Authors
Ryker Phillips
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Star Trek: Insurrection (1998)
     Star Trek: Insurrection was released to the general
populous on December 11 and opened to the tune of 22 million dollars.
Star Trek: Insurrection is a great story; especially since the
Federation are in the middle of a war with the Dominion.  In fact,
that is the only reason this movie floats over so well.
If you are not certain about this war, let me briefly tell you
about it as it has been portrayed on Deep Space 9.  Well, The
Dominion are a powerful governing force that came into existence
due to a race of shape-shifters that were tired of being persecuted
by solids.  The shape-shifters are the governing force.  Their
"senator" types are the Vorte, a race of clones that are impervious
to poison and lead the almost-indestructible Jem'hidar, which is
the foot soldiers of the Dominion. The Jem'Hidar are born
aggressive and addicted to a narcotic called Kitrocyl White.
The Cardassians, after getting booted out of the Bajoran
system cause of a treaty, losing their intelligent agency due to a
preemptive strike on the Dominion, and getting dogged by the
Klingons look to the Dominion and form an alliance to conquer the
Federation.  The war with the Dominion has been going on for about
a year and it looks kind-of like a desperate time for the
Federation.
Now onto the movie Star Trek: Insurrection.  The story floats
because the Federation makes an alliance with the SOna, which are
a race that are chiefly responsible for the production of Kitrocyl
White in the Alpha Quadrant.  Due to the closing of the wormhole to
the Gamma Quadrant, they are extremely important to the duration of
the Jem'hidar soldiers.  The Federation decide to force a
relocation on the Baccuu people who live on a planet that has
unique metaphasic radiation that rejuvenates humanoids to a younger
state of existence and holds them there for as long as they live in
that system.   As history has told us in the past, forced
relocations don';t work very well and lead to tragedy such as the
forced relocation of the Cherokee tribe and the subsequent Trail of
Tears episode.
Star Trek, in the past, has done a good job of taking a story
and making relate to things going on in the present time
situations.  For example, Star Trek VI: The Undiscovered Country
paralleled the breakdown of the Soviet Union in the early 90's.
Unlike this situation, I see no relevance to any current
situation therefore I do not see a point for this movie to exist.
It is a good story and there are quite a few clever and humorous
lines.  It brings up a lot of good points.  Maybe the intention is
more a reminder than anything else of what could happen.  All in
all, I give this a 3 1/2 out of 5.
For more Star Trek stuff and persnnal info visit my page at:
Http://devo.sfasu.edu/~ryker

"Has it ever occurred to you that the reason you believe the Founders
are gods is because that's what they want you to believe?  That they
built it into your genetic code?"
"Of course they did.  That's what gods DO."
Odo and Weyoun-6
Star Trek: Deep Space 9
Episode: Treachery, Faith and the Great River
