Authors
Michael Rizzo
Number of Reviews
4

Title
Review for Conspiracy Theory (1997)
        A long time ago, (and seemingly in a galaxy far, far away) back in
the days of Alfred Hitchcock and Otto Preminger, American moviegoers, and
movie critics, enjoyed the idea of a little tinge of suspense and
intelligence in their films.  In 1997, however, with huge multiplexes,
huge budgets, and huge special effects, this no longer seems to be the
case.  To support this theory, I offer you the decidedly mixed reviews
which so far have been given to "Conspiracy Theory", the fifth
collaboration between Mel Gibson, Richard Donner, and producer Joel
Silver.  With so many movies flooding the multiplexes, perhaps critics are
too tired for a little bit of mental gymnastics once the picture begins;
perhaps also moviegoers are too accustomed to seeing a film's entire plot
laid out in its trailer.  While by no means an accomplishment of
Hitchcockian proportions, in "Conspiracy Theory", Donner and screenwriter
Brian Helgeland have created a fast-paced, suspenseful, and intelligent
film in which not everything is as it seems to be, a very rare commodity
in this summer of big-bang action blockbusters.
        Crackpot cabbie Jerry Fletcher (Gibson) drives around New York
espousing far-flung theories on every type of conspiracy under the sun, to
anyone who'll listen (and even when nobody is listening).  Jerry stammer,
blabbers, talks to himslef, and thinks out loud; he comes across as the
product of a cross between "Taxi Driver", "Rain Man", and "The X-Files".
The only person who'll listen to Jerry is saintly Justice Department
attorney Alice Sutton (Roberts).  She tolerates his crazy theories - he
babbles something about NASA trying to kill the President with an
earthquake - with a roll of the eyes and a smile (she is Julia Roberts,
after all).  In return, Jerry has an unannounced (to her, at least) love
for her.  Somewhat unnervingly, we see Jerry watching Alice through her
apartment window - an interesting moment early in the film where we don't
know whether he a peeping tom, or a guardian angel, or just a nutcase.
Hwoever, there's something more beneath Jerry's nutty exterior than the
audience, Alice, or even Jerry himself, is prepared for.
        THere is far too much back story to "Conspiracy Theory"'s dense,
labyrinthine plot to describe it in detail without giving away too much.
If you're like me, discovering it is the most enjoyable part of the film.
AS it turns out (and this is what has most trailer-addicted folks in a
tizzy), it's not his theories, but it's Jerry himself that "They" are
after.  Jerry is quite obviously more than just a little crazy;  besides
the aforementioned peeping, he has violent flashbacks (which almost cause
him to wreck his cab), and he waves a gun around in public haphazardly.
Jerry is definitely dangerous, but to whom?  Jerry is kidnapped, pumped
for information, and tortured in a squirmingly vivid manner by a
suspicious "CIA shrink" known as Dr. Jonas (Stewart).  When Jerry escapes,
both Jonas and a team of FBI agents (led by Cylk Cozart) show up looking
for him, but not necessarily for the same reasons.  Jerry's only seeming
ally is Alice, who isn't surewhether she can trust him, or Jonas, or
anybody.  Things get considerably more complex from there.  Helgeland's
script is audacious enough to to continue developing both stories and
characters well into the film's second hour, as Jerry's past, top-secret
CIA experimentation, and the mysterious death of Alice's father play large
parts in the film's final resolution (hint: Jerry's fixation on Alice
isn't a coincidence).
        "Conspiracy Theory" works on the whole, though the two halves of
the film are of starkly different moods.  The second half of the film
doesn't keep up with the first hour's sense of paranoia, or the humor
which is derived from that paranoia; Jerry's idiosyncracies are quite
amusing to observe.  When the paranoia comes to fruition and Jerry is
being chased, the paranoia and humor fade.  Gibson, however, holds
everything in place, as he delivers one of his very best, certainly most
artistic, performances ever.  It's clear that the character of Jerry was
written for him, as no other star of his ilk combines groundedness with
feree-floa ting mayhem so adeptly.  His Jerry Fletcher is a good-natured
loon, but a ticking time bomb nonetheless.  We have no idea what he's goin
to do next, or how crazy he really is.  His blabbering and spouting are
fun, but it's when paired with Roberts as his object of unrequited
affection that he's at his best.  When Alice finally visits Jerry's
apartment, it's a glorious yet crushing moment - he's excited that she
finally sees how he lives, yet sane enough to to realize that the way he
lives is pretty embarrassing, and Gibson renders it beautifully.  Roberts
does well with what she's given, despite the fact that she really doesn't
have a character to play until midway through the film.  She does have
some nice momenst, especially as she grows more suspicious of Jeryy and
his role in her life.  Stewart, effective in in a break from "Star Trek"
mode, doesn't really get enough of a chance to be duplicitous, as we're
aware early in the film that he's up to some kind of no good.
        In terms of production, really there isn't much to quibble about.
Being their fifth go-around, Gibson, Donner, and Silver have this thing
down (rumor has it that teaming number six will be the much-anticipated
"Lethal Weapon 4", possibly next summer).  "Conspiracy Theory"'s ending hs
been noticeably tinkered with, as Donner filmed it two different ways and
let the test audiences make the decision; the final cut leaves the door
open for a possible sequel, provided that Gibson and Roberts, both red-hot
at the moment, aren't more expensive than their reported $32 million
combined salaries for this one.  Composer Carter Burwell's offbeat jazz
score is one of the most refreshingly original of the year, after too many
films either going bombastic ("Batman and Robin", "The Lost World", etc.)
or hip-hop (a la "Men In Black").  High praise for screenwriter Helgeland,
whose pop-culture tweaks are by far the most literate on screen in some
time.  A special notice to Helgeland's homage to J.D. Salinger, as a key
development in Jerry's character involves, and at the same time is cribbed
from, Salinger's classic _The Catcher in the Rye_.  Imagine that. a studio
movie using a book as a part of its plot.  Maybe Hollywood is more
intelligent than we thought.

Title
Review for Absolute Power (1997)
        In "Absolute Power", the latest entry into the ever-expanding
genre of White House scandal movies, Clint Eastwood and Gene Hackman
reteam in an attempt to duplicate the success of their Oscar-winning
masterpiece, "Unforgiven".  While it is likely that no effort could
recapture the critical and commercial praise of the first, the failure of
"Absolute Power" largely reflects upon the paths their respective careers
have taken since their first teaming.  Eastwood, while remaining one of
Hollywood's true giants, built upon his introspective performance in
"Unforgiven" with "The Bridges of Madison County", another sensitive,
mature picture which won critical raves as well as an Oscar nomination for
his costar, Meryl Streep.  Hackman, meanwhile, has moved away from the
types of roles which made him famous as well.  However, his
bad-guy-with-ideology roles in such underwhelming productions as "Extreme
Measures" and "The Chamber" have evinced no sign of a maturing performer;
rather, they seem more stale each time out.  These two patterns come
together in "Absolute Power" with unspectacular results.
        Eastwood plays Luther Whitney, and aging, recently-out-of-jail
burglar who has resumed his criminal activities.  Since he's played by
Eastwood, it goes without saying that Luther is the very best
recently-out-of-jail burglar in the business.  In the midst of robbing the
mansion of a wealthy political insider, he is interrupted by the
unexpected entrance of a couple - whom we immediately recognize as Hackman
and an unknown female acquaintance - returning from a late-night
rendezvous.  When the flirtation turns violent, the woman pulls a
knife.  At this point, two men break into the room and save the drunken,
battered Hackman.  Only then does Luther, and we the audience, realize
that the two men are Secret Service agents, the woman is the wife of the
insider, and Hackman is (surprise!) the President of the United States.
When the Chief of Staff  (a flustered Judy Davis) shows up, predictable,
the coverup goes into motion.  When the conspirators leave behind the
bloody knife ( a relatively important piece of evidence, one would think) 
Luther grabs it and escapes.  Predictably, Da visrealizes the mistake,
finds out about Luther, and decides to pin the murder on him.  Thus we
have "Absolute Power"'s biggest problem:  its highly implausible, often
ridiculous plot.  And it doesn't stop there.
        Eastwood is hereafter hounded by lonely D.C. homicide cop Ed
Harris (whose earnest performance lends the film a much-needed jolt of
credibility), who naturally suspects the involvement of the ex-convict.
Rather than flee the country, Eastwood decides to stay in Washington and
expose the coverup, unfazed by the idea of taking on the most powerful man
in the world.  Sure.  Eastwood does everything we would expect him to do,
and does it well.  He gets angry, scowls, furrows his brow, jokes about
his age, protects his estranged daughter (Laura Linney) and eludes both
the cops and the Secret Service.  In Hackman's defense, his
slimy-President character really doesn't have all that much to do, as the
overwrought plot and overabundance of name actors cut his scenes and lines
to the bare minimum.  The real bad guys here are Davis in her silly
Hillary Clinton-meets-Al Haig caricature, and the Secret Servicemen,
played by Scott Glenn and Dennis Haysbert.  Glenn, deserving of more
on-screen time as usual (see "Courage Under Fire", "Silverado", etc.)
plays the one with the conscience.  Haysbert's character, all deep voice
and sneer, is so ridiculously, cold-bloodedly evil that it stretches the
imagination to think that this man would be charged with protecting the
President of the U.S.  Eastwood's air-tight direction and his and Harris'
solid performances give you the feeling that this movie is better than it
really is, but in the end, it's a mishmash of too many characters and too
many plot-necessitated leaps of faith spoiling the already-iffy soup.

Title
Review for Donnie Brasco (1997)
        Anyone who has seen "The Godfather" can hardly deny the appeal of
mob movies; the intricacies, the shady deals, the horror, and the
explication of sheer machismo that is the legend of the Italian Mafia.  As
one who has seen more than a few of these films, it's usually a given that
mob movies chronicle life at the top.  "Donnie Brasco" takes a different
approach, and the result is one of the best films of the genre since
"Goodfellas".  Director Mike Newell's saga of the infiltration of the
lower-to-middle ranks of the mob by undercover FBI agent Joe Pistone is
vivid, intense, and littered with memorable performances.  Not the least
of which, certainly are those authored by the film's stars.
        Johnny Depp is Pistone, a family man with a lovely wife (media
darling and soon-to-be-superstar Anne Heche), beautiful children, and a
happy home.  Pistone, through his cover as jewelry appraiser Donnie
brasco, aka "Don the Jeweler", comes into contact with aging hitman Lefty
Ruggerio (Pacino).  Donnie manages to win Lefty's trust by doing him a
favor with an act of cunning and unexpected force.  Impressed, Lefty
decides to take "the Jeweler" under his wing.  Once inside, Donnie begins
a slow ascent through the ranks, encountering rising boss Sonny Black
(Michael Madsen), and eventually becoming an integral part of his
operation.  The most intriguing part of the story, though, is the
friendship which develops between Donnie and Lefty.  Donnie listens to
Lefty's gripes, he shares Christmas dinner with him, he visits him when
his drug-addicted son is in the hospital.  A very real bond is shared by
the two men, a bond that begins to make Pistone question his true duty.
He begins to feel the allure of the loyalty, honor, and blood ties which
connect members of the mafia.  As he and Lefty get closer, the characters
of Joe Pistone and Donnie Brasco become more and more intertwined.
        Interestingly, the mentor-student relationship of Lefty and Donnie
echoes somewhat in the pairing of Pacino and Depp.  Depp, who has long
been anointed Hollywood's next great dramatic actor, has up to this point
made a career playing interesting roles in unorthodox films, a la "Edward
Scissorhands", "Ed Wood", etc.  Here, under Pacino's watch, he graduates
to big-studio success.  Depp is excellent as Pistone/Brasco, as he slowly
loses the psychological boundary between the two.  The most intense
dramatic scenes inthe film are those between Depp and Heche, who is
equally good as a woman in love with, and enraged, with, a man whom she no
longer knows.  Good actors abound, some in accustomed roles, others not.
Madsen has got his trademark cocky-boy swagger in full effect as Sonny
Black, a man cleary in love with his increasing power.  Bruno Kirby,
hysterical as Billy Crystal's sidekick in "When Harry Met Sally" and "City
Slickers", exhibits some range as a mobster who isn't exactly on the
level.  The highest praise, though, should go to Pacino.  Yes, there are
reviews which have said, "We've seen this before".  I disagree.  Gone are
the quiet calculation of Michael Corleone and the self-destructive rage of
Tony Montana; Pacino's Lefty Ruggerio is a study in righteous indignation
and painful resignation.  In front of Donnie, he's all bluster,
complaining about his role in the organization, yet in front of his
superiors, he toes the line like a good soldier.  His increasing despair
with his lot in life - a son who doesn't respect him, a basically dead-end
job - is momentarily halted by the entrance of Donnie into his life,
giving him a brief pause of hope, which is finally crushed.  Pacino's
performance should resonate with anyone who has experienced similar
feelings.
        While the acting is first-rate across the board, I do have a few
minor quibbles.  The film's timeline is somewhat disjointed; long periods
of time tend to pass between scenes, and the audience isn't always
informed.  More scenes of the sinking Pistone/Brasco with his children
would have been nice as well, but that's somewhat picky.  Also, there are
a few elements of the plot which strain credibility just a little bit:
Donnie seems to advance to an awfully high position without having to do
too much that would get him sent to the gas chamber, if you know what I
mean.  Those are very minor points, and certainly no reason not to enjoy
the final product.  Paul Attanasio's screenplay is top-notch, and director
Mike Newell shows that he can tiptoe his way from scenes of utterly
abhorrent violence to very emotional drama with ease.  It probably won't
get him a trip to the Oscars, but after "Four Weddings and a Funeral", it
proves that he certainly has an abundance of range.  Speaking of Oscar,
hopefully the film's winter release won't plunge it off of the proverbial
radar screen; both Pacino and Depp are deserving of consideration.  As
Lefty would say, the Academy shouldn't "fuggedabowdit".

Title
Review for Air Force One (1997)
        It's a curious comment on the state of Hollywood that the most
realistic action hero offered up in any of this year's summer blockbusters
is the President of the United States.  Judging from "Air Force One"'s
opening weekend box office, we as an audience, even in this modern age of
cynicism and distrust of our nation's leaders, are more than willing to
believe that the President would defend himself, his family, and his
country with his fists as easily as he would with military strikes and
smart bombs.  Why?  Two words: Harrison Ford.  In "Air Force One", Ford
adds to his mile-long list of action fits while giving the audience a
two-hour lesson in star power.
        The setup of "Air Force One" is fairly easy to follow.  An allied
group of U.S. and Russian commandos raid the Presidential Palace of
Khazakhstan, overthrowing and imprisoning the hard-line Khazakhstani
Communist leader, General Radek.  U.S. President Marshall(Ford), at a
banquet in Moscow, follows this with a speech condemning Radek's
brutality, replete with a vow to fight terrorism throughout the world.
Ford makes a stately and noble chief executive; he embarks on this new
policy, not because his re-election campaign is coming up, but because,
"It's the right thing to do."  Once again, an idealism that we as
Americans wish our leaders still had.  After the banquet, Ford retires to
his plane, the actual AFO, for the flight home with his wife(Wendy
Crewson) and daughter(Liesel Matthews).  We see the president as a doting
father and loving husband, and a football fanatic who'd rather watch the
game with a beer than sit through another policy meeting; we see the
President as an average guy.  Unbeknownst to him and everyone else on
board, however, a group of Russian terrorists, led by psycho
extraordinaire Gary Oldman, have boarded the plane with the aid of a
duplicitous Secret Service agent, disguised as a news crew on a press
tour.
        Of course, the terrorists take over the plane, kill a few people,
and go looking for the President; they want him to influence the Russian
president to release Radek.  Before Oldman and company can get to him, the
Secret Service whisk Ford off to his Presidential escape pod.  Believing
that the Prez has escaped, Oldman goes to Plan B.  He uses AFO's
communications system to contact Washington, and informs Vice President
Glenn Close that he intends to kill a hostage every half hour until Radek
is released.  Predictably, the Cabinet is in disarray.  Close squabbles
with the Scretary of Defense (Dean Stockwell)over authority; a humorous
moment arises when the Cabinet can't find a copy of the Constitution to
figure out wh exactly is in charge.  They know something that Oldman
doesn't:  Ford wasn't in the escape pod.  Unfortunately, they don't know
if he's alive or dead, so they also don't know if he's still the
President.
        This is where the action begins in earnest.  Ford sneaks around
the underneath of the plane, trying to figure out a way to save his family
and the other hostages.  Soon, Oldman notices that he's losing men, and
begins looking for whoever is attempting to foul up his plans.  Much of
the film from this point feels like a high-stakes version of "Die Hard" on
an airplane, and it is, but "Air Force One" is also complex, well-acted,
and its action scenes will leave you breathless.  Oldman gives the film an
intense, brooding energy as the buzz-cut psycho leading the hijacking,
alternately exuding justifying ideology, uncontrollable rage, and cool,
collected malevolence.  His telephone conversations with Close are
chilling.  He is every bit as solid and contolled here as he was
outlandish in "The Fifth Element"; this film loses a little steam with his
demise.  Close is a convincing VP, all nerves as she attempts to sort out
the mess while defending the President's course of action.  "Fargo" Oscar
nominee William H. Macy lends a hand as an Air Force officer who aids the
President in retaking the plane.  The real stars, though, other than Ford,
are director Wolfgang Petersen and the model AFO he has created.
Petersen's trademark claustrophobic action (I recently read a review which
referred the film as "Das Plane") is in good effect here; it's a surprise
Bruce Willis hasn't sought out Petersen.  The tense action and fantastic
in-air effects (Check out the exploding fuel tanker and the fighter plane
battle.  Only one of the effects shots doesn't work - you'll know which
one when you see it...) help Petersen overcome a somewhat implausible,
often corny script by first-time Screenwriter Andrew W. Marlowe.  Even
with all of this going on around him, though, everything centers on Ford.
He is worth every penny of his reported $20 million salary in this, his
best actioner since "The Fugitive" and his return, after the disappointing
grosses of "Sabrina" and "The Devil's Own", to the box-office throne to
which he is accustomed.  One amusing final note:  A friend with whom I saw
"Air Force One" couldn't understand why everyone in the film spoke so
reverentially of Ford's President Marshall.  I have no doubt that if
Harrison Ford himself were President, he'd receive the same reverence.
