Authors
Sherline Lee
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Goofy Movie, A (1995)
I. Audience - Best for Families and Middle Age Kids
II. Character Twists - No Peg, Kellie Martin as Roxanne
III. Animation - Polished ... *four* studios!
IV.  General thoughts (no major spoilers) and other random comments
     inserted randomly (oh yeah. songs?!?)
----------------------------------
     Yesterday morning, I saw the soon to be released A GOOFY MOVIE at
a local theater.  Overall, I was pleasantly surprised to find a
polished and an interesting, character-driven movie.
     Forgive me if in the course of these next few lines or so, if I
accidentally let small spoilers slip.  (I don't mean to, don't kill
me!)
I. The Audience
     The audience consisted mostly of Disney employed persons and their
families.  The children that did show, were mostly in the 5-7 range.
     However, after seeing the movie, I would think it more appropriate
for kids who were a little older--preferably in the early adolescent
or "my parents are *so* embarrassing I think I'm going to die stage."  :)
     Thankfully, the GOOFY MOVIE is just that.  It centers largely
around Max and his tense relationship with Goof.
     Kellie Martin provides the love interest for the adolescent Max
(as Roxanne).
     Pete and PJ appear several times throughout the film, mostly to
serve as a contrast to Goof's and Max's relationship.  Besides Pete and
PJ, no other members of his family from Goof Troop appear. (Oh, Pete
and Goofy are both photographers for a living. heh. together. heehee)
     Max and Peej have acquired another sidekick in their little group
of friends.  (One who has really weird taste in food).  Roxanne (who is
a very attractive dog er goof) has one nerdy sidekick of her own.
     Let's see, one brief cameo by Mickey and Donald.  Interesting
scene with a Goof version of Bigfoot.  (Everything in this film is a
goof version. It's a little disconcerting.  I kept thinking WHERE ARE
THE DUCKS? *shakes head)
     And for you Ed, there are  *two* "not-so-hidden" Ariel's.  The
second one will just make you laugh ... it's so tacky :)
     I think I was impressed.  I had admired the DuckTales movie for
its backgrounds and its good bordering on very good animation.
However, coming into this movie, I really didn't expect much better.
Boy, I was majorly wrong.
     Although there were several rough spots in the Goofy movie, there
were many opportunities for my jaw to drop.  Let's see: digital
coloring, moving backgrounds, dramatic effects, and wow they even used
live action reference models (!).  (And yes, lots of computer rendered
stuff)
     Four major studios were used: France, Toronto, Burbank and
Australia ... frankly, I really couldn't tell. (Though some of the
gorgeous backgrounds do point to probably France or Australia).  I
would really love to know which studios did which scenes.
     Some of the scenes, involving water and lighting were great ...
realistic and yet exaggerated enough.  And the characters' expressions
were humanlike.
     Look especially for things like buildings and signs in the
background.  These are great computer effects.
     Sheesh, I think I could even be convinced to go back and actually
pay to just watch the animation this time.
     General note, though ... the animation is very good, but differs
in feel from Disney animated features.  I'm not sure if it's just
because we're dealing with 2D characters on 3D backgrounds, or if
because a lot of modern objects are used. hmm.
     I was surprised by what the plot centered on, but pleased.  Some
have criticized the Goof Troop series as being too heavily centered on
Pete.  Thankfully, this movie doesn't do that.
     I was though, a little surprised by the strength of Max's
feelings/paranoia about becoming his father.
     You know, there some strange sketches in this story line.  That's
all I'll say ... except that one particular part of the movie kept
reminding of all those Chuck E. Cheese/Showbiz places that I went to.
(I still have nightmares)
     As far as the songs, well they followed the first cardinal rule
pretty well.  They did serve to "express the feelings of a character,
move plot forward, and provide opportunities for visual gags."  But
they were a mish mosh of various styles of music.  (Definitely though
*not* Broadway).
     The score was fairly good, rather lush and large for what I would
have normally expected.
     Okay, this message went way longer than I wanted, but here's the
general rating.
