Authors
Mikhail Iosjpe
Number of Reviews
2

Title
Review for Instinct (1999)
To make a long story short - "Instinct" is a modern Tarzan-story with a dose
of social critisism. Dr. Ethan Powell ( Anthony Hopkins ) has suddenly been
found and imprisoned for killing two African guards after he disappeared two
years ago.
He has not spoken a single word since he has been found and he has become
distant and violent. Powell is then transferred to a special prison in the
U.S, where helpless lunatics are beaten and discriminated by the prison
guards.
Here is where Dr. Theo Calder ( Cuba Gooding, Jr. ) steps in. He is a young
and so far successful psychiatrist whose task is to write an evaluation on
Powell to determine why a brilliant scientist has suddenly become insane and
isolated himself from his family and the rest of the world. Later Theo finds
out that Powell has been living with wild gorillas for two years, instead of
studding them and has somehow made a connection; became a member of the
family. He has seen how the Africans killed the gorillas, how they pillaged
and destroyed. That  is why his violent behavior is to some point justified
by mankind's "rape of the world". Slowly when Theo is venturing deep into
Powell's mind, we get to witness his journey from the beginning. The African
jungle is here displayed as a peaceful eden - a paradise slowly transformed
into hell.
And here is the beautiful part of the film, it is also by the way the most
serious part -
Powell dreams of a world where we kill only as much as we can eat, where we
live like we have lived 10 000 years ago, in harmony with the nature instead
of in "control" of it.
The script is serious, solid and well written, exploring the true nature of
man, as well as our social and family mentality. The casting is likewise
solid, but there are specially Hopkins'and Gooding's performances that are
worth noticing. Stan Winston's computerized gorillas are incredibly
realistic and Danny Elfman's score, although not great, is at times
effective.  So it's actually nothing bad to say about "Instinct".
However, instead of venturing deeper into the lost instincts and explore the
true nature of man, Jon Turteltaub is concentrating his energy on the
difficult conditions in the prison and Theo's romance with Powell's daughter
(which by the way fails to capture my attention or emotions). The film's
lack of  focus is a bit disturbing. Another very important thing to notice
is that it never answers the question: "What is it we should do?", "Should
we throw our clothes off and return to the jungle, like Powell?" or should
we all become vegetarians? My point is that "Instinct" showed us how we are
like from nature's point of view - greedy, violent and stupid, sawing the
branch we're sitting on. But it is never said what we should do about it.
The important questions are asked, but never answered. Some of you may say
that everyone should figure this one out for themselves. Maybe so, but I
feel that after asking these important questions it's equally important to
answer them. It's like the director was not sure himself and found the easy
way out. However the film's many good moments, such as Powell's explanation
of control, and solid acting saves the film. It's not a bad movie and it's
not a masterpiece. It will not get any important nominations at the Oscar's,
but it's a well made film with a serious and important subject worth
thinking and making films about.

Title
Review for Matrix, The (1999)
Written and Directed by:
Andy Wachowski   (as The Wachowski Brothers)
Larry Wachowski   (as The Wachowski Brothers)
After their magnifficent debut with "Bound", the Wachowski-brothers have
returned to the screens with one of the most interesting, mind-bending,
original and captivating science fiction films of the past decade. So far
the best film of 1999, "The Matrix"  intellectually toys with dream and
reality, fantasy and nightmare, destiny and fate with such energy that it
will blow your away.
Thomas Anderson (Keanu Reeves) is a respected citizen of our comunity. He
works for a "..respectible software company,  pays our taxes and helps the
landlady to carry out her carbage..". But this is only one of his lives. In
his second life he is Neo a hacker that during night is breaking the law,
desperatly trying to find an answer to the question he can't find words for.
He is then contacted by a mysterious stranger that calles himself Morpheous
(Laurence Fishburne) who tells him about the Matrix - "..the world pulled
over our eyes to blind us from the truth..".
Neo is then offered a choice between ignorance - waking up in his bed in the
morning and continue to live his normal life..or he can step into the real
world, from which there is no turning back. Neo choses that truth and the
real world he discovers is horrifieng and alien, controlled bu
super-intelligent machines that
use us a bio-power sourse vital for their survivial. It is no longer 1999
it's closer to 2199. The frightening truth is that somewhere in the real
past and our future mankind celebrated the discovery of A.I. (Artificial
Intelligence). The machines that could think for themselves was going to
make our lives easier. But at the same time we were getting more and more
dependant on the machines - the machines evolved, prospered and formed their
bizzarre society. There was a war, it is uncertain who began, but we were
losing. Our last attempt to save ourselves was to reflect the sunlight from
the earth. We belived that since the machines were dependant on solar power,
they would not survive and the mankind could be safe deep under ground, near
the center of our planet where it's still warm. But the machines outsmarted
us again, a human body can produce more bio-power than a 120 V - battery. So
we are no longer born, we are grown like corn in the field. To keep us i
total control the machines have created a dream world for us, as it was in
1990-s, by sending certain electrical signals to our brain. Matrix can be
compared to a very big and complex computer game and we are the unknowing
players, born with a VR-mask on our face. Ironicly the humans and the
machines have changed places. We think that we live out our lives, when we
actually lieng helplessly inside an incubator as batteries for the machines.
Morpheous belives that Neo is the long expected Messias that can save the
world.
Although the film is a bit confusing at the beginning, the Wachowski
brothers revealing the big secrets pieace by piece, never leave you
completely lost in space. The script, although energic and full of action,
humour, betrayel and even romance is very gently and intelligently structed,
which is rare for science fiction films nowadays.
The casting is flawless;Keanu Reeves is again back on top after severel
flops and failures and is as effective as he could be in the part of
Neo.Laurence Fishburne is convincing as always as the mystifying Morpheous.
Another vital carector that is very important to the story is Cypher,
wonderfully played by Joe Pantoliano . He is the human element in the film,
willing to do anything for getting back his ignorance and return to Matrix.
Cypher rases many moral questions, such as "what is better living in total
ignorance and happiness as a slave or living freedome in misury and horror?"
Joe Pantoliano delivers in my oppinion the strongest performance in the
film, bringing in the comic as well as moral issues into the picture.
Carrie-Anne Moss is clever and voulnerble as Trinity and Hugo Weaving is
sinister, intelligent and calm as the leader-agent.
Behind the brilliant special effects, wonderful cinematography and solid
acting the Wachowski brothers display many important issues for us to think
about. "The Matrix" shows us the real world as a result of our many
discoverys, so the real villains the films are not the machines, but their
creators - us. When the machines tried to classify the human species they
classified us not as mammals, but as a virus, the cancer of this planet and
they are - the cure.
