Authors
Dylan Groves
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Whole Nine Yards, The (2000)
  When you hear that a movie with the title "The Whole Nine
Yards" is about a dentist in suburban Montreal, you may
figure that it's about floss, not football, and you would be
partially correct.  Jonathan Lynn's concept is mostly about the
friendship between two unlikely fellows, a wimpy DDS with a
practice in suburban Montreal and a hit man seeking to hide
out from a gangster intent on eliminating him.  Mitchell
Kapner's screenplay has quite a few belly laughs as any
decent sitcom would, but not only covers no new ground in its
satire of uptight professionals and uncannily relaxed mobsters
but is occasionally meanspirited, obvious to a fault, and
performed by a troupe that seem to be putting on a show for
their parents in a junior high auditorium.  Filled with pratfalls,
dopey facial expressions, and a mindless plot featuring comic
betrayals and outrageously cartoonish characters, "The
Whole Yards" displays a cast of actors who are either the
only ones in town having a good time or just plain
embarrassed to be going through these antics.
   Bruce Willis takes a step back in a career that has seen
him move toward deeper, more serious capacities: from a
popular but stereotyped role in the "Die Hard" series to the
more serious "12 Monkeys," "The Sixth Sense" and an
unusually distinctive role as Dwayne Hoover in Alan
Rudolph's absorbing, if commercial untenable, "Breakfast of
Champions."  This time around, Willis is Jimmy "The Tulip"
Tudeski, a hit man who has had his sentence reduced by
turning a dime on a brutal Chicago-based gang led by Janni
Gogolak--who is just one of the many people wanting to see
others dead.  As his perfect foil, Matthew Perry spends a
minimal amount of time in his office practicing dentistry as
"Oz" Oseransky--a buttoned-down, regular guy who is so
naive that he has been lured into marrying the sexy but
awfully mean Sophie (Rosanna Arquette).  Sophie is not
simply a gold digger but a woman bored to tears by her
insipid husband and is, herself, in the market for someone to
do a contract killing for her.  
   In a story that's as worn as the enamel on a bruxist's teeth
and witty as a root canal job, the hapless Oz, saddled with a
vicious mother-in-law, a castrating wife and a minimum of
patients, is shocked to discover that his new next door
neighbor is actually a contract killer.  Jimmy, who is ultra-
relaxed and sophisticated, takes an immediate liking to the
nervous and decidedly unhip neighbor, which goes a long
way toward explaining why Oz seems the only one whose life
is not in danger. Oz finds himself in the middle of a plot by
Janni Gogolak (Kevin Pollak) to find the stool pigeon with his
own help: he cannot be blamed for wondering who is really
allied with whom, for things are not what they seem.  Frankie
Figs (Michael Clarke Duncan), an enormous gangster,
appears to be allied with Gogolak but in reality is not.  Oz's
assistant in the office, Jill (Amanda Peet), treats her boss like
an equal, urging him to go to Chicago, have a good time and
"get laid."  But she is not what she seems either, and in the
picture's comic high point is shown to be a great admirer of
the career of Jimmy Tudeski, eager to apprentice herself to
him as a hit person.  And Jimmy's wife Cynthia (Natasha
Henstridge) comes across as a cool, cosmopolitan number
but is actually petrified of her husband who, she believes, is
intent on killing her.
   For all we know, there could be youngsters of high-school
age who will take this PG-13 feature seriously, particularly the
casual attitude that the criminals have about serial killing. 
The whole murder incorporated enterprise comes across as
nothing more serious than a chess game in which the goal is
to checkmate your opponent painlessly before he can do you. 
This outlook is never clearer than what we see in the
character of aspiring hit woman Jill, a gorgeous receptionist
you'd least likely expect to have larceny in her heart, who
appears turned on as never before in her life when in the
presence of her hero--who has already killed seventeen
people is on the way to duplicating that achievement.
   While the picture is destined to take in solid box office
because of the guaranteed draw of Bruce Willis and to some
extent the following that Matthew Perry has gained from his
role in the TV series "Friends," this film is nothing more than
standard lowbrow fare featuring a little bathroom humor, lots
of pratfalls, and an awfully silly army of hackneyed bumblers,
plotters, wimps and Jezebels.
Rated PG-13.  Running Time: 101 minutes.  (C) 2000
Harvey Karten, film_critic@compuserve.com
