Authors
Jason Whyte
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Blade (1998)
Amazing. That describes most of `Blade', a hyper, Michael Bay-esque 
Vampire horror-action film that combines great visuals, good visual 
effects, and a very comic book storyline (well, it IS based on a comic 
book!). Don't go expecting a plot along the lines of `Saving Private 
Ryan'.
Blade (Wesley Snipes) is a half vampire, half crime fighter; when we 
first meet him, he is busting up a night club of blood thirsty vampires, 
using his powerful fighting techniques (since he is half vampire, he can 
battle the vampires. Get it?); the opening, among all the other action 
scenes, is such a visual thrill that we are injected right into the 
screen.
However, to view these great action sequences, we have to sit through a 
lame plot, boring dialogue and some boring characters. Take, for 
instance, the doctor (N'Bushe Wright), who has been bit by a burning 
vampire, and has taken an essence of garlic medicine that will hopefully 
cure it. I didn't care for her story, or what happened to her. Blame it 
on her performance, which to her seems like standing there, not 
reacting, and spurting out lame dialogue.
The film's story, while weak, is Blade fighting the evil vampire of them 
all, Frost (a great Stephen Dorff) before the vampires wreak havoc on 
the streets and take over the world. The vampires must be stopped, and 
Blade is the one to do it.
So why a B-? What is good and what is bad? You have to really look at 
this film through a comic book point of view, understanding that the 
dialogue is trite because it has to be, and that the story must somehow 
have some sort of little zinger at the end that calls for the story to 
continue. The action scenes here are the standouts, which feature 
relentless editing, fast camera angles, and even a techno-fueled 
soundtrack, which works very well.
The key performers, Snipes and Dorff, are terrific; this is the first 
time that you can actually care about a superhero. Snipes has dimension 
and even has a few good lines (the best one is when he says `what the 
f-ck' but the soundtrack has muted out his line), he is fun to watch. 
Dorff grew on me as Deacon. At first he seemed like a stock character, 
but eventually he turned into a satisfying villian. 
However, with the bad plot, comes the lame dialog, which seems even lame 
compared to the comic-strip balloons. And some performances, like 
Wrights, are lousy. I didn't care at all for Kris Kristofferson's role 
as the guardian of Blade, and all of the other vampires, whether it be a 
ditsy blonde or a working stiff. Also, some scenes in the movie make no 
sense, such as when Deacon is executing one of his vampires by exposing 
him to sunlight, and before he does so, he pulls a couple of his teeth. 
What's the point? Pulling out teeth is unnecessary when the sun is going 
to burn him to death! (plus pulling teeth is horrifying to watch, just 
see `Wild Things')
However, on a whole the movie still works. I would be more satisfied if 
the performances were smoother and the story made you think and care 
about what is happening. If not for the amazing pyrotechnics, `Blade' 
would be a dull film indeed.
Picture: 2.5 Typical New Line film stock with faded out colors and lots 
of film grain. Blacks and shadow detail are very good, however.
Sound: 5 The soundtrack, which is mixed in dts, SDDS and Dolby Digital, 
is outstanding with a rich surround presence, deep, powerful bass 
(especially in the techno section) and clear dialogue.
Photography: 2.5 While the editing is fast and furious, director Stephen 
Norrington has trouble framing Panavision properly. Most shots are too 
messy with bad framing.

