Authors
George Jung
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Titanic (1997)
The movie is a technological triumph. Real footages of the
Titanic wreck were used to make for a breathtaking scene.
Computer animation were used throughout to portray the
Titanic in all its past glory. Unfortunately, it was painfully
obvious that the scenes in which the camera panned away
from the Titanic were computer generated. The power of
computer animation shined through in the actual sinking of
the Titanic. I couldn't believe my eyes as I saw the huge boat
sank into the ocean. I wasn't able to tell where the computer
animation began and where the live action shots ended.
The acting for the most part was good. I have new found
respect for Leonardo DiCaprio as an actor. He truely
convinced me that he was a young man named Jack with
nothing but a pocket full of dreams on his way to a new life in
America. Kate Winslet, who plays Rose, was somewhat
unconvincing as a member of the upper-class at first, but
came through at the end.
The directing and the script was incredible. The story flowed
beautiful throughout the whole movie.  Although each scene
contains a wealth of details, they do not overwhelm the
sences. I was thoroughly convinced that I was on the great
Titanic. Although the movie is titled "Titanic" the actually
sinking of the ship isn't the focus of the movie. The movie
centers around two people in love. Don't be fooled into
thinking that such a simplistic plot would bore you, because
this movie will grab your attention from the beginning and will
never let go till the end.
The movie is truely a classic love story. A poor young man,
Jack, meets a young upper-class woman, Rose. The two
gradually fall in love but many things prevent them from
being together. Jack and Rose are from totally different
classes and completely different worlds. Rose's domineering
fiance is incredibly jealous of her feelings for Jack and does
everything to keep them apart. Rose's mother forbids her
daughter from having anything to do with Jack. Although
numerous things tested Rose's and Jack's love for each
other, their love would be tested to the breaking point by the
inenvitable tragedy of the Titanic.
In the last half of the movie you wonder just how will Rose
and Jack survive the tragedy of the Titantic? Will the two
make it to America? Will they be able to go to Connie Island
and ride on the roller coaster until they get sick like they said
they would? Will they marry and have many children? Will
they live happily ever after? You'll just have to see for
yourself.
To sum it up "Titantic" is a life time of love in about 3 hours.
