Authors
Rob Furr
Number of Reviews
10

Title
Review for Highlander III: The Sorcerer (1994)
Highlander: The Randomly-Selected Descriptive Phrase
     If there's been a more chaotic entertainment franchise to come out
in the last decade than HIGHLANDER and associated works, I haven't
found it.  From the original film, which is arguably one of the
greatest fantasies ever to appear on celluloid (not that that's saying
much; its competition has been, for the most part, on the level of,
say, KRULL,) we've seen a slew of derivative works ranging from the
entertaining to the surreal.  There's HIGHLANDER, the syndicated drama,
there's HIGHLANDER: THE ANIMATED SERIES, there's HIGHLANDER II: THE
QUICKENING, and, now, HIGHLANDER: THE FINAL DIMENSION (a.k.a. HIGHLANDER:
THE SORCEROR, I believe.)  The two television series have nothing to do
with each other, the movies have absolutely nothing to do with the
television series,  and little to do with each other, and, for all I
know, there'll soon be HIGHLANDER: THE CEREAL, which will have about as
much to do with anything else in the series as the a small potato in
Riner, VA, has to do with economic policy in the Ukraine.
     That very confusion has led to decreased expectations for further
entries in the HIGHLANDER canon; what can you look forward to once
you've experienced the true, majestic awfulness that is HIGHLANDER: THE
ANIMATED SERIES? So, I approached the current HIGHLANDER movie with
some trepidation; could the movie makers pull something watchable from
the morass of the HIGHLANDER mythos?
     Note that I didn't say that it was a *good* movie, and I very
carefully did not imply that HIGHLANDER: THE FINAL DIMENSION is a
*great* movie, but it is watchable.
     The previous film entry, HIGHLANDER II: THE QUICKENING was
completely and utterly rotten as a sequel. On the other hand,  if,
through some miracle, the viewer could forget that the original movie
ever existed, it wasn't that bad. Not great, not by a long shot, but it
was only a slightly-lower-than-average attempt at movie-making, with
"only" four or five gaping holes where a plot should have been.
     On the other hand, we have HIGHLANDER: THE FINAL DIMENSION which,
as a sequel, is pretty good. As a stand-alone movie, it stinks.  The
viewer *has* to have seen the original movie to enjoy this one.
Apparently realizing this, the movie makers used several clips from the
original film in this one. Events, characters, terms, scenes, and
locales from the original are all used or referred to during the course
of THE FINAL DIMENSION, and only a knowledge of HIGHLANDER itself can
save it from totally confusing the viewer.
     So, if you've never seen the original HIGHLANDER, this is a movie
to stay far, far away from.
     On the other hand, if you *have* seen the original movie, THE
FINAL DIMENSION is actually not that bad. It suffers a bit from
sequelitis, in that certain scenes are frame-by-frame copies of scenes
in the original (For instance, Kane, the primary antagonist of THE
FINAL DIMENSION dresses like the Kurgan, has the same voice as the
Kurgan, and acts like the Kurgan, even down to his manic driving
style.  It's actually a pity he's not the Kurgan, but, hey, there can
be only one,) it needs the previous movie, and bits of it are included
for no readily apparent reason ... but that's about it. The filmmakers do
a credible job apologizing for HIGHLANDER II; they strive for and
mostly capture the feel of the original movie. The cinematography is
weaker, the transitions that were the signature of the original are
slightly more intrusive, the music is more generic....
     ... and yet, it's as close to the original as you can get without
digging Freddy Mercury up and having him record another soundtrack.
     On the Furr Scale, this is either a solid three star two-star
movie (a pretty good, if unambitious movie) or a pitiful one star
two-star movie (a rotten unambitious movie,) depending on whether or
not you've seen the original. Moreover, it's exactly the prototypical
matinee movie; this is the perfect movie for a slow Saturday
afternoon.  Park your brain at the door, and let it flow in one eye and
out the other.

Title
Review for True Lies (1994)
Wham, Bam, Thank You, Mister Cameron.
     The best way to start off this review is to begin with the
obvious: This is a James Cameron movie, lock, stock, and barrel.  To
movie-goers who haven't been trapped in a cave with a projector and a
35mm print of SHAMPOO for the last eighteen years, that should mean
something.  It should mean that this movie, like all other Cameron
movies(except for PIRANHA II, but we won't talk about that ...) has
excellent, clean cinematography, a strong sense of color, unique action
shots, and tightly integrated special effects.  If you like Cameron's
previous work, there is absolutely no reason you won't like TRUE LIES.
     This is also an Arnold Schwarzenegger movie.  *That* should mean
something as well.  It should mean convincing movie violence, snappy
patter delivered in an unexplained Austrian accent, and, lately,
mind-bending budgets, and, again, Arnold fans will have no trouble
parking their brains at the door and enjoying TRUE LIES.
     That's the obvious.  You should know that even before you walk in
the door, much less before you sit down and let the THX promo destroy
your hearing.  So, even before you pay your six bucks, you know what
you're getting.  A little action, a little snappy patter, and enough
violence to make you want to go beat up Secret Service agents.
     However, there's an awful lot in this movie that I didn't expect.
For instance ...
     This movie has some absolutely jaw-dropping, astonishing comedy in
it.  I cannot think of another movie which has managed to make me laugh
hard enough to injure myself and, at the same time, astonish me with
the sheer movie-making spectacle.  In fact, the biggest, most dangerous
laughs, are, amazingly enough, *not* shown in the previews.
     In combination with the eye-popping comedy (which, to be frank, is
faster and funnier than almost any movie made so far this year, or, in
fact, almost any movie back to, perhaps, YOUNG FRANKENSTEIN,) TRUE LIES
makes every cent of its gargantuan budget appear on screen.  Even in
portions of the movie where no sane director would spend money, Cameron
not only spends money, but makes the money spent *worth it*.
     Furthermore, there seems to be something approximating a plot
lurking deep inside this movie.  While plots aren't as important as,
say, a good villain in these sorts of movies, TRUE LIES has one, and
one that serves its purpose well.  No, it's not HIDDEN AGENDA or IN THE
NAME OF THE FATHER, but, unlike some action movies, TRUE LIES at least
has the decency to not hit you in the face with a blatantly rotten
story line.  Call it the equal of THUNDERBALL, and let it lie at that.
     In fact, that's an important comparison, right there.  TRUE LIES,
to be quite honest, out-Bonds modern Bond.  It has nuclear weapons, a
fiendish organization, lots of disposable terrorists, and (so, okay,
I'm a twenty-three-year-old male.  I have hormones.  I admit it,) two
(count them, two) incredibly beautiful (and well-packaged) female
characters, even though Jamie Lee Curtis does look remarkably like
Annie Lennox for large portions of the movie.  Pierce Brosnan and
GOLDENEYES will have to aim very high to stand a chance of coming up
to the level set by TRUE LIES.
     Last in the list of positive commentary: the actors.  Believe it
or not, Tom Arnold does a good, believable job in this movie.  So does
Bill Paxton.  So does almost everyone, except for, unfortunately, Jamie
Lee Curtis, who doesn't quite seem to have her character down.  It's
not a grating performance, but it doesn't help the suspension of
disbelief much, either.
     So, if you've read this far, you probably think that I think that
TRUE LIES is the greatest film ever made, that I consider it to be
better than CASABLANCA, and so on.  Which, actually, I don't.  It has
flaws, one of which is the occasional extremely slow section.  (Do we
really need to see Jamie Lee Curtis gyrate for *that long*  From a
visual point of view, it was great, especially for people with a Y
chromosome, but it didn't help the movie, or her characterization, much
either.)
     It has the occasional weakly done minor character, like number 7,
or Charleton Heston's character, or the Nefarious Bad Guy himself.
(Plus, it has a thug, who has no lines, but who I would *swear* was
built by Jim Henson's Creature Shop.  The guy looks exactly like one of
the monsters from "The Muppet Show."  Honest.)
     It also doesn't transcend its genre.  It's a very, very good
comedy, a darn good spy/action movie, but it doesn't go beyond that
into the realm of the classic film, like RAIDERS OF THE LOST ARK did,
like the original TERMINATOR did, like THE GOOD, THE BAD, AND THE
UGLY did.  It remains firmly in its genre, and seems quite happy
there.
     It's still probably the funniest movie you're likely to see
this summer.
     It's still probably the most spectacular movie you're likely to
see.  Period.  Or, at least, until the *next* Cameron movie.
     And, lastly, it's still highly recommended.  Call it a four-star
three-star-movie, on the Furr Scale (wherein the first rating is the
evaluation, and the second rating is what sort of movie the film was
trying to be.  TRUE LIES was trying to be a three-star movie, and it
did it *very* well.  HEAVEN'S GATE (*, ****,) on the other hand, was
trying to be a four-star movie, but did it incredibly badly.)

Title
Review for Lion King, The (1994)
     I went to see THE LION KING last night; it was hot, I had six
dollars to burn, and that was the only new movie in town, or so I
thought.
     In reality, THE LION KING is a fairly old movie, or, more
precisely, a whole bunch of old Disney movies tossed in the Mixmaster
and poured into a mold.  I'm sure that there was a plot in there,
somewhere, but most of the movie concerned itself with Disney's
trademarked cutting-edge animation, Warner Brothers-style comedy, and
some of the most forgettable music this side of your local elevator.
     As far as I was able to discern, the plot dealt with the efforts
of one Scar, the obligatory bad lion, to become king of the savannah by
killing the current king and attempting to kill the prince, and Simba's
(the prince and, later, king) eventual victory over Scar.  I'm a little
vague on the details of this supposed plot, because every time the
movie turned its attention that way, I kept having flashbacks to other
Disney movies.  With a few stripes and a couple of weeks with
Body-By-Jake, the nefarious Scar would be indistinguishable from THE
JUNGLE BOOK's Shere Khan.  The rightful king's death tossed me into
Bambi's mother's death scene, I'm sure Simba's exile differed from
Mowgli's time with Baloo only because Phil Harris is dead, and so on
and so forth.  Furthermore, even though what plot there was wasn't
original, there wasn't enough of it.  Even THE RESCUERS DOWN UNDER
had more twists and turns to its plot, and I'm not even including THE
PRINCE AND THE PAUPER in that.  In point of fact, much of what passes
for the plot is actually written in shorthand, with plot twists
becoming acceptable not because that there's any meat to them, but
because they're such cliche'd events that the movie doesn't need to
flesh them out.
     There's also a problem with the music: It's less than twelve hours
since I saw the movie, and the only music I can remember from it is
"The Lion Sleeps Tonight." "Forgettable" is a kind way to describe the
musak that Tim Rice and Elton John have presented us with.  Even the
giant production numbers don't remain in memory: It's over a year since
I last saw BEAUTY AND THE BEAST, and I can still sing most of "Be Our
Guest" from memory ... but I cannot for the life of me remember anything
about "The Circle of Life" except the title and the chord that they
brought the title card of the move in on.  This isn't going to win the
Oscar for Best Song, kids.
     However, that's not to say that there isn't a great deal to like
in THE LION KING.  When the plot isn't getting in the way and causing
flashbacks, there's an awful lot of comedy in this movie.  Rowan
Atkinson's avian major-domo provides several of the largest laughs in
the movie, from his long-suffering shepherding of the young Simba in
the first few minutes, to his tour of duty as Scar's stereo system
towards the end.  Whoopi Goldberg, Cheech Marin and "Ed," the lead
hyenas, are quietly amusing ... they completely lack any *menace*, but
they're amusing ("I just *gotta* get me a wildebeest!"), and there's
that rendition of "The Lion Sleeps Tonight" that rivals any comedic
moment Disney's had in years.  However, my personal favorite comedy
sequence occurs during the climactic battle, beginning with a meerkat
doing a slightly revised version of Spike Jones' "Hawaiian War Chant"
in drag, and ending with a baboon fighting off about eight hyenas in
perfect cheap-martial-arts-movie style, complete with sound effects.
     The animation is incredible, with the wildebeest stampede as the
possible high point of Disney's animation so far.  There are more
colors, more backgrounds, more of everything.  On a purely visual
level, THE LION KING is rivaled only by FANTASIA, and even FANTASIA
cannot compete with THE LION KING when Disney's latest decides to get
serious about its animation.  Words like "Breathtaking," which are
usually used by reviewers to indicate mild amusement, really *do* apply
to the absolute mastery of animation which Disney presents us with.
     Still, THE LION KING is a thin and weak structure covered with
strong comedy and beautiful animation.  It may have grossed $42 million
over its first weekend, but I can't imagine that it'll have the staying
power of ALADDIN.
     On the Furr Scale, THE LION KING is a two-and-a-half star
four-star movie. (In other words, it's *trying* to be the next BAMBI,
but it only manages to be the next GREAT MOUSE DETECTIVE.) Go see it,
in a THX theatre, if possible, but don't pay full price.
     (As a final note, I was annoyed by this movie in another way:
After the traditional THX and Dolby Digital wallop-the-audience
commercials, it went straight into the movie.  No trailers at all.
Bummer.)

Title
Review for Quick and the Dead, The (1995)
     I sail against the wind quite often, it seems, when it comes to
movies.  I actually liked SUPER MARIO BROTHERS, for instance, which
flopped, and I cannot stand the enormously successful EDWARD
SCISSORHANDS, a movie that I consider to be such an utter waste of
celluloid that I openly advocate using all existing copies to heat
homeless shelters in the New York area.
     I'm apparently sailing against a light breeze when it comes to Sam
Raimi's new movie, THE QUICK AND THE DEAD.  The overwhelming reaction
looks to be "Well, it's all right, if you like that sort of thing,"
said in a disparaging tone of voice, while I stand off in the corner
and say "It's all right, if you like that sort of thing" in an admiring
tone.
     From its opening frame, THE QUICK AND THE DEAD is clearly and
obviously a spaghetti western.  Like the movies that made Clint
Eastwood a star and Sergio Leone a legend, this film is set in a region
of the American west just south of Canaan and barely east of Hell.
Biblical overtones abound; the town where the action is set is named
Redemption, the primary antagonist is named Herod, and the only
righteous man in sight is not only a preacher, but is offered all the
kingdoms of the world during the course of the movie.  Like Leone's
movies, THE QUICK AND THE DEAD doles out its plot sparingly, and
instead presents us with memorable scum and finely calculated pacing,
and like Eastwood, the star of THE QUICK AND THE DEAD is left unnamed
for most of the film's running time.
     The plot of the film is as simply stated as that in THE GOOD, THE
BAD, AND THE UGLY.  There is an annual gunfighter's contest held in the
town of Redemption, it's sponsored by Herod, the gunfighter who rules
Redemption with an iron fist, and, along with the assorted scum,
Swedish fast-draw champions, and elegant fops with pearl-handled guns
who have been drawn by the promise of a prize of $123,000 to the
winner, a woman has come to compete, for an unknown reason.  Almost all
else follows from that basic concept; only one plot element is left
out: Herod has a pet project, an old associate of his who abandoned the
outlaw's life for that of a missionary.  Herod has a theory; once a
killer, always a killer, and the preacher is asked--forcibly--to
compete in the contest.
     That's it; a contest, a set of assorted killers, a reluctant
gunfighter, and a cipher, and once the pieces are in place, the movie
ticks along like the town clock that plays such an important role in
the film.  The key element of Leone's plots was always theme and
variations, and Raimi has taken that idea and distilled it down as far
as it will  go.  To my knowledge, no movies have ever included this
many classical face-off in the street gunfights, and none have ever
taken such pains to make sure each one is distinct and memorable.  The
pains are, in part, fruitless, because the middle of the movie does
drag a bit, somewhere around the seventh time the clock rings the hour
and someone gets shot, but the effort does show, and, for me at least,
is apprecated.
     The movie's weaknesses and strengths are the same: the actors.
Sharon Stone is wonderful for the first ten minutes and horrible for
five somewhere towards the end.  Gene Hackman is pretty good
throughout, but becomes wearing about halfway through, and only
recovers when he picks up his gun again.  Lance Hendricksen has several
fine scenes, but loses believability as he departs the movie.  The
acting is uneven, to put it mildly.  The cinematography and pacing
cover most of the real difficulties up, but the fact that they need
covering up detracts from the film.
     To return to my thesis; it is my belief that this movie "is all
right if you like this sort of thing."  If you like spaghetti westerns,
their simple plots and their spare characterization, their elegant
construction and their dusty world, you'll enjoy THE QUICK AND THE
DEAD, which is as typical of the form as any other movie ever lensed.
If you don't like the spaghetti western, you won't.
     Personally, I rate it as being a three-star three star movie (a
moderately ambitious movie that fulfills most of its ambitions
adequately.  The Furr Scale rates movies on ambition as well as
quality.  ROBOCOP is a four-star three star movie; a wonderful example
of non-epic moviemaking, while HEAVEN'S GATE is a one-star four star
movie; a film that tried to be majestic, sweeping, grand, and failed
utterly.  EVIL DEAD II is a four-star one star movie, and DAVE is a
two-star three star film.  I rate films this way because comparing the
rampant but hilarious idiocy of DUCK SOUP to the boring grandeur of THE
LAST EMPEROR.)

Title
Review for Die Hard: With a Vengeance (1995)
     Last week, I saw a Jackie Chan movie in a theatre for the first
time.  Aside from the incredible non-stop physical comedy, the most
notable thing about DRUNKEN MASTER was the extent that Chan made of his
surroundings.  Where an American action film would simply have two
characters enage in a stand-up fight, possibly but not probably using a
chair as a weapon, Chan and his antagonists constantly made use of
their environment; chairs, tables, trees, rocks, doors, windows, pots,
jugs, sticks, anything and everything in their surroundings could be
and was used and involved in the fight sequences.
     I was reminded of DRUNKEN MASTER while I watched DIE HARD WITH A
VENGEANCE, the third installment in Bruce Willis' caper-film series.
The distinguishing factor of all DIE HARD-like films is their use of
their environment; last summer's SPEED and the first DIE HARD are
possibly the best of the sort in their use of their premises.  Like
Chan, the combatants in a DIE HARD film make use of or are affected by
their environments--and usually these environments are strictly
limited.  The hero is on a bus, or in a building, or on a battleship,
or a plane.  DIE HARD WITH A VENGEANCE, on the other hand, shares its
stomping ground with THE TAKING OF PELHAM ONE TWO THREE: New York.
     That's both the problem with DIE HARD WITH A VENGEANCE and its
best aspect.  The problem is that the tight confinement that comes with
planes, buses, buildings, and boats limits the screenwriter's options
and thus improves the Chan-like action.  Instead of having to ask the
question "Okay, what does the hero obtain to solve this problem," the
screenwriter merely has to ask "How can the hero use what is available
to solve the problem," which usually provides a far more interesting
answer.  John MacClane (according to the end credits of this film; I'd
thought that the hero's name was John MacClaine in the previous
outings.  Que sera sera...) was handed an extremely limited set of
options in his first appearance, and it made for one of the all-time
great action movies.  His options and choices were enlarged for DIE
HARD 2: DIE HARDER, and the tension was reduced.  His third film is set
in an extremely large place ... and it *is* harmed by it, when compared
to the majesty of the original.
     However, ... this *is* New York.  Everyone in the *world* knows
New York, just like everyone knows what a building is, or a plane, or a
boat, and the potential for creative use of New York is endless.  We
*know* what Central Park is, we know Harlem, we know Wall Street ...
and when DIE HARD WITH A VENGEANCE is *using* New York, it almost
reaches the heights of its illustrious predecessor.  Just as we're
astonished and amused when Jackie Chan fights off a horde of enraged
waiters with chopsticks, we can be entertained by creative use of New
York, and we are.  Or, at least, I was when DIE HARD WITH A VENGEANCE
showed me the fastest way to go ninety blocks in a cab, when it
demonstrated exactly what the wrong thing to wear on 121st street was,
what the best way to get fourteen dump trucks sixty miles north was,
and so on.  The creative use of New York in DIE HARD WITH A VENGEANCE
is easily the equal of SPEED's creative use of the L.A. highway
system, and far superior to THE TAKING OF PELHAM ONE TWO THREE's use of
the New York subway system.
     So we have the down side--an enormous place for action to take
place in--and the up side--a really good enormous place for the action
to take place in.  On the down side, we also have the fact that this is
a DIE HARD movie, and therefore the glorious surprise of the original
DIE HARD is no longer possible.  DIE HARD 2: DIE HARDER tried and
failed to shock the audience with the creativity of its caper, and DIE
HARD WITH A VENGEANCE doesn't even really try.  We know very early in
the film what the scam is and how things are supposed to go ... at
least initially.  This removes another element of tension from the
movie, but it's replaced by the finest in Hollywood skill.  DIE HARD
was a demonstration of John McTiernan's genius; DIE HARD WITH A
VENGEANCE is a demonstration of his masterful craftsmanship.  While it
won't be studied in years to come in film class, it will in no way
subtract from his reputation and it is in no way a black mark on his or
anyone else's record.  The special effects are, for the most part,
excellent, primarily because of their subtlety.  The direction is crisp
and assured, the cinematography is uniformly good, and there are some
*damn* good roles in this movie.  Instead of giving us another
character in the mold of Dwayne T.  Robinson (played by Paul Gleason in
the original film) or William Atherton's Thornburg (the two false notes
in an otherwise perfect movie,) DIE HARD WITH A VENGEANCE presents us
with competent and engaging, if not deep, characters who are played by
actors in full command of their abilities.  Of especial note is a
character whose name I unfortunately did not catch and could therefore
not look up in the credits: the role of the bomb disposal expert, which
could have been a cheap joke, is filled by an actor who I've never seen
before but look forward to seeing again.  The music is also of note:
just as Beethoven was used in the original, "Johnny Comes Marching
Home" is a recurring and highly effective theme in this film--I plan on
buying the soundtrack, which, considering that the last soundtrack I
bought was for THE RIGHT STUFF, is saying something.
     There are, of course, some leaps of logic, some coincidences, and
some rather silly events that happen, but for the most part, DIE HARD
WITH A VENGEANCE moves forward with assurance, with a reasonably good
story (which I have carefully tried not to spoil.  The problem with
writing a review of this sort of movie is not ruining it ahead of
time,) decent if sketchy characters, and a high level of
craftsmanship.  DIE HARD WITH A VENGEANCE may not be the summer's
biggest hit, but I can definitely say that it begins the summer season
on a relatively high note.  On the Furr Scale (of quality and
ambition:  I rate films based on how well they achieve what they want
to do.  A four-star one star film, such as EVIL DEAD II cannot be rated
on the same scale with any justice as a one-star four star film such as
HEAVEN'S GATE.  Suffice it to say that I consider ROBOCOP to be a
three-star three star movie, or, a reasonably ambitious movie that
fufillis its ambitions well.  THE SPECIALIST was a one star three star
movie, or a reasonably ambitious movie that failed utterly, and LOCAL
HERO was a four-star two star movie, or a movie that didn't aim too
high, but did what it tried to do *insanely* well,) I give DIE HARD
WITH A VENGEANCE the rating of a three-star three star movie.

Title
Review for Terminal Velocity (1994)
     TERMINAL VELOCITY, the new Charlie Sheen vehicle, is a hard movie
to review.  Not because of any inherent problem with the movie itself,
but because delivering my honest opinion is going to make me look like
an idiot.
     Believe it or not, I consider TERMINAL VELOCITY to be well worth
the five-seventy-five and two hours I spent on it.
     Now, I'm *sure* that that statement is going to be met with
disagreement, but that's not what's going to get me in trouble.  What's
going to get me in trouble is the rest of this review.  To wit:
     The first adjective that comes to mind when describing TERMINAL
VELOCITY is "Hitchcockian."  If Alfred Hitchcock was a modern B-movie
director, this is the sort of movie he'd make.  Forget FRANTIC and the
other stale reworkings of the Master's art; Hitchcock at his best was
able to conjure a fearful, paranoia-laden energy that his modern
followers can only imitate.  TERMINAL VELOCITY, on the other hand,
manages to weave something approximating the Hitchcock aura out of its
B-movie roots.  It's nowhere near as good as the Master's best, but, to
be quite honest, I'd rather sit through TERMINAL VELOCITY again than
TOPAZ.
     In fact, TERMINAL VELOCITY is Hitchcockian enough that I'm not
going to describe the plot beyond the basics: There's this
sort-of-rebel parachute instructor who takes a student up, see, and ....
     The plot is even a rough approximation of the Hitchcock plot.  The
general description is Hitchcockian enough; slightly-tarnished Everyman
gets into a situation over his head in which nothing and no-one is what
it seems.  Even some of the specifics are Hitchcockian; the rocket sled
ride (which was visually impressive, but otherwise mostly pointless)
brought the Redcap scene from NORTH BY NORTHWEST to mind (and,
furthermore, there's even a scene that's almost identical to the
classic biplane sequence from that movie.)  There's a MacGuffin, which,
in true Hitchcock style, is never satisfactorally explained (what was
it doing on a German plane?), there's a underlying Cold War air to it,
and so on.
     Now, before you, the reader, fire up your mail program to tell me
that I'm trying to make a silk purse out of a sow's ear, let me qualify
this general statement:
     No, TERMINAL VELOCITY is not a great movie.  There are some
howlingly bad scenes, some rather tasteless scenes, and a conclusion
that is a deus literally ex machina, and if you have a low tolerance
for cheap characterization, then you might want to avoid this movie.
     On the other hand, if you're willing to put up with some stupidity
on the part of the filmmakers, you might stand an excellent chance of
actually enjoying this movie.  On the Furr Scale, TERMINAL VELOCITY is
either a three-star two star movie, or a two-star three star movie.
(The Furr Scale rates movies on ambition as well as quality; you
shouldn't expect a movie that's trying to be AMADEUS to be better or
worse in the same way as a movie that's trying to be EVIL DEAD 2.
HEAVEN'S GATE is a one-star four-star movie ... that is, it's an
utterly rotten movie that was trying to be great, and ROBOCOP is a
three-star three star movie; a darn good movie that was trying to be
darn good.) It's hard to tell with TERMINAL VELOCITY whether it was
trying to be a B movie, in which case it was pretty darn good, or an A
movie, in which case it was merely average.  Considering all in all,
I'm leaning towards three-star two star (an above average B movie.)
     Whatever it is, it's worth a look.  If you're unsure, give it a
matinee performance; it's definitely worth *that*.

Title
Review for Congo (1995)
     Ask yourself this question: "How much would I pay to spend about
two hours in an air-conditioned, dark room?" If your answer is higher
than the price of a movie ticket in your area, then, by all means, go
see CONGO this week.
     That's the only real reason to go see CONGO.  If the temperatures
in your area are above ninety degrees, it's humid, the air conditioning
in your apartment is out, there's only one theatre in town, and you
only have two hours to kill before you have to be somewhere, then it's
possible that going to see CONGO might be worth while.
     It's been a long time since I've seen a big-budget summer action
film as boring as CONGO.  It's been about as long since I've seen a
movie as badly made as CONGO, and, I hope, it'll be even longer since I
see a movie like this again.  (Of course, with WATERWORLD coming out
soon, my hopes are not high.)
     Remember those dreadful cheap jungle flicks from, oh, the
mid-eighties?  THE PERILS OF GWENDOLINE IN THE LAND OF YIK YAK?  That
sort of thing?  The makers of CONGO obviously derived their inspiration
from those films, instead of the jungle action films from the black and
white era that were actually good.  The plot makes as much sense (i.e.,
none,) the characterization is of the same quality (i.e., rotten,) the
acting is of the same caliber (i.e., pretty damn rotten,) and the
effects are just as good (i.e., not very.)
     The story is ... well, I'll try to sum up: An expedition to the
Congo finds really nifty diamons, which can be used to turn a laser
into the Death Star's main gun.  Unfortunately, just as they find the
laser, the expedition gets killed by ugly thingies.  The leader of the
expedition is the son of the evil nasty businessman, who sends his
son's fiance' into the jungle to find the diamonds.  He doesn't care
about his son, he just wants the diamonds, because, apparently, he
needs a laser that can vaporize people on the Moon.  This irritates the
fiance' to no end.  Meanwhile, a primatologist and his buddy (who has
VICTIM stamped on his forehead in big letters from the instant he
appears) decide that their ape, who's learned sign language, wants to
go home.  They can't afford to take her home, until a Rumanian shows up
and offers to pay for the trip.  Meanwhile, the fiance also shows up,
takes over the expedition, and everybody flies to the Congo, where the
evil nasty businessman has arranged for porters and equipment and
guns.  At this point, for no readily apparent reason, things start
exploding.  Things continue to explode for about half an hour, as the
expedition, which is showing signs of Hollywood Conflict, proceeds into
the jungle.  We discover that the Rumanian wants to discover the Lost
City of Zinj, where Solomon got his diamonds from, and he thinks the
ape that's going home knows where it is.  We also discover that Tim
Curry can't do a Rumanian accent, but that's not important right now.
What is important is that nothing much happens for another half an
hour, until the expedition reaches the Lost City of Zinj, and people
start getting their heads ripped off.  One thing leads to another, and
eventually everybody dies except for three people, who escape from the
ugly thingies, the exploding volcano, and the Shaking Hollywood
Disaster Landscape (left over from EARTHQUAKE, I'd assume), in a
balloon, which completely ignores the fact that, during the half an
hour when things exploded, we discovered that the area around the Congo
is filled to the brim with surly people with anti-aircraft missiles who
don't like people flying over the landscape.  Regardless, the evil
nasty businessman gets his, the ape gets laid, and everybody who's
still alive is happy.
     You now no longer need to see CONGO.  You'll note, by the way,
that the ugly nasties, who are the major advertising point of the film,
are pretty damn unimportant.  They rip everybody's heads off, but in
such a way that you don't *care* who ripped whose head off.  For many
of these characters, missing one's head could only improve things.
     However, the plot synopsis only shows one thing--the utter
silliness of the plot, and a silly plot is not enough to make a movie
bad.  What makes this movie bad is the rest of it--*every* aspect of
it is rotten.  The cinematography manages to completely fail at
capturing any sense of spectacle or grandeur.  The special effects are
bad--the people in gorilla suits look like people in gorilla suits,
which, in a film like this, is fatal.  The sets look like sets.  You
can tell immediately when the film moves from shot-on-location to
shot-in-a-warehouse-somewhere.  The acting is boring (except for Ernie
Hudson and Bruce Campbell, who are so much better than the rest of the
actors in this piece of tripe that you feel sorry for them wasting
their talent like this.)
     And, what's more offensive, it's stereotypical Crichton.  Yup.
Mister I-Hate-Science himself is responsible for this travesty.
There's a truly insulting sequence where one scientist, who
theoretically has a doctorate, asks another scientist why he taught an
ape to speak.  The answer is *incredibly* annoying ("No reason," he
says,) and the question is more so--in essence, the screenplay
portrays science as something that is done for either a: completely
ruthless exploitation, or b: aesthetic reasons which will never ever
amount to anything.  I can only imagine what happened to Crichton when
he was young: possibly, he was frightened by Mister Wizard and has
harbored a deep and abiding loathing of anyone daring to figure
anything out ever since.
     The movie doesn't even get bad *enough*, which is the worst bit of
all.  If it had gone through rottenness and out the other side, it
could have been entertaining, if not good.  It could have tried for
camp, for tongue-in-cheek thrills.  It didn't.  It played it straight,
and it's the worse for it, because it is so utterly, unredeemably
boring.  On the Furr Scale (I rate films on ambition as well as quality
- you can't rate EVIL DEAD II on the same scale as THE RIGHT STUFF, for
instance.  An okay movie that tried to be great is different from a
great 'bad' movie.  ROBOCOP, for instance, is a three-star three star
movie; a pretty good movie that aimed fairly high.  HEAVEN'S GATE was a
one-star four star movie; a bad movie that tried to be great.  SOAPDISH
was a three-star two star movie; a very good movie that didn't aim as
high as it might,) CONGO is a one-star three star movie.  Boring, dull,
and uninvolving are the *best* words to describe it--I could be more
descriptive, but that'd make this review R, instead of PG-13...

Title
Review for Johnny Mnemonic (1995)
     I've paid my dues when it comes to cyberpunk in the visual media.
I've seen all the episodes of MAX HEADROOM, I've seen both versions of
BLADE RUNNER, I even still have an episode of WHIZ KIDS on videotape
somewhere.
     Of course, I could have skipped that last one and missed nothing.
Every scene in this movie (save one, and I'll get to that in a bit,)
gave me a galloping case of the "Been there, done that"s.  Which is
*incredibly* depressing, as the original short story was exactly that:
original.  "Johnny Mnemonic" and the other stories that were
collected in William Gibson's BURNING CHROME, were original,
well-constructed, painfully clear and brilliantly vivid short stories.
     Gibson's talent has been slowly fading since NEUROMANCER, it
seems.  COUNT ZERO was good, MONA LISA OVERDRIVE was all right, THE
DIFFERENCE ENGINE was tolerable, VIRTUAL LIGHT was boring, and now he's
got sole writing credit for this film, and it fits into that linear
descent just fine, thank you very much.  There are a few elements left
in JOHNNY MNEMONIC from the original short story, but they're hidden
behind an inordinately large load of, and I'm using this word
intentionally, crap, and the good bits are the ones that Gibson chose
to change.  Instead of the film noir-esque aura of the short story,
where there *are* no good guys, Gibson ladled gallon after gallon of
Hollywood Motivation into the plot--he's no longer just a courier with
information that matters nothing to him, he's now The Sole Hope Of The
World.  He's no longer just in danger of getting diced by a monofilament
thumb, he's now got a Tragic Flaw, by jiminy, and He'll Die Because Of
His Own Mistakes.
     This is not to say that I'm writing a rotten review because of how
different JOHNNY MNEMONIC is from "Johnny Mnemonic"; that's just why
I'm disappointed.  I'm giving JOHNNY MNEMONIC a rotten review because,
unfortunately, it's a rotten movie.
     It's stunningly unoriginal in production design; remember what I
said about having seen MAX HEADROOM?  Well, if you've seen any given
episode of MAX HEADROOM, you've seen what the designers of JOHNNY
MNEMONIC were trying to do, and you've seen it done twenty times better
than JOHNNY MNEMONIC did it, on an incredibly smaller budget.
     It features some stunningly bad acting: Keanu Reeves is rotten
... totally, unreservedly, completely rotten.  It's not his
fault--the script is the primary culprit--but, as bad as his portrayal
is, he gives the best performance of the cast.  Ice-T *could* have given
a decent performance--he's a better actor than Keanu is, in my humble
opinion - but he's got about six lines and about four seconds of screen
time, which makes it kind of hard to tell whether or not it was a
decent go at the role.
     It's got some hideously bad special effects.  Oh, *one* scene is
well done, but the rest was on a level with the effects done for STAR
TREK V: THE FINAL FRONTIER.
     It's got ... well, why go on? Bad acting, a bad script, unoriginal
and badly executed design ... this movie is a turkey.
     One scene--*one* single, solitary scene is impressive, and it's
almost enough for me to forgive most of the rest of the movie.
Fortunately, the people who assembled the trailer also saw a good scene
when they saw it, so most of it was included.  The "What are you
doing?" "Making a long-distance phone call." scene is probably the best
virtual reality scene ever done on film or on TV.  It's believable,
well-done--Keanu performs well--and if I had my way, I'd pull that one
single scene out of JOHNNY MNEMONIC and film an entirely different
movie around it.
     At any rate, I'm calling JOHNNY MNEMONIC a one-point-five star
two-star movie.  It didn't aim very high, and it missed what it was
aiming at, but it had a redeeming feature or two. (On the Furr Scale, I
rate movies by ambition and execution: rating EVIL DEAD II (a four-star
one star movie, i.e., it didn't aim very high, but, boy, did it
succeed) on the same scale as HEAVEN'S GATE (a one-star four star
movie, i.e., it aimed very, very high, and failed utterly) is
ludicrous.  So I don't do it.  A few examples; ROBOCOP is a three-star
three star movie (aimed relatively high, did what it wanted to do,) THE
RIGHT STUFF is a three-star four star movie (aimed very high, did
pretty much what it wanted to do) and THE LAWNMOWER MAN was a two-star
two star movie (didn't aim too high, and did what it was supposed to
do, but not very well.))

Title
Review for Street Fighter (1994)
     Mark Twain's (so, okay, Samuel Clemens') wife Livy was, as it
happens, not terribly thrilled with her husband's tendency to swear.
In one specific instance, the anecdote goes, Twain was alone in a room,
and, if memory serves, injured himself.  This served as the inspiration
for a round of cursing of biblical proportions; he unburdened himself
of a month's worth of profanity in seconds.  After he wound down, he
turned around and saw Livy standing in the door to the room.  She stood
there and, very carefully, repeated every word that Twain had uttered.
Twain reportedly replied to this unemotional rendition of his poetic
blasphemies with the sentence, "My dear, you may have the words, but
you don't have the music."
     STREET FIGHTER, the most recent of the new trend in
martial-arts-for-the-kiddies movies, has the words ... has an awful lot
of words, as a matter of fact ... but it simply does not have the
music.
     It has a respectable plot; power-mad dictator (Raul Julia, in his
last role, doing a decent, but not, unfortunately, great, job as
General Bison) is trying to take over first, a small Asian country, and
second, the world, and everybody and his dog is either trying to help
him to do it or stop him from doing it.  Certain details are laughable
(e.g., Bison has sixty-some hostages, for which he demands twenty
billion dollars in ransom, and the other nations of the world are
willing to *pay* that much.  "Yeah," I said while watching, "Right.")
     It has respectable actors ... amazingly enough, Van Damme, the
biggest-name star (aside from Julia) in the film, has one of the
smaller roles.  The rest of the cast consists of second-rank actors who
you *know* you've seen before, but can't remember from where, and, for
the most part, they do a more than adequate job.  Certain of them stand
out ... the characters of Honda, Dee Jay, and Dhal Sim are above
average in this regard.
     It has decent production values; not great, but decent.  The
whiz-bang-on-the-cheap special effects that we've come to expect from
this sort of film are, for the most part, missing, and the money saved
from not trying to be the next Jurassic Park is applied rationally.
Certain effects are rather rotten, to tell the truth.  It took me more
than half the movie to figure out that Bison's floating console was
actually supposed to be floating (I'd assumed that, up to then, it was
supposed to be on a crane or something,) for instance.  However, the
overall look of the movie is far superior to the last
video-game-inspired movie (DOUBLE DRAGON.  Of course, "America's
Funniest Home Videos" usually looks better than DOUBLE DRAGON did.  On
the other hand, DOUBLE DRAGON was funnier than "AFHV" usually is, and
had a better chase scene, so it averages out.)
     It has, in short, pretty much all it needs.  There are two
detail-related problems with the movie, but it strives and almost
overcomes them.  The most significant problem with the film is that
every STREET FIGHTER II character, whether from the original version,
Special Championship version, Turbo, Super, or, for all I know, Tiger
hand-held, gets a 'speaking' part.  Some are larger than others; Vega
doesn't actually speak, for instance ... but they're all in there.
That fact tends to limit the amount of characterization and plot
involvement available to any one character, which makes the entire
movie oddly uninvolving.  There's no central viewpoint character or set
of characters that we can follow through the movie, and the resolution
of any one character's story is less meaningful; the viewer only
invested five minutes in Blanka's story, for instance, and four of
those were spent watching him in a chair making faces at the camera -
which makes it sort of hard to *care* what happens to him.  The second
problem is less major; it might even be a minor problem for anyone
who's not as, er, anal, as I am.  The military details are *laughable*,
and, unfortunately, unintentionally so.  A colonel is in charge of a
company that's apparently effective enough to have complete control of
a major seaport?  A stealthed boat can't be seen on a TV screen?  And
so on and so forth; minor to others, annoying to me.
     The key, major problem with STREET FIGHTER is that, even though
it's competently made, even though the plot holds together reasonably
well, even though it has decent performances, passable effects, snappy
lines, hilarious scenes (listen carefully to the soundtrack when Honda
and Zangreif are going at it,) it just never comes together into a
seamless whole.  Individual elements range from passable to great, but
the collection of them  looks more like Frankenstein's monster than
Cindy Crawford.  Possibly, if it had thrown most of the cast out, it
could have spent the time made available on the cinematic equivalent of
plastic surgery, but as it is, the assemblage may work, it may even
entertain, but it's not what it could have been.
     STREET FIGHTER is, at times, trying to be a martial-arts movie,
and it succeeds, for the most part.  It's not up to, say, ENTER THE
DRAGON's standards, but then, what is?  At other times, it's trying to
be a believable thriller, and at other times than that, it wants to be
the third act of a James Bond movie.
     On the Furr Scale, it's a 2.5-star three-star movie. (The Furr
Scale (I'm *so* modest) rates movies on ambition as well as quality;
clearly, ANIMAL HOUSE should not be judged on the same basis as THE
LAST EMPEROR ... thus, ANIMAL HOUSE was, IMHO, a *great* B movie; in
other words, a four-star two-star movie.  THE LAST EMPEROR, on the
other hand, was an average epic. (a two-star four-star movie.) Both
ROBOCOP and TREMORS could be rated with three stars, but ROBOCOP was
*trying* to be a three-star (or A) movie, while TREMORS was aiming
squarely at the B movie (two-star) level, thus ROBOCOP is a three-star,
three-star movie, and TREMORS was three-star two-star movie.)
     Loosely translated, a 2.5-star three-star movie is "Go see it;
you're not likely to do better this holiday season."  In an otherwise
lackluster session of movies, STREET FIGHTER by sheer virtue of not
being boring, is therefore recommended.  Just park your brain at the
door, and try to read more into it than is actually there.

Title
Review for Batman Forever (1995)
     You know, it's a darn good thing that BATMAN FOREVER isn't dull.
We'd be suffering through eight million reviews, all using the same "It
certainly *felt* like forever..." gag, and if that happened, I'd be
forced to flee the country and watch no movies younger than thirty
years.
     That's the best place to start a review of BATMAN
FOREVER--whatever else you can say about it, it certainly isn't
dull.  If anything, at times, a little dullness would be a good
thing, just so that the audience would have time to grasp the latest
complication.  I mean, THE DRAUGHTSMAN'S CONTRACT this ain't, but it
has more stuff actually happening in it than any three other summer
movies I can name (So far, anyway.) There's the Riddler's origin,
there's Two-Face's story, there's Robin's origin, there's the
obligatory Batman/Blonde In A Black Outfit love story, there's action,
there's street combat, there's chase sequences, ritzy parties, Jim
Carrey's stand-up routine, and, amazingly enough, a giant blender with
fins (we'll get to that later).  There is, to be blunt, so much stuff
happening that, even at an approximately two-hour running length, the
movie bulges at the seams, to the point where aspects of the plot, such
as it is, whiz past unnoticed because something else is already shoving
its way forward for its second-and-a-half of screen time.
     Not only is there a lot happening in the plot, there's a lot
happening visually.  I'll be frank--the original BATMAN is a hard act
to beat, in terms of production style--it is, as far as I'm concerned,
the only movie Tim Burton's ever done where his Gothic obsessions work
(they certainly didn't in BATMAN RETURNS)--and BATMAN FOREVER doesn't
beat it.  It doesn't even try to do so.  Burton chose to model his
Gotham on Gothic elements, on shades of gray, on noir and
Piranesi--this more recent Gotham is full of strong primary colors, and
more humanistic design.  It's still recognizably the same city as
Burton's, but the Gotham we see in BATMAN FOREVER looks like it's
actually been lived in, like it *could* be lived in.  There's no space
for humanity in Burton's Gotham, but there is in this one.
Furthermore, BATMAN FOREVER succeeds at doing what DICK TRACY only
dreamed of doing.  Not only is BATMAN FOREVER's Gotham more colorful
than Burton's, it's more faithful to the Gotham of the comic books--it
*looks* like what comics look like after they've been projected in the
theatre of our imagination.  The camera often swoops around buildings,
it falls down, it moves as fast and as smoothly as the comic reader's
eye seems to (yes, eye movements are actually rather jerky and
sudden--but it doesn't seem that way to the person behind the organic
camera...).  The production design in BATMAN FOREVER seems designed to
have something on the screen at all times that captures the eye, or
leads it, or draws the viewer's attention in or moves it aside.  Just
as it seems at times to be overplotted, it may even be overdesigned.
At the very least, it demands a second viewing, for the simple reason
that familiarity with the most obvious objects on screen will allow the
observer to see everything else crammed into a single frame.  There
are, of course, occasional false notes in the production design, the
most obvious of which is, er, the giant blender with fins.  I can't
really explain why there's a giant blender with fins, not without
spoiling the climax of the movie (although I think it's not exactly a
spoiler to mention that, not only is it a giant blender with fins, it
eventually becomes a giant *exploding* blender with fins.)
     I'm now forced to divide my critical response, which is
appropriate, considering that Two-Face is in this movie.  I can respond
to BATMAN FOREVER on its own terms, and I can respond to it based on
the fact that I've been reading BATMAN and DETECTIVE for decades.  Own
terms first, I suppose.
     This is a very funny movie at times.  There are the gags and lines
that we've all seen and heard in the promos and trailers--but those
are, amazingly enough, neither the funniest of the gags nor all of the
lines.  Jim Carrey, furthermore, is not the funniest actor in the film,
either.  This should come as no surprise to those of us (all, what,
three?) who saw Val Kilmer in TOP SECRET!, but for those who haven't:
Val Kilmer can be very funny when he wants to be, and, quite often in
this film, he wants to be.  Carrey, on the other hand, does his
standard schtick.  Okay, it was funny at times on IN LIVING COLOR, it
was funny in ACE VENTURA: PET DETECTIVE, and it was even funny in THE
MASK, but honest to Pete, we've *seen* him posture, we've *seen* him
twist that rubber face of his around, and, okay, yes, he's moderately
amusing in BATMAN FOREVER, but the novelty's worn off.  Tommy Lee Jones
is also ... less interesting than he should be.  Apparently someone
handed him a copy of all the scenes from BATMAN with Jack Nicholson in
them and said "See this? That's your role.  Oh, but you only have to
put makeup on half your face.  Ciao." As a villain, he's okay.  Which
is, sadly, not enough (fortunately, the movie doesn't rest on his
shoulders.)
     Which brings us to the really unique point of BATMAN FOREVER.
This is the first Batman movie (of the recent three) where Batman/Bruce
Wayne is more interesting than the villain(s).  I was shocked.  A
Batman movie where BRUCE WAYNE gets screen time? And it's a
*believable* Bruce Wayne? Holy smokes, wake the kids, call the
neighbors.  After the disastrous (and misnamed) BATMAN RETURNS (Batman
didn't return--he didn't even get any screen time) I fully expected
this to be another villain-based outing, where Bruce Wayne and his
blonde-in-black would be relegated to about fifth in order of
importance.  Fortunately, I was wrong.  The protagonist is really the
protagonist for once.  Wow.
     (And now, my reaction based on the fact that I've been a Batman
fan since before Batman was cool again:)
     This is Two-Face?  Huh?  Since when was Two-Face like *this*?
Threw *me* for a loop, I can tell you.
     On the plus side, though, BATMAN FOREVER is more aware of the rest
of the Batman phenomenon than any previous film.  Concepts and scenes
are taken directly from BATMAN: THE DARK KNIGHT RETURNS, references are
made to, for instance, Metropolis and other parts of the DC Universe,
it occasionally slyly pokes fun at itself and its predecessors. (I will
bet you *any* amount of money that you will *not* expect (unless
someone tells you) what Robin says as the two heroes first encounter
the Riddler's base at close hand.  Whee!)
     (This concludes my fan-based reaction.  Thank you.)
     At any rate, since any plot summary would take too long, and,
besides, you already know the important bits, I'll skip the
play-by-play and go straight to the box scores:
     BATMAN FOREVER was a surprise.  Not only did it have, amazingly
enough, a real, live plot, not only did it have mostly original
production design, not only did it have decent acting all around
(except for, sadly, the two villains,) it had more fun with itself than
Burton ever allowed his films to have.  On the Furr Scale (I rate films
based on ambition as well as quality: you can't rate a film like EVIL
DEAD II on the same scale as LAWRENCE OF ARABIA without acknowledging
the fact that the two movies were trying to do different things.  EVIL
DEAD II was a four-star one-star film:  a very, very good movie that
didn't aim very high, while LAWRENCE OF ARABIA is a four-star four-star
movie: a very, very good movie that aimed very high.  ROBOCOP is a
three-star three star movie (pretty good, aimed pretty high,) and
HEAVEN'S GATE is a one-star four star movie (a rotten movie that aimed
high.)) I'll call BATMAN FOREVER a three-star three star movie.  As
long as you don't expect the bad guys to carry the film, and as long as
you can keep up with the film's rapid and diffuse plotting, you should
have a blast.
