Authors
Sean Linaweaver
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Battlefield Earth (2000)
Anyone who ever read John Campbell's "Astounding" or "Analog"
magazines, or admired a painting by Frank Kelly Freas will
recognize what has been accomplished in the film version of
"Battlefield Earth." This is real science fiction on an epic
scale. The heroes have to use their brains. The villains take
too much for granted.
Some of the reviews I've seen appearing are by critics who
take too much for granted. It is painfully obvious when a
reviewer hasn't bothered to see the film he lambastes. One
reviewer was babbling about robots and puppets. What movie
is that, hmmm?
Look, H.G. Wells was a Socialist. But you don't have to be a
Socialist to enjoy "The War of the Worlds"! C.S. Lewis was a
Christian. But you don't have to be a Christian to enjoy the
Narnia books!
The point should be obvious. L. Ron Hubbard was a great science
fiction writer. "Battlefield Earth" is one of his best stories.
Roger Christian has made a fine film and if there are any hidden
messages, it is that kids should read books.
John Travolta plays the most sarcastic villain in the history of
motion pictures. That alone would justify seeing the film but
there is much more. Barry Pepper, Kim Coates, Christian Tessier
and the rest of the freedom fighters make you believe that the
human race will never be defeated. On the other side, Forest
Whitaker provides a superb foil for Travolta's character.
Between the two of them we experience the Satanic side of
bureaucracy.
When I saw this film at its Hollywood premiere, I paid close
attention to the kids in the audience. They don't have any agendas.
They just want to have a good time. They could tell the good guys
from the bad guys. They loved the action and explosions and here's
the most important part: they didn't run to the concession stand
during the dialog scenes.
I'd like to see someone try and convince them that they didn't
really enjoy the movie.
