Authors
Michael S. Huang
Number of Reviews
3

Title
Review for Few Good Men, A (1992)
Directed by Rob Reiner
Starring Tom Cruise, Demi Moore, Jack Nicholson, Kiefer Sutherland, and
         Kevin Bacon
     The past few years have been lacking genuinely well-told stories
that are there for the essence of the yarn -- tales that make people
think and feel.  Movies of late have relied on special effects, sex,
violence, controversy, and big names to bring in audiences, and this is
the first movie in a while which I've seen that doesn't use any of these
except the big names and doesn't rely on *any* of them to keep your
attention.
     The story starts out with the brutal beating and murder of a
Private First Class at the United States Naval Base, Marine Barracks in
Guantanamo Bay, Cuba.
     Moore, as the officer in Internal Affairs finds out about this case
and wants to pursue this as a case of "Code Red," illegal hazing and
beating of marines who are not up to par for some reason.
     Her superiors deny her request to press this case, and forward it
to Tom Cruise who plays a Harvard Law School graduate who has been out
of school for nine months and in the Navy for only seven.  He's had a
history of brilliant plea-bargains, and has never actually defended a
client in court.
     Enter Nicholson, who is the Colonel in command of the Marines in
Guantanamo Bay, and Sutherland, his right-hand man (well, once removed.
:-)  Nicholson's character ordered the "Code Red" which eventually led
to the killing of the Private.
     This is the premise for the story of getting to the truth, and
Cruise and Moore's battle through Marine Code of Platoon, Corps, God,
Country.  They must dig out the truth through a group of highly
disciplined soldiers who are trained to obey orders, and to put nothing
above the word of their superiors.
     Reiner did an outstanding job with the movie's direction, and
Cruise was brilliant in a few courtroom scenes.  Moore gave much of
herself in her role as a very self-determined, stubborn, headstrong
Naval Officer, and Nicholson played an unbelievable courtroom scene
near the end of the movie.
     Cinematography was well-done, and music was moderately-well-done.
     This movie is a definite gem among today's common movies being
released.  Unlike others like BASIC INSTINCT, and TERMINATOR 2 it
doesn't rely on gratuitous sex or violence to convey an extremely
well-told story.  There isn't any gore or "skin," although there is a
bit of language spread through the film, although done well with the
type of story being told.  An extremely well-done story.  A definite
must-see.

Title
Review for Wayne's World 2 (1993)
Starring: Mike Myers, Dana Carvey
Co-Starring: Christopher Walken, Tia Carrere, Ralph Brown
Appearances by: Kim Basinger, Heather Locklear, Charleton Heston,
                Aerosmith, Jay Leno
Written by: Mike Myers and Bonnie Turner & Jerry Turner
Directed by: Stephen Surjik
     One year has passed since the last time we saw them, and but Wayne
Campbell and Garth Algar are back but, they've moved out of their
parents homes, and now have their own pad in an abandoned warehouse.
Wayne's still hopelessly infatuated with his girlfriend, Cassandra, and
of course Garth is still having his own, personal growing pains.
     They guys are just finishing off one of their shows, and head off
to an Aerosmith concert where they run across Cassandra and her new
manager, a stereotypical industry slime not unlike the character Rob
Lowe portrayed in the previous film.
     Again, the promoter is not only after the money that Cassandra's
talent can bring in.  The storyline quickly degrades to a parallel of
the original, "guy loses chick, guy realizes mistake, and guy gets
chick back."
     Fortunately, there is more to this movie than this somewhat sheer
plot.  The wit and humor in this film are surprisingly intelligent and
fresh with many inside jokes on the film and music industries as well
as just a lot of hilarious scenes of Wayne and Garth showing their true
color.
     Highlights of the movie include a spoof of JURASSIC PARK, Garth's
seduction by a married woman, a surprise appearance by Charleton
Heston, a 1960's Batman setup in the guy's pad, and some pretty groovy
chats with Jim Morrison and some "naked Indian guy," an unexpected
lip-sync of YMCA (you could see that one coming a mile away) and of
course a hilarious parody of those badly-dubbed kung-fu movies we love
to laugh at.
     And if you've ever wondered why there's always boxes of
watermelons, chickens, and people walking plate glass in the middle of
streets, you'll find out here.
     This movie also explores Wayne and Garth a little more.  Garth has
somewhat of a "coming of age" and Wayne gets to learn a little about
himself (with a little help from our old friend, Jim Morrison).  A few
old jokes from the previous movie are explored here again, but this
time with a few twists to keep them fresh, and luckily, few, if any of
them are overused.
     Overall, the movie has plenty of continuity flaws (especially in
the fight scent between Garth and Cassandra's dad), but these are
easily overlooked as this is, after Wayne's World.  The plot is flimsy
but manageable.  There are a few special effects, but they are fairly
seamless, and fill nicely into the plot.  The acting is good, for this
sort of movie, but there are some very bright spots.
     In the big picture, this movie is just plain fun.  There is lots
of intelligent humor that makes this film special.  During the whole
one hour and 40 minutes, I didn't even think about looking at my watch
a single time.  Silly, but riotous at times, this is an excellent movie
even better than the original.

Title
Review for Lion King, The (1994)
Disney Films
Featuring: James Earl Jones, Whoopi Goldberg, Moira Kelly,
           Matthew Broderick, Jeremy Irons, Cheech Marin,
           and a host of others
Music and Lyrics by Elton John and Tim Rice
     Just when you thought that Disney could do no better; just when
you thought that the pinnacle of an art form had been reached, Disney
dared to push the envelope, and make another animated feature.  To the
pleasant satisfaction of many, and in classic Disney style, this film
has outshined the sunrise over the African savanna.
     Disney has had a grand tradition of animated film, which has
spanned the greater course of this century.  Starting with such films
as SNOW WHITE, PINOCCHIO, and CINDERELLA, Walt Disney set the standard
by which all other animated features have ever been measured.
     This tradition wavered during the 1970's and early 80's, but made
a sensational return with its trio of films, THE LITTLE MERMAID,
BEAUTY AND THE BEAST, and ALADDIN.  Each of these films went back
to the tradition of a good story before excellent animation.  The magic
and charm of the art was brought back from a cellulose, near-death
experience.
     Throughout each of these films, not only did the Disney animation
house draw deeper upon their artful imagery, they also drew upon
stronger characters, and better vocal talents.  To this end, they have
drawn many a celebrity into the recording studio, including Robin
Williams, James Earl Jones, and Jeremy Irons, the latter two both
appearing in the Lion King.
     As the grandeur and spectacular sights and sounds of ALADDIN
thrilled audiences, and its timely, cutting-edge humor brought roarious
laughter, and an occasional tear.
     This film does one up from that, with spectacular vocal
performances, brilliant sights and more than a plethora of the
traditional Disney charm.
     The artful expression of the characters was wonderful, ranging
through the adorable Simba as a cub, to the evil Scar.  Not to be
outdone in expressing characters, Disney also went out of their way to
create beautiful scenic backdrops, with a sense of depth panning across
the wild African brush, often with hundreds of waterfowl flying across
the land.
     True to Disney style, the story is a tear-jerker, which is
apparently geared more towards adults than children, but which most
children will surely enjoy.
     This grand drama of a lion cub finding himself and his true place
in the call of the wild is a must-see, with some hilarious
characterizations, and charm which brings back great drama and art true
to the Disney tradition.
