Authors
John S. Watson
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Dersu Uzala (1974)
DERSU UZALA, 1975, Japan/Russia, a film by Akira Kurosawa,
     It seems like I spend hours every week rummaging around videos stores  and
reading this newsgroup hoping to find that one movie that might change  my life
a little.  Or at least touch my heart some.  Alas, as the years roll by, movies
like this seem harder to find.
     DERSU UZALA is the third film I've seen from the legendary director Akira
Kurosawa, who as you recall was honored last month by the Academy of Motion
Picture Arts and Sciences.  The other two films of his I've seen, THE SEVEN
SAMURAI and THE HIDDEN FORTRESS, are his best-known works (along with RAN which
I've not seen yet).  But DERSU UZALA is my favorite so far.  (George Lucas is
said to have borrowed elements from THE SEVEN SAMURAI and THE HIDDEN FORTRESS
for his "Star Wars" movies,  now I think maybe he derived the character "Yoda"
from Dersu Uzala).
     The story is of a Russian explorer/surveyor in 1903, who while on a 
mapping expedition of northeastern Siberia meets and becomes excellent friends
with Dersu Uzala, a gnome of a man, wise in the ways of the forest.  Dersu
becomes the Russian's guide, and they quickly come to respect and love him:
respect especially for his knowledge of nature on the taiga, which saves them
many times from certain death.  This living in harmony with nature is the
ecological message in the film.
     The characters seems very real, and down to earth.  The action is slow and
deliberate.  Nothing is wasted.  The Russians aren't the cardboard-cut-outs
you'd find in a typical Hollywood movie.  These people consistently "Do the
Right Thing."  The friendship that develops between the two major characters,
the Russian captain and Dersu, was the best portrayal of "friendship" that I
can remember in a movie.  Two friends saying goodbye, knowing they may never
see each other again, is to me, the saddest thing a movie can can have in it.
This movie has a couple of poignant goodbye scenes.  Which always makes me
think of all the friends I've had in my life which I will never see again.  But
I digress ....
     As with the other Kurosawa films I have seen, the cinematography was
fabulous: beautiful and atmospheric.  Sadly, the video I viewed was not letter-
boxed, and there were many scenes that just cried for it; lots of times there
was very noticeable "panning and scanning."  I wish I could seen it on the big 
screen.  The film is in Russian with subtitles, but you'd swear that you could
understand without.  Good luck in finding it at you local video store, though,
in any format.
     A perfect way to celebrate glasnost, Earth Day and Akira Kurosawa.  All at
once.  
