Authors
Robert Chao
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Twin Peaks: Fire Walk with Me (1992)
     I saw TWIN PEAKS: FIRE WALK WITH ME grudgingly, just because a
friend wanted to go.  I felt David Lynch had gotten carried away with
himself lately, as I didn't like WILD AT HEART or the pilot for the
second season of "Twin Peaks."
     I was just speechless after I saw it.  I thought I would hate it.
But I was eating it up, every second of it.  It was extremely emotional.
I felt as though I knew all the characters, and to see them again, on
year earlier, just blew me away.  Especially when the familiar music
came back and you see the girls walking to school.
     What struck me the most was the style of photography.  I was not as
slick and polished as WILD AT HEART or the series.  The film was grainy
and the lighting was kind of naturalistic.  Like the scenes in the
Palmers' house or when Bobby is using the lay phone.  It seemed almost
low-budget at times.  Does anyone know if the film stock was unusual for
a theatrical release?
     I really appreciated the way Lynch didn't pander to people who
hadn't seen the series.  He just stuck to being faithful to his
creation.  And there were *so many* characters from the series in it, even
Leo and Shirley.  The ads are stupid because they mention Bowie.
     All throughout the film I was saying "This is a stupid movie, but
I'm loving every second."  I guess those Japanese are way ahead of us.
I was fascinated with the character of Laura and the emotional high
point was when she broke with James at the very end.  The most emotional
bit in any Lynch film.
     I once saw Lynch's earliest films, THE GRANDMOTHER and THE
ALPHABET, and the scene of Cooper playing with the TV monitors really
reminded me of those.  After the film my friend played me a laserdisc of
INDUSTRIAL SYMPHONY and I hated it.
     I guess a reason I liked this film is that it felt personal, that
Lynch is out to please "Twin Peaks" fans, that he isn't being Ridley
Scott or Oliver Stone, and to hell with everybody else anyway.  It may
sound ridiculous but I can't even remember the last time I enjoyed a
film so much as last night.
