Authors
Eric Walker
Number of Reviews
21

Title
Review for Jurassic Park (1993)
     My ears are still ringing and my head is still swimming from the
experience I had last night: I saw Steven Spielberg's JURASSIC PARK.
The movie of the year, the ads call it, with dinosaurs so life-like you
won't believe they're real.  There hasn't been this much hype for a
movie since 1989's BATMAN, and expectations have been high that we
would finally see a return to the old Spielberg magic that's been
missing since the days of RAIDERS OF THE LOST ARK and E.T.  The
question to ask, therefore, is "does the movie live up to the hype?"
     Yes, it does.  The movie isn't perfect, but it delivers what the
audience wants to see, and more.  You want dinosaurs?  There has never
been anything on the screen quite like the dinosaurs we see in JURASSIC
PARK.  The movie is teeming with them, and they're every bit as scary
as we want to be, and then some.  The dinosaurs take us on a thrilling,
terrifying roller-coaster ride from the first frame to the last.  I
haven't felt this wrung-out by a movie since I saw ALIENS in 1986;
there's an intensity to this film that grabs us and holds us on the
edge of our seats, carrying over any weaknesses in plot and
characterization.  In fact, the dinosaurs outshine the human cast,
typifying a weakness inherent in all of Spielberg's movies.
     I could go on and on about those dinosaurs.  This movie has the
special effects Oscar in the bag, especially where the Tyrannosaurus
Rex is concerned.  The only time it seems as though we're looking at
animatronics and not at live lizards is when the dinosaurs aren't
moving (which isn't often).  The brachiosaurs tower over the tops of
hundred-foot-tall trees, and the fearsome velociraptors (which like to
hunt in packs) look like the came from our darkest nightmares.  You
absolutely will not believe your eyes.
     In fact, the dinosaurs are so realistic that parents with young
children may want to seriously consider the movie's PG-13 rating before
taking their kids to the theatre.  Spielberg knows how to frighten an
audience without blood; in fact, there's less blood and gore in this
movie than there was in JAWS.  There are scares aplenty, though, and
they all come from suspense and the sheer presence of the T-rex as it
thunders across the screen, crushing everything in sight in pursuit of
his meals - both dinosaurs and humans.  His assault on a party of
Jurassic Park sightseers may be the most intensely frightening scene
Spielberg has ever filmed.  It's a far cry from Barney.  The film pulls
out all stops to wring suspense out of the dinosaurs, and at this it
succeeds grandly.
     The human actors and actresses struggle to compete with these
awesome titans, but let's be honest: Spielberg could have cast anyone
in these roles and gotten the same results.  After the troubles with
HOOK, in which casting problems and demands (as well as outrageous
salaries) struck a heavy blow to its success, Spielberg has apparently
gone back to using actors and actresses less in demand, thus
guaranteeing that he would have the final say in every stage of
production.  (Laura Dern has commented that when it comes to control of
his movies, Spielberg is more obsessive than David Lynch.)  This means
the dinosaurs take the center stage, and no attempt is made to outshine
them.
    The story is essentially an update of the classic monster movies
of the 1950s, those films that state that There Are Things Man Was Not
Meant To Know.  In the case of this movie, it's the power of creation,
as Man (specifically, a billionaire named John Hammond, played by
Richard Attenborough) has taken dinosaur DNA from the blood of
mosquitoes encased in amber for millions of years and used it to grow
brand-new, living reptiles.  Hammond wants to put these dinosaurs in
a theme park on an island off the coast of Costa Rica and display them
for the world to see, but he finds that living beings can't be
controlled as easily as the robotic creations of Disneyland.
     That tells us all we need to know about the story.  In terms of
thrills and excitement, it lives up to its expectations and more - but
there are serious flaws in terms of characterization and plot
development.  The humans are there simply to be gobbled up and to run
away from dinosaurs.  Most of the people seeing this movie aren't even
going to remember their names by the time the final credits roll;
there's no Chief Brody or Lacombe or Elliot here.  Sam Neill and Laura
Dern put in passable performances as the pair of archaeologists who
squabble about whether or not to raise a family.  He doesn't want kids,
and she does - but of course there's a heart of gold underneath his
supposedly gruff exterior, and when the chips are down he plays the
father figure, risking his life to protect the kids tagging along with
them.
     Richard Attenborough is John Hammond, the billionaire who's
brought back the dinosaurs, cloning them from dinosaur DNA taken from
fossilized mosquitoes.  Unlike his obsessed opportunist character in
the novel, he's a kindly grandfather figure who wants nothing more
than to impress the world with his creation, making his dinosaurs
available for all to see.  This is why he built Jurassic Park - he's a
modern-day Walt Disney, more interested in the care and enjoyment of
his guests than he is with making money.
     Then there's Malcolm, a modern-day update of the scientist
warning against tampering with nature.  He quotes the Chaos Theory (a
new branch of mathematics that governs probability and predicting the
unpredictable), and of course we know he's right when he says that
"life can't be controlled" - because in this type of movie, it never
is.  Things go wrong, and before anyone knows what's happening
Jurassic Park is out of control and dinosaurs are moving this way and
that, munching on the unfortunate souls who get in their way.
     The cause of these problems can be traced back to human greed as
much as the unpredictability of Nature.  There's an interesting theme
of greed and its consequences here that's especially appropriate when
one sees how much of a theme park the movie itself is.  We've all
heard the JURASSIC PARK hype campaign; the merchandise is flooding the
markets; the books, T-shirts, tie-ins, and other companies jumping in
on the money-making bandwagon here in real life are ironically
parodied in the film, as we have corporate executives discussing how
much they should charge for park admission.  In one scene, John
Hammond realizes that his theme park is not going to get off the
ground, and we see several of the JURASSIC PARK products that are
actually being sold here in real life.  The merchandising campaign for
this film was planned before it ever reached the filming stage, and
Spielberg is trying to satirize it by taking us behind the scenes and
realizing how difficult it actually is to sell a theme park to the
public.  While it fails as satire, it still retains a level of irony.
     (Spielberg may be lamenting the cost of success: because this
movie cost so much to make [as did his last film, HOOK], merchandising
is an important tool for the studio to make its money back.  This
means that the theme park aspect is built right into the movie itself.
Spielberg considered saving the pirate ship from HOOK for use in a
possible theme park, but that idea was abandoned.  In addition, he had
wanted to build life-size robotic dinosaurs for this film so that they
could be used in a theme park afterwards, but that idea didn't pan out
either.  Nevertheless, we all know that a JURASSIC PARK ride is going
to show up at Universal Studios.  The movie is plugging its
merchandise as heavily as the dinosaurs themselves, but Spielberg
found a way to make fun of merchandising at the same time.)
     But the problems in the story make the film less of an
achievement than CLOSE ENCOUNTERS OF THE THIRD KIND or JAWS, both of
which are paid homage in this film.  When the characters see dinosaurs
for the first time, Spielberg is trying to get the "sense of wonder"
that he achieved so magnificently in his UFO film, but at he fails at
this.  In CLOSE ENCOUNTERS, our enjoyment came from both the UFOS and
the reactions of the humans to beings from outer space, but that's not
the case here.  The dinosaurs *are* amazing and we gasp in awe when we
see them, but our excitement comes entirely from the special effects
and not from the characters, because they're so poorly developed.
     A subplot involving sick dinosaurs is also worth mentioning.  I
was hoping that this aspect would be further developed, but it seems
little more than a red herring.  This ties into the ending of the
film, which is too abrupt to be truly satisfying.  One extended
sequence of the characters talking about the sick dinosaurs and their
possible life expectancy would have helped; I think that it could have
been a tribute to WAR OF THE WORLDS, and it would have been a more
satisfying conclusion.
     But as serious as these flaws are, they don't subtract from the
excitement we feel when the film kicks into high gear.  It bogs down
in a couple of places during the first hour, but once the machines
begin to fail and the dinosaurs are on the loose, the film turns into
one of the most exciting, terrifying monster movies ever filmed.
Spielberg even tops his own JAWS for excitement here, as we find
ourselves gripping the seats and forgetting to breathe.  My eyes were
locked to the screen for the entire second half of the film, and I was
putty in Spielberg's hands as he delivered one amazing scene after
another.  I especially love the fact that there is almost no blood in
this film.  In an age when even big-budget science fiction movies like
TOTAL RECALL rely on splatter and gore for audience entertainment,
JURASSIC PARK scares its audience without making them sick to their
stomach.
     The Tyrannosaurus Rex is a wonder to behold.  The special effects
belie themselves even in a mega-budget production like this, and if we
look hard enough we can see where the computer animation and mattes
are being used.  That's minor nit-picking, however, and anyone who
complains about the special effects is a spoiled brat who doesn't
believe in "suspension of disbelief."  But the T-rex will shut the
mouths of the most fanatical critics.  It's an awesome creation,
definitely the most realistic movie monster *ever* created.  It does
not look like the product of computers and models - it looks *real*!
You absolutely will not believe your eyes when you see it, and you'll
have an uncontrollable urge to duck when it lunges right at you.  Best
of all, T-rex is a homage to the movie monsters of old: there's one
scene where it eats a helpless victim that reminds me of the classic
THE BEAST FROM 20,000 FATHOMS (and the great Ray Harryhausen).
     This brings up an important question for parents.  Since the film
is such a terrifying monster movie, should young children be allowed
to see it?  The answer, I think, lies with the parents themselves.
I'm not going to make a blanket statement here, because you know your
children better than I do.  There are eight-year-olds in the audience
who will eat this movie up and ask for more, but there are also
children who will consider the movie too frightening to finish.
Personally, I belong to the "give it a try" school: since there's very
little gore in the film and its terror comes from suspense rather than
actual violence, the experience of seeing a scary movie may actually
be a good one for kids.  It's similar to taking a four-year-old to see
PINOCCHIO; he'll be frightened by the experience, but he certainly
won't be traumatized for life, and years from now he'll look back on
the experience and remember it.  In the end, it's up to you.  If you
think JURASSIC PARK is too frightening for kids, don't take them.  If
you do, then let them see it.  The movie is rated PG-13 for good
reason.
     JURASSIC PARK is an unforgettable summer experience, a movie that
delivers exactly what we expect from it.  It's got a flawed story and
forgettable characters, but it also has some of the most amazing
monsters of all time.  The dinosaurs of JURASSIC PARK are a new
high-water mark in the long history of Hollywood movie monsters,
standing tall with King Kong, the Martians of WAR OF THE WORLDS, and
other fondly-remembered creatures of the past.  It's an movie well
worth paying full admission price for, as long as you realize that
you're not going to get Academy Award-winning performances or a complex
plot.  It's a far more satisfying film than the other summer
blockbusters of recent years: TERMINATOR 2, BATMAN, TOTAL RECALL, and
other flawed adventure movies.  I can't see any movie coming out in the
near future that will deliver a more satisfying good time at the
movies.  Arnold Swchwarzenegger?  Who cares?  1993 is going to be
remembered as the year we first heard the thundering footsteps of
JURASSIC PARK.

Title
Review for Beneath the Valley of the Ultra-Vixens (1979)
For a while, the Internet Movie Database had a link to a review at
film.com (now conveniently deleted) of Russ Meyer's FASTER, PUSSYCAT!
KILL!  KILL! that described that movie as so bad, it "approached the
level" of Ed Wood Jr.'s movies.  This review was an obvious admission of
two things: 1) The writer of that movie had never seen Ed Wood Jr.'s
movies; and 2) he didn't even bother to realize what Meyer's movies are
about. 
The films of Russ Meyer are a legend in themselves, largely (very large)
because of the qualities of his leading ladies: enormous breasts.  Meyer
is known by the title of "King Leer" because of his unabashed fascination
with gigantic bosoms. Whether his w omen are clothed (as in MOTOR PSYCHO
or the aforementioned FASTER PUSSYCAT) or baring all for the camera (as in
VIXEN, Meyer's biggest box office hit), you know that a Russ Meyer movie
is going to give you a show mammoth proportions...at least as far as c
hest size is concerned.
But if there's one thing that *can't* be said of Meyer's movies, it's that
they're demeaning to women.  The women in his movies are not only
possessed of Brobdingnagian mammaries of the type that men only dream of
-- they're possessed of zest and willpowe r that puts your typical
Hollywood leading lady to shame.  BENEATH THE VALLEY OF THE ULTRA-VIXENS
gives us four women of this type, shown in the outrageous fashion that
only Meyer has succeeded in achieving: they're sex-crazed, exhilarating,
gigantic beau ties who perform with enough zeal to put any of today's
so-called "porn stars" to shame.  The sex in this movie is of a sort that
one could only dream of seeing in today's porn: the women are happy,
energetic, and they enjoy the hell out of what they're d oing.  His women
aren't passive, submissive sex toys; rather, they're towering beacons of
femininity who utterly dominate every scene they're in, with energetic
performances that force us to see that these are WOMEN who just happen to
be naked.  Your typi cal Russ Meyer woman can take on any ten men, smile,
and come back for more...and you know she means it. 
This is what gives Meyer's best movies their appeal: the acting may not be
the greatest, but the performers carry us along with sheer, lustful
energy.  And that's why watch Russ Meyer's movies: not for the plot, but
for the women! 
But having given all of this praise to Meyer's movies as a whole, what can
we say about BENEATH THE VALLEY OF THE ULTRA-VIXENS as a movie?  Only that
it's lewd, crude, ridiculous, and often shockingly funny.  Meyer's movies
have always been comedies, thou gh as he approached the end of his
filmmaking era his movies became wilder, more outrageous, more blatant and
unbelievable...and in their best moments, gut-bustingly funny.  This movie
is one of his best efforts, simply because Meyer goes all out to give us a
sex comedy of unbridled proportions.  The plot, such as it is, is
bare-bones and simple: the hero and heroine (Kitten Natividad) are trying
to settle their differences.  She prefers simple, straight sex; while he
prefers a different approach that tur ns her (and just about everyone
else) off.  Kitten's attempts to "convert" her husband to the pleasures of
sex are the source of the movie's more outrageous situations, such as her
dressing up in a wig and performing at a strip club; or taking him to a de
ntist who happens to be a flaming queer, and ends up trapping him in a
closet while smashing at the door with a sledgehammer and a chainsaw. 
In the tradition of Meyer, all of the men in this movie are stupid idiots,
though the hero is a likable fool who just happens to be too stupid to
realize the trouble his wife is going through to get him into bed.  But
the true star of this film, of course , is Kitten Natividad.  She's naked
for about four-fifths of the entire movie, but more importantly she's
smiling throughout the entire movie.  Whether she's trying to seduce her
dumb-ass husband, or having a quickie with an alleged "fourteen-year-old"
to wn boy (yeah, right - he sure looks fourteen years old!), or even
succumbing to the charms of the hostess of the local radio Gospel hour,
Kitten proves herself to be the epitome of the Russ Meyer woman. 
A "narrator" pops up all through this film, providing a completely
"serious" (albeit tongue-in-cheek) explanation for our benefit of
everything happening in the film, and he even gets to play the role of
Peeping Tom himself (in much the same way that we, the audience, are
voyeurs).  Meyer says the narrator is his tribute to Thornton Wilder's
"Our Town," and the similarity between the two comes in the film's opening
speech, when the narrator explains that the entire sex-crazed population
of this Small Town consists of "normal people" and "everyday people."  In
Meyer's universe, Kitten Natividad is nothing exceptional; *all* the women
are as outgoing and satisfied as she is.  And quite frankly, if all the
women in our own real world were as outgoing as her character is, we'd
probably have a lot less incentive (and energy) to fight wars with each
other. 
Sure, the movie is silly and completely non-serious (with a jaw-harp
musical "soundtrack" reminding us not to take it seriously.  Sure, the
movie goes on too long and loses itself in the ending.  This isn't THE
AFRICAN QUEEN we're talking about here, and it isn't even BEYOND THE
VALLEY OF THE DOLLS (often touted as Meyer's "best" movie)...but the lack
of seriousness is what puts it head and shoulders above most of the other
porn films of its time, and especially above most of today's porn films. 
I person ally find most of the typical so-called "adult" films so
ridiculous and downright *boring* that it's difficult to imagine getting
turned on by those things, with their godawful "musical" scores and
silicone-inflated breasts and ugly kinks that have very l ittle to do with
true enjoyment of sex.  But BENEATH THE VALLEY OF THE ULTRA-VIXENS is a
*fun* adult movie, which Meyer freely admits to making just for the hell
of it.  If I wanted to rent a porn movie, I'd rather watch one that wants
you to know that ev eryone is enjoying themselves.  After all, that's what
movies are all about: entertainment. 
And strangely enough, we can say the same thing about Ed Wood Jr.'s
movies, too.  Meyer's movies are technically more competent than PLAN 9
FROM OUTER SPACE, but he certainly does share a love for his subject
matter with Ed Wood.  These two filmmakers had (Meyer's not dead, but he's
retired) a true love for their work, and one thing you can say about their
films is that they are labors of love.  Is Russ Meyer as "bad" a filmmaker
as Ed Wood?  No, but he's certainly as dedicated. 
So if you ever want to watch a Russ Meyer movie, you can pop this one into
the VCR, turn off your brain...and turn on other parts of your anatomy. 
And laugh. 

Title
Review for Dracula (1992)
    Francis Ford Coppola's newest film, BRAM STOKER'S DRACULA, is an
intelligent, well-made vampire movie that unfortunately spends too much
of its time looking good to be an effective, terrifying horror movie.
It looks great, and it's a tribute to the great Universal horror movies
of old (including the original DRACULA, starring Bela Lugosi and
directed by Tod Browning).  But pretty pictures do not a scary story
make, and this is the movie's ultimate weakness.  It's as undead as its
star.
     The movie tries to be a tale of tragic love, rather than a
straightforward horror story, but the scenery and atmosphere overwhelm
the actors so that you can't feel any emotion for any of them at all -
not even for Prince Dracula himself, whose heavy accent is
incomprehensible at times; nor for professor Van Helsing, who is
expertly played in a controlled, not quite over-the-top performance by
Anthony Hopkins.  The other actors in the film fare badly, turning what
could have been an emotional, intense tale of love, loyalty and humanity
into a silly soap-opera with pointy teeth.  The minor characters,
including Winona Ryder's Mina and Keanu Reeves' Jonathan Harker, exist
solely to be victims for the Prince or willing recruits in Van Helsing's
band of ghostbusters.  They have no emotions and feelings of their own,
and we never see them as true characters.  This robs the film of much of
its intensity.
     Coppola pays tribute to the famous German Expressionist horror
films (especially NOSFERATU, which is mentioned by name and which the
Old Prince resembles) and the classic Universal monster movies, giving
us lavish sets and special effects galore - but he loses control when he
includes surreal images of splashing blood and confusing "montage"
images that try to grip the audience but end up confusing them instead.
The movie's best moment is, in fact, an imitation of Coppola's own
famous climax to THE GODFATHER, in which a wedding takes place.  But
most of the scenes in the film are confusing, especially during a sea
voyage where people who have not read the book will only scratch their
heads and try to figure out what's going on.
     The best vampire stories have an erotic feel to them, as the
drawing of blood becomes more of a sexual act than a mere feeding on of
victims, though the eroticism of this movie is about as subtle as a blow
with a wooden stake.  The connection between feeding on victims and sex
is bludgeoned into us, using so heavy-handed an approach that even a
seduction/rape scene involving three women is nothing more than a
turn-off.  Coppola has invested so much time and effort into dazzling
the eyes that he has drained the film of heart and feeling, in much the
style of Stanley Kubrick.
     In the end, BRAM STOKER'S DRACULA fails to be the horrifying,
heart-stopping horror film it could have been.  It's a feast for the
eyes to behold, but underneath the sets, cameras and special effects
there's very little room for a person to *feel* anything.  As a result,
we don't care for the characters as much as we should - and a movie
without memorable, energetic characters is like one of the undead.  It's
a movie without a soul.

Title
Review for Pinocchio (1940)
     Without a doubt, the best movie you could see in the theatre this
summer--indeed, almost amy summer--is the re-release of Walt Disney's
PINOCCHIO.  I know it's a cliche to say this, but this time it's true:
they don't make movies like this anymore.
     Walt Disney's greatest animated feature films were FANTASIA and
PINOCCHIO, yet neither of them proved to be the big box-office hit
that SNOW WHITE AND THE SEVEN DWARFS was.  Over the years, of course,
PINOCCHIO has since come into its own, but until now, we have rarely
if ever had a chance to see it the way it was meant to be seen: in the
theatre.  While this movie was released on video several years ago (and
is widely available in rental stores), seeing it on your TV screen just
isn't the same.  Some movies deserve to be on the big screen, and
PINOCCHIO is one of them.
     Everything about this movie is perfect.  The animation is awe-
inspiring, and the opening sequence in Gepetto's toy shop is one of the
finest animated sequences ever filmed--probably topped only by the
"Nutcracker Suite" segment of FANTASIA.  To think that the Disney
artists did all this by hand, with no help at all from computers...it
staggers the imagination.  Disney's achievement is even more impressive
when one realizes that what we see on the screen is not what the Disney
Studios first began with.  Five months into the production of
PINOCCHIO, Walt Disney was unsatisfied with the result of his studio's
work, and he shut down production to make major changes.  Essentially,
Disney started the production of this movie over from scratch, throwing
out hundreds of thousands of dollars of completed material.  No studio
today would be so quality-conscious as to abandon a completed
production; the lost money would be considered a waste, and more than
likely the studio would try to work the old footage in with the new in
order to save it.  (Look at ALIEN 3--this was a patchwork job to end
all patchworks.)  But as happened so often in his life, Disney's gamble
paid off.  PINOCCHIO is one of those few works that can genuinely be
called a Masterpiece.
     Who can forget the first appearance of the Blue Fairy?  Who isn't
moved when he hears the immortal song "When You Wish Upon A Star"?
Gepetto's kindly old father figure is never tiresome, even when he acts
foolish; Figaro the cute little kitten is a charmer (and never treacly
cute).  This was the movie that forever associated the phrase "Jiminy
Cricket" with Disney--and indeed, Jiminy is more of a world-wise soul
here than in many of his later appearances.  (And he's surprisingly
lecherous, too!)  And Pinocchio, the little wooden puppet who falls for
temptation, is charmingly naive.  We all remember these characters, and
here's your chance to remember why we love them all.
     However, parents taking very young children to the theatre should
be warned:  In PINOCCHIO, as in no other Disney movie, Disney gives us
the dark side of this fairy tale, and his vision is so intense that
young children could easily be frightened.  Leonard Maltin describes the
movie: "If SNOW WHITE was a fairy tale laced with moments of terror,
PINOCCHIO was an extended nightmare with occasional humorous
interludes."  Never again after PINOCCHIO did Disney allow such moments
of danger and terror into his movies--and they suffered as a result.
The transformation of Lampwick into a jackass is genuinely chilling, and
the final chase with Monstro the Whale is one of the most terrifying
moments in motion picture history.  When I saw this movie in the
theatre, some little children started screaming during the finale--and
Pinocchio's death scene sent them over the edge.  Gepetto's mourning for
Pinocchio is truly heartfelt.  I've seen PINOCCHIO several times now,
and this final scene still brings tears to my eyes.  It's probably the
most heart-touching death scene ever filmed--a feat that wouldn't be
equalled until E.T.  died, over forty years later.
     Some parents may hesitate to let their children see PINOCCHIO,
because their children may be too sensitive for it.  I personally
believe that this is the perfect movie for any child to see--if he or
she is ready for it.  All too often, makers of so-called "children's
movies" hesitate to add strong emotional sequences because they're
afraid to frighten the kids.  Even Disney fell into this trap of
self-censorship with such movies as PETER PAN, where Captain Hook
gives Peter a bomb instead of poisoning his milk, and where Hook escapes
at the end instead of being eaten by the crocodile.  Kids are far more
resilient than many people think they are, and while they may be scared
by PINOCCHIO, they certainly won't be scarred for life by this movie.
In fact, the very way in which PINOCCHIO presents the terrors of the
real world to children--being led from the straight and narrow path by
strangers, learning the consequences of getting into trouble--makes it
a genuine learning experience for youngsters, as well as being
tremendous entertainment.
     So I say, let the children see PINOCCHIO.  This is one of the
greatest movies ever made.  It's heart-warming, funny, exciting, and
terrifying--and they just don't make movies like this anymore.

Title
Review for Much Ado About Nothing (1993)
     After a meteoric career on the stage, Kenneth Branagh made his
directing debut with William Shakespeare's HENRY V, and he immediately
became a name to be reckoned with.  He's a shrewd fellow, with genuine
talent and an ability to carve his own niche in the cutthroat world of
Hollywood movies.  Long after black-and-white movies were considered
anathema, Branagh made DEAD AGAIN, a sly tribute to Orson Welles,
Hitchcock and the "film noir" movies of the 1940s, and again he scored
a box-office hit.  He's one of those "auteurs" who's determined to buck
the system and get the movies made that HE wants to make, without being
reduced to silly brainless Hollywood pablum.  _[}His next film, PETER'S
FRIENDS, was a failure at the box office (and critics didn't like it
either), but it was an ambitious attempt nonetheless.
     And now Kenneth Branagh has made a Hollywood romantic comedy with
a big-name cast; what's more, he's released this movie during the
summer, which is traditionally the time when the mindless,
one-dimensional Hollywood mega-budget blockbuster wannabes are duking
it out for moviegoers' dollars.  Who else but Branagh would have the
nerve (and the ego?) to film Shakespeare as a summer movie?
     And that's what we get with Branagh's return to the Bard: MUCH ADO
ABOUT NOTHING.  When he made HENRY V, Branagh cast his friends from the
British stage, because they had great talent--but they were virtually
unknown to mainstream American audiences.  This movie has clearly been
filmed with the box office in mind.  He's taken an all-star cast--
Denzel Washington, Keanu Reeves, Michael Keaton, Emma Thompson (who won
the Best Actress Oscar for HOWARDS END--and who happens to be his
wife), and Branagh himself.  What's more, he's chosen one of
Shakespeare's most popular comedies instead of a drama or a tragedy--a
move, I'm sure, made to ease the worries of the Corporate Bigwigs who
would normally shrink at the thought of foisting Shakespeare--the name
sends chills down the spines of high school students across America--
upon unsuspecting moviegoing audiences.
     MUCH ADO ABOUT NOTHING seems tailor-made for Hollywood summer
entertainment: it has a simple plot, laughs galore, a happy ending, and
you have no question who the good guys and the bad guys are.  What's
more, it includes a healthy dose of sex, and Branagh makes this clear
by including a shower scene during the opening credits, as we see
literally dozens of naked bodies frolicking across the screen in an
effort to get washed washed up so that they can greet the returning war
heroes.  Sex plays a major role in this film: all of the women wear
loose-fitting, low-cut dresses that look more like nightgowns than
dresses, and the men wear billowing, loose-fitting shirts and skintight
trousers that show off their manly physiques.  You can be sure that
none of this was allowed on the live stages of Europe--but today's
audiences won't mind it at all.
     And yet, despite being tailor-made for summer audiences, Branagh
has made a film that will surely appeal to all audiences, be they
Shakespeare aficionados or not.  There's no denying that this is a
high-spirited, zestful comedy that will stand head and shoulders above
the silly high-concept "comedies" being turned out by the major
studios.
     The simple plot may appeal to the Hollywood studios, but this
particular play is one of the Bard's most well-known and beloved for a
good reason: it's as funny as anything you're likely to see on the
screen this year.
     The cast is well-chosen, and each actor fits his role admirably.
Branagh himself knows that the best way to appeal to an audience is to
make fun of yourself, and he does so by playing the role of Benedick,
the determined bachelor who will have nothing to do with marriage and
who delights in trading barbs with the equally headstrong Beatrice
(played by Emma Thompson).  Their being husband and wife serves them
well, for they mesh with a chemistry that leaves you with little doubt
that these are two people who could easily love each other, if they
would only come down off of their high horses and give in just a little
bit.  The wit of their wordplay is rapier-sharp, and they're obviously
having a ball in these roles.
     But the war between Benedick and Beatrice is not the main story:
rather, it's another tale of True Love, straight out of THE PRINCESS
BRIDE.  (Or rather, THE PRINCESS BRIDE obviously borrowed it from
here!)
     Robert Sean Leonard is Horatio, the headstrong, love-smitten young
romantic who falls head-over-heels in love with Beatrice's lovely young
cousin Hero (played by the ravishing Kate Beckinsale).  This young
couple look as though they came straight from John Hughes' teen-angst
comedies, but they play their roles well.  Their dialogue sounds
natural, and even Horatio's temper tantrums are well-played.  Since
Mr.  Leonard landed this role after playing in lesser Hollywood films
(he met Branagh on the set of SWING KIDS, and subsequently landed the
role of Horatio), he must have had a tough time standing up against the
likes of Denzel Washington and Brian Blessed (the grand British actor
who's probably best-known for playing Augustus in I, CLAUDIUS), but if
he had any trouble with his role then it certainly doesn't show here.
     Denzel Washington is having an equally grand time as Don Pedro,
the lord and leader who delights in conspiracy: the subtle plots and
counter-plots that take place are largely his doing.  But it's all for
the good, as Don Pedro wants nothing more than to make his subjects
happy.  He's always smiling and laughing, and it's infectious.
     And there's Keanu Reeves, who plays the conniving, covetous Don
John.  You know he's the bad guy because he's the only one in the
entire film who never smiles; what's more, he declares early on that "I
am a villain" and that he will stop at nothing to destroy the
match-made-in-heaven of Horatio and Hero.  For those who worry about
Keanu Reeves playing Shakespeare after his roles in MY OWN PRIVATE
IDAHO and BRAM STOKER'S DRACULA, I can tell you that you have nothing
to worry about.  Reeves' scenes are brief, and he lets us know that "I
am a man of little words."  However, we're never sure why he wants to
play the villain--a flaw that is never completely covered up.  He's
there, and he sneers a lot, but little more.
     Michael Keaton appears too, as the swaggering Doogberry.  He plays
the traditional Shakespearean fool well, though we never lose the
impression that we're watching BEETLEJUICE all over again when he
appears.  Shakespeare knew he was spoofing himself when he devised this
character, I think, because his nearly incomprehensible speech confuses
the other characters in the film as much as it does the audience.
     So, despite the way the film has been carefully crafted to appeal
to summer audiences, does MUCH ADO ABOUT NOTHING satisfy?  Indeed it
does.  The characters mesh together well, and the entire movie moves at
a fast, brisk pace that gives us a healthy, earthy feeling of energy
and vigor.  Everyone is smiling and laughing (except the villain), and
nowhere does it feel that this mirth is forced.  You can tell that the
cast had a lot of fun making this movie, and this enjoyable spirit
carries over to the final print.  It's also hilariously funny.  It
takes a while for an audience raised on high-concept action flicks to
get used to Shakespeare's flowing dialogue, but after about fifteen
minutes our ears have been attuned and we're laughing heartily, both
with the cast and at them.  This free and easy approach makes the film
far more enjoyable than Franco Zeffirelli's HAMLET (which starred Mel
Gibson); it seems far less staged and forced than that production did.
     Kenneth Branagh seems determined to acquaint his audience with the
classics, whether they like it or not.  If his future works are as
well-done as MUCH ADO ABOUT NOTHING, then he'll have a long and rich
career ahead of him.  He's out to buck the system, and fortunately for
him the Hollywood studio heads are just stupid enough to miss the fact
that he's thumbing his nose at them.  I wish him well.  MUCH ADO ABOUT
NOTHING is definitely one of the best movies I've seen so far in 1993--
and if the rest of the summer is as disappointing as I think it's going
to be, it may well be one of the best movies of the year.

Title
Review for Brief History of Time, A (1992)
[The book generated enough interest in the science fiction community that it seems
reasonable to post the film review to rec.arts.sf.reviews as well as
rec.arts.movies.  Followups are directed to rec.arts.movies.  -Moderator]
     Since the earliest days, Man has looked up at the stars and
wondered just what was out there.  Were the myths true, and were the
stars created by the gods, or by God?  How do stars work?  Will our
Universe ever come to an end?  Which came first, the chicken or the egg?
Did God create the Universe, and does he play dice with it?
     These are the questions asked by Stephen Hawking, one of the
greatest minds in the scientific community, in Errol Morris'
fascinating-but-unsatisfying documentary A BRIEF HISTORY OF TIME, with
a title taken from Hawking's own best-selling book on black holes and
the beginnings of the Universe.
     Hawking's mind has traveled to the farthest reaches of time, but
in contrast his body cannot go beyond his wheelchair.  He suffers from ,
a disease that is slowly robbing him of the ability to move his muscles;
over the years he has lost the ability to walk, to lift himself up, and
even to speak.  In 1985 he suffered from a bout with pneumonia, and as a
result he had to have a tracheotomy in which he lost his voice
completely.  Hawking now communicates with the world through an
electronic voice from a computer terminal attached to his wheelchair.
Oddly enough, the computer's mechanical (but not emotionless) voice
suits him better than any human voice ever did, and it's the perfect
vehicle to deliver his dry, British wit.  The movie is quite funny, and
we're engrossed from its first moment, when we see a vision of
infinities of stars, and we hear Hawking's keypad clicking away and
forming sentences for us.
     Morris wisely avoids the standard "hero triumphing over tremendous
odds" approach of documentary filmmaking.  Hawking suffers from a
disease that would make it easy to pity him, and yet he still became one
of the greatest names in the scientific world.  Instead of the usual
"battle for his life" that we would expect, however, Morris prefers to
cast Hawking as an individual who willingly accepted the hand dealt him
by Fate.  He lost the ability to walk, to talk, to move by himself, but
he didn't mind; he just accepted it and continued from there.  He's
simply a man in a wheelchair, writing books and papers with the aid of a
computer.  If he had any bitterness about his condition, he doesn't show
it here.
     This is why we don't even see a complete shot of Hawking until
nearly half an hour into the movie; when the movie begins, we first hear
the sound of his clicking keypad.  We are then treated to a close-up of
his eyes, concentrating on his computer screen, and several shots of his
face appearing amidst flashes of his early life, when he could walk.
Nearly all of the present-day scenes with Hawking consist solely of his
face, his eyes, or his hand at the keypad - these are his most important
parts, and to dwell on the wheelchair would be a way of pitying a man
who has no need to be pitied.  In fact, as his mother notes, it was the
disease that contributed to Hawking's decision to concentrate on
theoretical physics.  While growing up and attending college, he seemed
to be a bored genius - he could easily solve problems, but he had no
interest in doing anything worthwhile.  The disease (and his engagement
to his wife, now separated) made him face the reality of death for the
first time, and he resolved to bring direction and meaning to his life
after that.  He then began his now-famous research into the structure of
black holes, entropy, quantum physics, and other areas of science that
we can barely conceive.
     In addition to presenting Hawking's vast intellect for us, we also
see that he is a very religious man.  The question of God is always
present here, and Hawking is very concerned with the fact that if
Mankind learns how the Universe was created, we might learn that God
does not exist.  This question permeates Hawking's book, and it's here
in the movie as well, as Hawking tells us how the Church persecuted the
great minds of the past, like Galileo, and how he was nervous when he
was granted an audience with the Pope.  Few other movies have the
courage to tackle such cosmic ideas, and A BRIEF HISTORY OF TIME
deserves credit for doing so without overwhelming us.
     As a presentation of Hawking's life, the movie is entertaining and
informative.  In fact, the wealth of detail that Morris gives us makes
us hungry for the knowledge that Hawking has accumulated through the
years.  It makes us want to go out and learn about black holes and the
Universe.  This brings me to the movie's one fault: While the movie
paints an engrossing picture of a man whose mind has traveled into
realms of the Universe where no man has gone before (to coin a phrase),
it only gives us the briefest of synopses when outlining Hawking's
theories for us.
     What it does describe for us is intriguing and interesting.  As
Hawking's computer-generated voice tells us that time might flow
backwards when the Universe eventually collapses in upon itself, we see
a teacup crashing down upon a linoleum floor - and then the teacup
reverses itself, comes back together, and rises again to the top of the
screen where it came from.  It's a striking image, and it perfectly
completements Hawking's description of the reversibility of time.  There
are several other related images throughout the movie, as Hawking
summarizes the Big Bang for us, along with the reasons why particles can
escape a black hole, and why time slows down as we approach one.  But
it's not enough; these lessons in quantum physics only serve to whet our
appetites, and the movie leaves us hungry for more.
     The book A BRIEF HISTORY OF TIME is a fascinating piece, and its
major advantage is Hawking's gift for writing about complex subjects in
clear, concise, easy-to-understand grammar.  Perhaps it's a natural
development of his illness; since it takes him so long to phrase his
statements, he must choose his words carefully and presents them in a
fashion that gets the point across with the greatest impact as quickly
as possible.
     I couldn't put the book down when I began reading it, even though
some of the subjects presented in it made my head swim.  It's a
simplification, meant to explain the complex cosmologies of the Universe
for us in plain and simple terms.  At this it succeeds admirably, and I
would have loved to see even more of the book presented in the movie.
Perhaps Morris was afraid that long segments of techno-speak would turn
off audiences and put them to sleep.  When I saw the film, however, I
heard people wishing that there was more of the book in there.  What we
see is merely the tip of the iceberg, and even though a ninety-minute
documentary can only give us the simplest of lessons in science, I
believe that Morris should have delved into Hawking's theories with more
detail.
     A BRIEF HISTORY OF TIME is certainly a triumph for Errol Morris.
He could have turned Hawking's book into a cold, dry essay on the
structure of the Universe, but by making it into the story of the life
of a great man, he gives his movie a humanity and a warmth rarely seen
in character portraits of this type.  But he does so at the expense of
the scientific data, making much of the film a case of
style-over-substance.  You will certainly be entertained, informed,
entranced, and fascinated when you see this movie.  It's a terrific
piece of work, and in an age where 90 minutes can seem like an eternity
at some movies, here's one film that's not long enough.  I've had a
taste of A BRIEF HISTORY OF TIME, and I want *more*!

Title
Review for Aladdin (1992)
     After BEAUTY AND THE BEAST was became the first animated feature
film to be nominated for the Best Picture Oscar last year (Disney's
hypesters have done everything possible to make the public remember
this), the Disney Studios have once again proven that when it comes to
making audience-pleasing animated films, they are second to none.  These
days, the only standards they can top are their own.  But how do you top
a film that everyone has gone out of their way to rain praise upon,
calling it the best animated feature since the days of BAMBI and
PINOCCHIO?
     Once again, the Disney folks have made the right choice: you don't.
Instead of going for heart-warming romance this time, they've toned down
the myth-making and have instead aimed for a much more down-to-earth
target, namely laughter.  We now have ALADDIN, the latest addition to
the ever-growing list of successful Disney animated films - and Disney
money-makers.  But this time it's not going to be romance or realistic
characters or even the always-impressive animation that will win over
the audiences.  The success of ALADDIN is going to be summarized in two
words: Robin Williams.
     Williams runs away with the entire movie, lock, stock, and barrel.
He plays the voice of the Genie, a non-stop cloud of blue energy who
saves the day, helps Aladdin get the girl, lets the Disney animators get
away with more sight gags and throwaway bits since THE NAKED GUN, and
keeps the audience rolling in the aisles.  There are other good
characters in this movie, such as a wisecracking parrot (played by
another comedian, Gilbert Gottfreid), a flying carpet, and a little
monkey sidekick, but this movie belongs to Williams.
     The Disney animators deserve an award for being able to keep up
with Williams' 90 m.p.h. dialogue, with impressions, puns, and yuks
galore.  The Genie puts the pedal to the metal (like Williams himself -
he even *looks* like Williams), shape-changing into an infinite variety of
forms to keep up with the jokes.  Look fast and you'll see references to
the Marx Brothers, Delta Airlines, Ed Sullivan, THE LITTLE MERMAID,
PINOCCHIO, Walt Disney World ... in fact, the Genie's routines are so
packed with Disney in-jokes that if they weren't so funny, one would
think Disney was shamelessly plugging its theme parks.  I suppose a
cynic would say that this is exactly what's going on, but I don't think
so.  Williams is obviously having a ball here, biting the hand that
feeds him and satirizing the famous Disney merchandising machine with
his constant references to 20th Century icons.
     However, these in-jokes and allusions to the modern era do have one
other effect on the movie that is noticeably missing from other Disney
animated films: they date it.  It's been pointed out that the Disney
films can credit their everlasting popularity to their timelessness.
The problem with contemporary films is that in twenty or thirty years
time they can look terribly dated, and no one will want to watch them
anymore.  (WEST SIDE STORY is a notable example of this - singing and
dancing 1950s street gangs look absolutely ridiculous when viewed from a
1990s perspective.)  ALADDIN obviously doesn't worry as much about being
an "immortal Disney classic," going instead for the immediate laughs.
     Perhaps this is the influence of Jeff Katzenberg, the Disney head
honcho (second only to Michael Eisner) who has been re-shaping the
animation studio in his own image.  Like most of the Hollywood moguls
today, Katzenberg seems concerned with what sells *now* and what can make
the quickest profits; he doesn't think about the future.  Since ALADDIN
will be released on video for the 1993 Christmas season - you can count
on it - we may not be seeing a theatrical re-release of this film the
way we've seen revivals of 101 DALMATIANS, PETER PAN, LADY AND THE
TRAMP, and the other Disney classics (all of which have now also been
released on video); but in the long run, Katzenberg may regret his
decision to make ALADDIN a "1990s" film.  Still, this is a topic to be
discussed at a future date.  What matters right now is that ALADDIN is a
very funny film.
     However it does have its flaws: primarily the fact that it is
nothing *besides* a funny film.  The hero and heroine, Aladdin and
Princess Jasmine, are carbon copies of Prince Eric from THE LITTLE
MERMAID and Belle from BEAUTY AND THE BEAST (during one musical number
Jasmine sounds exactly like Belle - or Ariel); and the villain, Jafar,
comes a long list of Stereotypical Disney Villains: he's evil,
threatening, clever, and he's got a talking animal sidekick as well.
The story is, of course, predictable - in fact, it's almost a carbon
copy of the classic Max Fleischer cartoon, "Popeye Meets Aladdin and his
Wonderful Lamp."  Aladdin is a fun-loving, clever thief and Jasmine is
another 1990s-era heroine who Thinks For Herself (until Aladdin comes to
her rescue), while Jafar puts in a passable, entertaining performance.
     But aside from the Genie, it's the sidekicks who get all the
attention and all of the laughs.  Jafar's loyal stooge, a loudmouthed
talking parrot, steals every scene he's in - he's almost as effective as
the Genie in his own way.  He's loud, annoying, and rude; so of course
we love watching him get dumped on again and again.  Likewise, there's
Abu, Aladdin's loyal pet monkey, who makes fun of Aladdin's crush on the
Princess and who has big eyes that show his emotions - and elecits even
more laughs from the audience.
     And there's a magic carpet as well, with no voice - but whose
personality shines through nonetheless.  The carpet is a triumph of
animation, as it expresses its feelings better than Aladdin himself
does.  Its intricate detail comes once again from computer animation.
     And once again, computer animation is used in a Disney film to
augment the hand-drawn method and make it even more impressive.  More
emphasis on hand-painted backgrounds is used this time, and in the
beginning of the film during the scenes in the (unnamed) desert city,
the animation does not seem quite up to Disney standards - it's good,
but it's "ordinary."  (Perhaps I'm spoiled by computer animation.)  Once
we enter the Sultan's Palace, however, the film becomes a feast for the
eyes to behold.  There's a Cave of Wonders that is truly wonderful, with
treasures galore and awe-inspiring animation to boot.  One scene being
pushed in the television commercials shows Aladdin on the flying carpet,
moving through a series of caves that reminds one of a video game;
seeing this sequence on the big screen is exciting and delightful.
Computer animation is seamlessly blended with the hand drawings this
time; it's the best combination of the two styles of animation since THE
RESCUERS DOWN UNDER.
     There are several songs in the movie as well, though none of them
are very memorable.  Ever since the success of THE LITTLE MERMAID,
Disney has been milking the success of its song-writing crew (even using
Howard Ashman-Alan Menken songs in their live-action musical NEWSIES
earlier this year) and using the same song-writing team over and over.
While the songs of MERMAID were a delight, I didn't think the music of
BEAUTY AND THE BEAST was quite as good - and here, it's simply generic.
Music and comedy don't mix very well; one is reminded of the films of
the Marx Brothers, when each movie would come to a standstill while one
song-and-dance number was performed, and the audience would patiently
wait for the song to end so that they could continue laughing.  It's the
same way here; the best song of the movie is "You've Never Had A Friend
Like Me," sung by the Genie as he dazzles us (and makes us laugh) with a
phantasmagoria of shapes, sizes, impressions and gags galore.  The
song's entertainment comes not from the music (which is by Alan Menken
and Tim Rice, Andrew Lloyd Weber's co-conspirator), but from Robin
Williams.
     However, no one is going to complain about the weak main
characters, or any flaws in the animation, or the musical numbers.
ALADDIN aims to do one thing only - to make you laugh - and it succeeds
admirably.  After a year where the biggest movies have been either
disappointments (BATMAN RETURNS, BRAM STOKER'S DRACULA) or deep, serious
"epics" (UNFORGIVEN, MALCOLM X), here's a movie that's just a lot of
fun.

Title
Review for People vs. Larry Flynt, The (1996)
Well, look here -- it's a movie from Hollywood that actually defends
pornography! In this day and age when the whining and crying over
sexual content in the media -- especially "newer" media such as the
Net -- seems to be reaching an all-time Pinkness saturation, we
finally get a movie that comes out and says "This is porn, a lot of
people want to see it, and by God, we've got a right to make porn
available to people who want to see it!" It's about damn time we got a
movie that makes a sensible statement like that. The movie's far from
perfect -- it's a typical Hollywood whitewashing of the porn
controversy, a simple black-and-white, good-vs.-evil story -- but
hell, it's still a lot of fun to watch, and at least it says something
about our culture. You'll get more good Slack from this movie than you
will from EVITA or DANTE'S PEAK.
As you've probably heard, THE PEOPLE VS. LARRY FLYNT is supposedly the
story of Larry Flynt, the owner of a few strip bars and publisher of a
sleazy skin magazine who happened to get lucky: he acquired nude
photos of Jackie Onassis and published them in his rag. That caused a
national sensation, and he rode the wave of infamy to build his baby,
Hustler, into a huge publishing empire. (If THAT'S not Slack, tell me
what is! ) Of course, you have to remember that this is a Hollywood
story, and it's aimed at mainstream audiences -- i.e. the Pink masses
who hate to THINK. So the makers of this movie (Director Milos Forman,
who made ONE FLEW OVER THE CUCKOO'S NEST -- and producer Oliver Stone,
that egotistic jerk who thinks every one of his movies has to be an
Important Wake-Up Call To America) dumbed it down and made Larry Flynt
into a Hollywood Good Guy. He's a clean, straight, good ol' boy who
loves his wife dearly and just wants to turn an honest profit...and he
just happens to be in the business of publishing dirty pictures.
Right. And I just happen to be J.R. "Bob" Dobbs' legitimate son and
heir, too. Needless to say, the real-life story probably has as much
to do with this movie as the movie JFK had to do with the real Kennedy
assassination -- i.e. little to none -- but hell, at least Woody
Harrelson (who plays Flynt) manages to have a lot of fun with the role
and get away with pulling some fine stunts on film. It's fun to watch
as Flynt tells his photographer to forget trying to be "arty" and just
go for hard-core smut.
There's one great scene where Flynt is standing in front of a huge
movie scene, making a sermonizing speech about the First Amendment and
the right to publish porn; as he says this, the movie screen is
illustrating the difference between pictures of war and murder (which
nobody seems to mind publishing), and sex (which gets people upset for
some reason). It's a great visualization of the classic defense of
pornography, namely: "Why is it okay to show pictures of murder and
suffering, but not okay to show pictures of people having sex and
enjoying themselves doing it?"
It's a simple message, and frankly this is a simple movie. We've got
good guy Larry Flynt, crusading to bring his porn to the grocery
stores of America. For bad guys we've got the usual enemies: Jerry
Falwell and the Moral Majority, and the other fat old white men who
wield all the power in government, and who usually play the role of
the bad guys in movies of this sort. (Falwell sued Flynt after Hustler
made fun of him by publishing an alleged "story" of Falwell having sex
with his mother in an outhouse.) There's no exception here: The rich
old white men in suits all hate this evil, disgusting filth, and the
movie emphasizes their hypocrisy by using Charles Keating as a major
player in the anti-porn crowd. (Keating was the central figure in the
nationwide savings-and-loan scandal of the late 1980s, which cost the
taxpayers over two billion dollars.)
So it's a simple "good" (Flynt) vs. "evil" (Falwell) story. But, the
movie's still a hell of a lot of fun, and Larry Flynt is such an
outrageous figure that even Hollywood can't tame him. He wanted
Hustler to be as lewd, shocking, and offensive as possible, and this
movie has the good sense to give us at least a few glimpses into that
milieu.
We get a lot of laughs (mostly from Flynt's antics at bucking the
"establishment"), we get some great gags (mostly taken from the pages
of Hustler itself -- wait till you see what they do with Santa Claus
and the Wizard of Oz), AND we get a knockout performance by Courtney
Love, who plays Flynt's drugged-out wife Althea. Courtney is
everything Madonna ever wanted to be -- namely, a real actress -- and
she's a wonder to look at. She also does a striptease, so you folks
who want to use this movie as an excuse to look at some naked women
won't be disappointed either. Whether she's posing for her husband (or
the photographer), or getting zonked out on Flynt's "pain killers,"
she steals every scene she's in. You can't help but watch her, even
when she's getting thin and pale.
You can tell Oliver Stone produced this movie because of the two
mysterious "conspiracies" that never really get resolved, one of them
involving the would-be assassin who paralyzed Flynt from the waist
down and confined him to a wheelchair for the rest of his life. But
fortunately, director Forman know how to tell a story without beating
the audience over the head with it (Stone's forte), so we don't mind
the fact that this movie is trying to force its "porn is good" message
down our throats. It even gets wimpy at one point, when Flynt finds
religion and tries to turn over a new leaf (sort of)...but that
doesn't last long.
Hollywood (and Sony Pictures, the distributors) is raining praise on
this movie as a way of trying to show us they can "take a stand" over
a supposedly controversial issue. Bull. If this movie was made at an
independent studio with about 1/10 of the budget, it would probably be
the scathing, vicious attack on "the establishment" it wants to
be...but then it would be rated NC-17 (which is still box-office
death) and it would barely reach 1/10 of the audience it's reaching
now. The original poster for this movie had an image of Harrelson
wearing a diaper made of an American flag, crucified between a woman's
legs...but Sony decided that image was too "controversial" and they
pulled it in favor of the much tamer image we see on the movie posters
now (Harrelson's face, with a flag covering his mouth). That's the
true face of Hollywood, which is (as always) dominated by the
Conspiracy: it's afraid of real controversy, and it pulls back in the
face of anything really daring and produces a pale facade instead.
But, nonetheless, we've still got a fun, intelligent movie from
Hollywood that tells us that people like looking at dirty pictures,
and by God, we've got a right to see those dirty pictures! So even if
it's not a perfect movie, THE PEOPLE VS. LARRY FLYNT is still worth
seeing. It's a movie with its mouth in the right place. It reveals a
lot more about Hollywood than Hollywood realizes...but then, that's
why Hollywood is Hollywood and we are SubGenii. They've got the
MONEY...and we've got the SLACK.

Title
Review for Scent of a Woman (1992)
     Martin Brest first hit the big time as the director of BEVERLY
HILLS COP, the movie that epitomized the Hollywood formula of "good cop
vs. evil drug dealer."  Every bit of the movie was predictable; if it
wasn't for Eddie Murphy's winning performance, it would have been a
piece of garbage.
     Brest scored again with MIDNIGHT RUN, another Hollywood formula
film--but once again the project was saved by winning performances from
its lead stars, Robert De Niro and Charles Grodin.  We watched the movie
for these characters, not for the chase-and-crash scenes, and as a
result it delivered handsomely.
     And now we have SCENT OF A WOMAN, which once again looks like a
Hollywood formula product: an innocent college student is whisked off to
New York City for a weekend of thrills by the gentleman he's supposed to
be caring for.  What's more, there's a subplot involving "honor" and
"loyalty" and "betrayal"--something milked shamelessly by this holiday
season's other politically correct "feel-good" movie, A FEW GOOD MEN.
     On paper, it looks like your standard Hollywood "buddy" movie.  But
when one of those buddies is played by Al Pacino, you know that
something good is going to happen.
     Pacino has been on a roll lately, after spending most of the
eighties in near-seclusion.  He's come back with a vengeance, and this
year we've already seen him as the sleazy real estate broker Ricky Roma
in GLENGARRY GLEN ROSS.  Now he plays a bitter, blind war veteran in a
performance that raises SCENT OF A WOMAN above the level of today's
inoffensive schmaltz and makes it a truly enjoyable experience.
     The setup is pure Hollywood: Chris O'Donnell plays Charlie Simms, a
meek, shy, poor college student who happens to witness a practical joke
played on the school's dean by a group of trouble-making pupils.  What's
more, he's been offered an ultimatum: either he squeals on the
perpetrators and gives names, or he'll be expelled.  (The dean is an
idiot, of course; the First Rule of Hollywood college movies states that
the principal must have the IQ and morals of a dung heap.)
     Now, Charlie has to raise some money for his Christmas trip back
home, so he takes what looks like an easy job: care for an elderly war
veteran over the Thanksgiving weekend.  The woman offering the job tells
him "it's the easiest $300 you'll ever make," but after Charlie meets
the fellow, he admits "I don't get an easy feeling."
     Here's where we meet Lieutenant Colonel Frank Slade.
     This is, of course, Pacino's movie: he takes command the second he
appears on-screen, controlling the lives of everyone around him.  Slade
is a complex man, who blinded himself by accident when he drank too much
one day and played with a hand grenade; now he tosses down Jack Daniels
as if they were water, never getting drunk.  He screams at everyone and
wants sits alone in the dark, hurting everyone around him because he
feels that it's the only way to survive without admitting how much he's
hurting inside.
     But the Colonel has a special plan for this particular weekend: as
soon as the folks leave the driveway on their Thanksgiving trip, he
practically drags Charlie onto a first-class jet, and the two are off to
New York City.  Slade wants only to feel the touch of a woman's arm for
one last time--but his plan for this weekend is destined to end in
tragedy.
     Now, in the hands of most other actors, this would be a typical
Hollywood "odd couple learns to trust each other and each is changed by
the experience" movie.  But Pacino turns Slade into a real human being,
able to tell a woman's brand of perfume just by taking a sniff, and
keeping the whole world on its toes when he enters the scene.  He's a
world-wise man, able to live by his wits.  He figures out immediately
that Charlie has a dilemma of his own; the advice he offers is to take
what you can, and forget the other people.  That's the code he's lived
by all his life, because the world is a tough place.
     One of the film's best moments occurs when he and Charlie drop in
on his brother uninvited for Thanksgiving dinner.  Slade walks in the
door and announces his presence with a roar, and his brother sitting
upstairs immediately recognizes his voice with a start; it's obvious
that he's been putting up with Slade all of his life.  When the Colonel
sweeps a shy young girl off her feet at a fancy New York restaurant, we
feel the magic in the air.  He can make things happen--but because he's
blind, he feels useless and wasted.  (The movie doesn't go out of its
way to present Pacino as a blind man; it's done naturally in a fashion
that doesn't force his disability on us.  This is one of the film's
strengths: it doesn't hit us over the head with the story, until the
very end.)
     Chris O'Donnell had his hands full keeping up with Pacino, one of
the greatest actors of our time.  It would have been easy for him to be
overwhelmed by Slade's character, especially since most of the script
calls for him to be quiet and meek.  But he holds his own, as he sees
the Colonel's time rapidly running out.  The old soldier is becoming
distraught and careless about himself, and Charlie knows that he has to
teach him to love life once again.  But because his character is
developed so well, we believe him as he asserts himself and does what he
can to help the Colonel.  Charlie's not as simple as he looks, and the
Colonel's desperate grasps for attention bring out the best in him, even
as he's changing the old man for good.
     But after all this buildup, it's a disappointment when the movie's
climax has Slade giving a corn-ball speech in Charlie's defense, trying
like so many other movies to capture the magic of MR. SMITH GOES TO
WASHINGTON.  After two and a half hours of wonderful character
development, to wrap everything up neatly in typical Hollywood fashion
is nothing less than a cop-out.  Even Pacino descends into overacting
here, and the film ends with your typical "I've been through a crisis,
but now my life is perfect" note that we get all too often from
Hollywood films.  If the rest of the movie wasn't so good, this would be
irritating.
     However, Pacino must have realized what a waste this final scene
is, however, because he caps it off with a one-liner that I won't
reveal, saving the movie from descending into pure kitsch the way A FEW
GOOD MEN did.
     The movie is a full two hours and forty minutes long, though there
are very few moments that don't contribute to the story.  I certainly
wasn't bored, and yet I had the feeling that the story could have been
shortened by as much as an hour.  Brest tried screening shorter versions
of the film to preview audiences, and they were confused or disappointed
with the results, so the movie was released at full length.  The problem
lies with the screenplay's pacing: it's leisurely paced when it should
be rushing forward at breakneck speed.  SCENT OF A WOMAN is an enjoyable
experience, but it could have been a truly great motion picture if it
picked up the tempo in the way Jonathan Demme's SOMETHING WILD did.
     Despite its length, however, you won't be looking at your watch
when you see this movie.  Brest may be a Hollywood director at heart,
but he cares about his characters, and because he does, we do.  SCENT OF
A WOMAN is a movie you won't regret seeing, thanks to a great
performance by Al Pacino that you'll remember for a long time.

Title
Review for Natural Born Killers (1994)
When NATURAL BORN KILLERS premiered in 1994, it created a storm of controversy
over its controversy.  This was the ultimate stab at our media-saturated culture
-- the story about how a pair of mass murderers would become the hottest
sensation since O.J. Simpson, with the help of a sleazy TV reporter who glorifed
them.  There was talk about "Mickey and Mallory" copycat killers, about the
movie's over-the-top violence, and Oliver Stone's use of ground-breaking,
MTV-style editing...
...or at least, that's what the producers of NATURAL BORN KILLERS want us to
think.
It's probably not surprising to see how many people have fallen for the lure of
this film, because it may well be suited for Oliver Stone and his "in-your-face"
style.  Stone's filming style has never been subtle; however, after the success
of PLATOON it's seemed as if he has gotten more and more over-the-top as his
fame (and his ego) spreads.  Each of his films after that have become more
blatant, as they rubbed our noses in their "messages" and dragged us through the
dirt with them.  NATURAL BORN KILLERS, then, was the culmination (so far) of
Stone's work, in which he abandoned all subtlety and attempted to blow us away
with a cinematic shotgun.  He pulled out all the stops to shock us and
supposedly "open our eyes."  In his promotional interviews, Stone claims that
the film came from a couple of years in his life when he was feeling nihilistic,
depressed, with an attitude of "fuck everything."  So he put it on film, and
this is what we got.
Stone's remarks about how the film was unvairly judged have focused excusively
on its violent content.  Unquestionably the film *is* violent, and like
everything else the violence goes over the edge.  But what Stone doesn't
mention, or even take the time to defend, is the way everything in the movie is
so overblown, so outrageous, that the film stops being "shocking" and
"eye-opening" and instead becomes a numbing special-effects display, drowning
the film's "message" with the flashy visuals and reducing the viewer's sympathy
for it to nil.  It's an overblown, violent, live-action cartoon attempting to
stretch reality to the point of satire.  Unfortunately, it goes too far.
The "Director's Cut" of the film, now available on video, restores about three
minutes of footage that Stone had to cut from the original.  He gripes
repeatedly about how the MPAA representatives who saw it couldn't pin down any
"one particular scene" that upset them; rather, he claims, it is the entire aura
of "chaos" emanating from the film that they found offensive.  As such, the
scenes deleted from the film aren't any more violent or offensive than the rest
of the movie, and most of them don't add to or detract from its content.  The
reason they were cut was because they seemed (at the time) to be *especially*
shocking.  In particular, there is a clip, lasting perhaps three seconds or
less, of Mickey raping a hostage girl in a motel room.  At the film's climax,
there is the much-talked about scene where a gun shoots a hole right through a
person's hand, and the camera actually sees through the hole.  These two scenes
are indeed "shocking" when taken by themselves, out of context.  However, their
insertion into a two-hour-long montage of fast-cut images tends to dull their
effect, so that the viewer doesn't do much more than raise his or her eyes when
we see the girl in question being raped.  It happens so fast that we don't have
time to feel any emotion for her, and indeed the scene is completely forgotten
(by the story itself, anyways) five minutes later.
One might say that this is a deliberate effect of the film, as well as a comment
on the way the quick-cut editing style (popularized, of course, by MTV) has
supposedly "numbed" audiences to the point where they barely feel anything at
all.  Oliver Stone is trying to make us look at ourselves.  "Look at you!
You're so numb that you don't even care about a woman being raped on-screen!"
But unfortunately, neither does he.  We are indeed numbed by the intensity of
this movie...perhaps too much so.  We're so numb, in fact, that we aren't even
able to think about the film at all.  Furthermore, Stone has made his message so
obvious and so simplistic -- "The unending media barrage has turned us into a
society of unfeeling zombies" -- that there isn't very much there for us to
think about.  He's put so much effort into dazzling our eyes with unconnected,
apparently random transitions to black-and-white images, animation, high-quality
visuals, grainy TV images, superimposed surreal images, and every other
cinematic trick in the book that we're left with little more than a special
effects show.  NATURAL BORN KILLERS follows in the footsteps of MTV: rather than
exposing it for the hollow shell it is, it wallows in that same hollowness.
This is why audiences flocked to see this film, despite the fact that many of
these same people would not even consider watching so-called "avant-garde"
movies that use the same effects to make a much more subtle point.  Will the
audience of NATURAL BORN KILLERS suddenly have a desire to go out and see ANNIE
HALL or Godard's BREATHLESS?  How come, for that matter, there have been no
other "mainstream" films that try to work in the same visual style as this one?
Meanwhile, the restored footage does not change the film at all.  If you liked
it before, you'll still like it; if you were disappointed before, you'll still
be disappointed.  There are a few brief scenes that add some detail to Mickey's
life as opposed to Mallory's; we see the death of his father and we get hints of
how he became so depraved and soulless.  The scene of the prison riot is
expanded, and many more shots of the rioting prisoners are included, complete
with some impressive stuntwork and and another grisly image involving a severed
head.  The coffee-shop massacre at the beginning of the film is also extended
slightly, and you'll note several other shots included in the new cut.  Oddly,
the Nine Inch Nails music from "Burn" is removed from the end, and instead the
entire music video is included in the companion videotape.
One commentary on the soundtrack: accompanying the additional scenes, especially
during the prison riot, Stone includes more music from Nusrate Fateh Ali Khan.
This is obviously an attempt at irony on his part.  Nusrat is one of the most
famous "qawwali" singers of the Muslim faith, and his songs are joyous
celebrations of Life, Spirit, and God.  By using this music as the background
for an excercise in nihilism such as NATURAL BORN KILLERS, Stone is attempting
to show us how satirical the whole thing is: using music of life to counter the
images of chaos and death.  While this is great music, I fear Stone is aiming
far over the heads of most of the audience of this film; it's doubtful that a
great deal of the viwers of this film have never even heard of Nusrat Fateh Ali
Khan.  And despite the inclusion of his music on the film's much-touted
soundtrack, I don't think many people are going to go out of their way to hear
more of his music.  It's their loss; but it's also a display of contempt on the
part of Oliver Stone.  Is he aiming for the "intellectuals" in the audience --
the ones who will actually get the joke and "understand" the movie?  If so, then
I don't like his attitude.
The second video of this two-tape collection consists of out-takes and rejected
scenes from the film, as well as the Nine Inch Nails video "Burn" (as mentioned
earlier) and a series of comments on the making of the film and the reaction to
it, from Oliver Stone, Woody Harrelson, Tommy Lee Jones, and others.  The cut
scenes are interesting, in that they would have indeed added to the plot of the
movie; however, Stone cut them because he felt that they did not contribute
towards the plot development and the evolution of the characters of Mickey and
Mallory, the way that he wanted them to go.  This was a wise move on his part,
though it also displays more of the movie's weaknesses.
One especially disappointing scene involves the courtroom trial of Mickey and
Mallory, in which Mickey is allowed to defend himself and cross-examine a
witness in the case...one of the eye-witnesses to his own crimes.  The idea of a
murderer being allowed to defend himself probably struck Stone (and the writer
of that scene, Quentin Tarantino) as an interesting piece of satire (especially
in the way the courtroom scene ends), but this particular sequence is so
ridiculous that its exclusion from the film was a wise move on Stone's part.
Unfortunately, this scene also fails on a different level.  The story of NATURAL
BORN KILLERS includes the idea that the American public could become infatuated
with a pair of mass murderers through a barrage of media hype, and given the
state of today's cultyre, this may not be completely impossible.  But the movie
doesn't develop this angle enough.  We do get a look at the sleazy producer of
"American Maniacs," as well as scenes of people who adore Mickey and
Mallory...but this whole aspect of the film is still shallow.  I was hoping that
the courtroom scene would have been able to flesh out this aspect of the film,
by showing how millions of people could focus so intently on a superficial media
event such as one sensational murder trial (I needn't mention the real-life
example where this came from), but it barely touches on this at all.
As for Oliver Stone's own commentary on the movie, as well as the interviews
with Woody Harrelson, Tommy Lee Jones, Juliette Lewis, et al...they don't do
anything to shed a new perspective on NATURAL BORN KILLERS, any more than the
additional footage and out-takes.  Everyone dewells on the public's reaction to
fhe film, decrying the idea that it is "too violent" and that it is an
"exploitation" picture.  However, Tommy Lee Jones' comments have to be heard to
be believes, especially when he compares it to great works of art and mentions
Moliere as an example.
Jones also makes a comment about how Oliver Stone's humility and
self-deprecation is so exemplary, and how Stone is such a modest person...but
then, one should consider just WHO supervised this entire video production in
the first place.  It is indeed a commentary on Oliver Stone, but it certainly
shows him to be anything but humble.
In the end, the director's cut of NATURAL BORN KILLERS is going to be received
in the same fashion as the so-called "director's cuts" of BASIC INSTINCT, or any
number of so-called "director's cuts" appearing on the video shelves nowadays.
It does contain some new footage that we didn't see in the theater, but this new
footage does not change the film at all and is, in fact, completely unnecessary.
It merely continues the saga of NATURAL BORN KILLERS, and tells us what the film
is REALLY about.
It's about Oliver Stone's ego, and it's about Hollywood trying to make big bucks
by cashing in on the so-called "controversy" over an overrated, overhyped,
overblown issue...an issue that is only controversial because Hollywood created
that controversy.
In that respect, one might easily say that NATURAL BORN KILLERS truly is a movie
for the 1990s.

Title
Review for Go Fish (1994)
     The movie begins in a classroom, as a group of students and their
teacher compose a list of names of famous people who *might* be
lesbians.  The names chosen are interesting, including "Peanuts'"
Peppermint Patty to Marilyn Quayle.  But when one student speaks up and
asks, "why are we making this list," the professor states that it's an
example of how little written literature there is to describe the
history of the lesbian lifestyle, and how she hopes that this can be
changed.
     GO FISH, the feature-length debut for director Rose Troche, is a
low-budget, black-and-white film that aims to be a light-hearted love
story of two women who fall for each other.  It succeeds, and the charm
and slice-of-life honesty of the characters is where this film's
"heart" lies.  Its small, "homey" feeling gives it warmth and
likability, and while the actresses aren't professionals, they project
honesty and are sincere about their parts; we don't feel as if they're
merely speaking scripted words.  Independently-made films of this sort
can't compete with the technical razzle-dazzle of Hollywood, but the
fact that they are a sincere effort on the part of the filmmakers (who
often invest a great part of their own personal wealth into the movie)
give them a vitality that simply can't be matched by the assembly-line
product that comes from the major studios.  The typical movie-going
audience has been raised from birth on Hollywood motion pictures, and
they can often be shocked and confused by the "feeling" projected by a
movie of this sort.  This speaks more of Hollywood's control over the
audience than it does of any faults in the technical quality of the
film itself.
     The story is simple: a close-knit group of friends arrange a
liaison between Max (played by Guinevere Turner), a pretty and somewhat
naive young lady; and Ely (V. S. Brodie, who also was involved in the
writing and production), a lonely woman who still pines for her lover,
even though she moved away two and a half years ago.  The two girls
know they're being set up, but they don't mind because they feel an
attraction to each other.  They'd like to get to know one another
better, but they're both shy and unsure of how the other will act--in
much the same way that relationships here in real life are started.
This charming story is a variation on the classic boy-meets-girl tale
that we've seen a thousand times before, with the twist being the fact
that it's a girl-meets-girl story.  We have a pretty good idea what's
going to happen, and the question one keeps asking is "when are they
going to have sex?"
     The movie does have its share of sexual content, and it's frank
and quite lifelike.  Unlike the rehearsed eroticism of Hollywood, the
sex scenes here seem natural and unforced; the ladies hop into bed
because they like having sex.  They also fall in love, too, but they
know that it's fun as well, and they like having fun.  (Since I am not
a lesbian, I honestly can't say how accurate a portrayal this is of the
feelings women have towards other women, and towards sex.  But the
audience I sat with in the theater enjoyed it and applauded it; I heard
comments from various people that it was an accurate portrayal.)
     The movie also makes statements about the lesbian lifestyle and
the way our society frowns on it, as well as commenting on the "labels"
that women use to describe everything, from their own sexual parts
(i.e., a conversation describing a suggestive use of the phrase "honey
pot") to the way a woman in the gay community can be shunned if she
actually dares to sleep with a man.  Miss Troche obviously knew that
her movie would be seen by many as a looking glass into lesbian life,
because it's actually being sent to mainstream theaters that normally
wouldn't screen films of this type.  (The Samuel Goldwyn Company, which
has made a name for itself by sending relatively "controversial" or
financially risky movies to mainstream theaters, such as Kenneth
Branagh's highly acclaimed films, is handling the distribution of this
one.  Since the movie was made on a shoestring budget, the company is
almost certainly guaranteed to make a profit on it, even if it only
attracts its most obvious audience.)  This is why the film spends time
looking at life as a lesbian; various segments are interspersed within
the movie, forcing the audience to take note of the fact that the
characters are lesbians, and they're trying to assert themselves in a
world that frowns upon them.
     It would be easy to emphasize these moments as the approach of the
"angry filmmaker lashing out at the world," but Miss Troche doesn't do
that.  She merely presents these scenes as a way of reminding us that
lesbians have their own unique problems, and many questions that are
not easily answered about their relationships with the rest of the
world (and with each other).  We're obviously meant to think about this
after the movie is over, and it *is* something worth considering.  But it
can also distract from the main purpose of the film, which is simply to
tell an entertaining story.  I've always had trouble adjusting to
sudden, jarring insertions of seemingly unrelated scenes, as well as
film-school style symbolism such as we see in the brief shots of a top
spinning on a chessboard, or being gripped by a hand.  (These scenes
are probably intended to represent the unpredictability of the future,
and the fact that we never know who we're going to meet in the future.
As the movie states: "The girl is out there.")  While this style of
filmmaking has its proponents, it tends to limit its appeal to the
thinking person's audience that "understands" such filmic styles.  (The
famous French New Wave films of the late 1950s and early 1960s have
this similar limitation.)
     But the movie has some very strong moments.  One especially
pleasing scene occurs as Ely prepares dinner for some guests, while two
of her friends make love in the other room.  It's an amusing use of
symbolism (and the audience laughed heartily), while it also gives us
an idea of Ely's feelings: she's becoming impatient, and tired of
longing for her past lover.  The film's final scene is also noteworthy,
as it gives us various shots of women making love while Ely and Max
enjoy themselves and spend time together.  I suspect these scenes were
filmed to get the audience all hot-and-bothered, so that they would go
home and make love (or have sex for fun).  There's nothing wrong with
this, of course; I consider it an amusing joke on the part of the
filmmakers.
     I wonder if this movie would have been allowed to be distributed
by the Goldwyn company if it was *not* presented as a "statement" on the
lesbian lifestyle.  Whenever a film like this appears in mainstream
theaters, it's expected to represent an entire community and speak in a
bold voice:  "This is what we are!"  GO FISH does do its part to
present itself as a lesbian love story, with emphasis on the 'lesbian'
part, but I think its best moments come when it simply tells being a
love story that just happens to involve two girls.  It's worth seeing
for this reason alone, but you may consider its additional elements to
be the icing on the cake--or a distraction.
     Either way, you won't be disappointed when you see GO FISH.
Movies like this are often promoted as "the emergence of a startling
new talent" and "the beginning of a promising career."  I certainly
hope this is the case here.  It's always good to see fresh, new
faces--they're the lifeblood that will keep the cinema going forever.

Title
Review for Rupan sansei: Kariosutoro no shiro (1979)
Hayao Miyazaki is best known as the director of MY NEIGHBOR TOTORO,
smash hit Japanese animated film. It was subsequently released by Fox
Video here in America, though because it's not a Disney film, it's
still largely unknown to audiences in this country. This is a pity,
because TOTORO is a wonderful movie for young audiences. It defies the
anime stereotypes involving robots, demons, samurai warriors, women
with tight clothes and huge breasts, and lots of graphic violence, and
above all it is a fun, entertaining movie. Miyazaki's movies have all
been aimed at the "family" audience, and his stories are often full of
comedy, exciting action, and energy; on the Internet mailing list for
discussion of Miyazaki's works, he is often referred to as "The Steven
Spielberg of Japan."
Miyazaki had created and produced many animated series and movies
before the success of TOTORO, however. Among other works such as
SHERLOCK HOUND, NAUSICAA, and LAPUTA: CASTLE IN THE SKY, he was
responsible for the adaptation to TV of a highly popular comic series
by Monkey Punch called "Lupin III," and in the late 1970s he produced
an animated TV series based on the character. Many episodes of the
series were produced, along with two animated movies: THE FUMA
CONSPIRACY and THE CASTLE OF CAGLIOSTRO. CAGLIOSTRO received a stroke
of good fortune: it was screened at the Cannes Film Festival in 1980,
where it enchanted audiences and gained a reputation of its own.
(Rumor has it that Spielberg himself saw the movie at Cannes,
reportedly enjoying it immensely.)
Streamline Pictures obtained the rights to release THE CASTLE OF
CAGLIOSTRO on video in the United States, and a subtitled print of the
movie was screened at several art houses across the country. A dubbed
version of the film was released on video in 1992, and copies of this
video can still be found with various video companies. The dubbing job
is sufficient, in that there are no lines of dialogue that make the
viewer wince; the lip-synching is quite good.
"Lupin III" is a fine animated series, but THE CASTLE OF CAGLIOSTRO
stands out as its high point, and a high point of Japanese animation
as a whole. It's an exciting, hilarious, cartoony romp packed with
memorable characters, delightful animation, and enough thrills and
cliffhangers to rival the Indiana Jones and James Bond series. The
animation is every bit the equal of Disney's productions of the late
1970s and early 1980s, and it avoids most of the anime clichs as well.
(There's a samurai here, but no demons.)
The hero of the story, "Wolf" (the English translation of "Lupin"), is
the world's greatest thief: he's a clever, ingenious trickster with an
arsenal of gadgets, who is always one step ahead of his enemies...yet
he can't help jumping into a new adventure to save the life of a
pretty girl.) This concept is similar to Columbia Pictures' LONE WOLF
series of the 1930s [based on Louis Joseph Lance's character], and the
character may have been taken from there.) He finds himself caught up
in a fiendish plot involving counterfeit money, a hidden treasure, a
princess locked away in the highest tower of a castle, and the evil
Count Cagliostro, who intends to marry the princess and reunite the
two halves of their long-separated family.
Unlike many Japanese animated films, THE CASTLE OF CAGLIOSTRO doesn't
take itself seriously, instead devoting itself to giving the audience
a fun roller-coaster ride. The plot is complicated, but not overly so
(prolonging the climax too far is a common fault with anime), and the
supporting cast of Wolf's friends and enemies have been well-developed
by this time, so that they stand out on their own and seem lifelike
and believable.
One notable scene has Wolf surrounded by about two hundred bad guys,
all with their blades pointed at his throat -- but Wolf remains calm
and undisturbed, still in control of the situation. Aplomb of this
sort doesnt occur very often on the screen, especially in cartoons.
Wolf is a worthy descendant of Bugs Bunny; this makes him more than a
mere two-dimensional hero figure.
Added to the plot are outlandish car chases, gunfights, battling
ninjas, scuba diving, dark inescapable dungeons, lots of explosions,
and lots of laughs. This film uses the reality-defying tricks of the
animated film to give us great slapstick, death-defying stunts,
impossible physics (how'd you like to drive your car along the side of
a cliff?), and characters who heal from near-fatal wounds in the space
of one day. It's a good thing they do, too, otherwise they'd never be
able to survive the furious action of this wild ride...and still
escape from the clutches of Inspector Zenigata, the police inspector
who is obsessed with capturing Wolf once and for all. (Shades of THE
PINK PANTHER.) The final climax of the film takes place inside a huge
clock tower, and though the final resolution doesn't blend with all of
the funny action scenes beforehand, it still satisfies and leaves the
viewer smiling.
Miyazaki's company, Studio Ghibli, signed a distribution contact with
Disney in 1996, and Disney now has the distribution rights to all of
his films. His fans are hoping that this means his older films, such
as CASTLE OF CAGLIOSTRO, will be translated and released on video in
America, though so far there haven't been any signs of that. At the
time of this writing (November 1996), there is no word of a new video
release of CASTLE OF CAGLIOSTRO; this means that people wanting to
watch this movie will have to search for the dubbed video release from
Streamline Pictures.
Fortunately, this is a movie worth searching for.

Title
Review for Jesus Christ Superstar (1973)

When I was four years old, my mother took me to the movies and we saw
"Jesus Christ Superstar" -- the filmed version of Andrew Lloyd Weber's
so-called "rock opera."  I still don't know why she took me, because I
didn't understand what was going on in the least...but I loved it
nonetheless for the music and the weird visuals.  During the song "Damned
For All Time" when Judas is being chased by tanks (talk about subtle
symbolism!), I shouted out "Batman!" because the musical beat was very
similar to the "Batman" TV series, which was in reruns at the time (1973) 
and which I followed religiously.  Several other moments in the film
having to do with the actors climbing up and down on scaffolding
(sheesh!), or Judas being lowered from Heaven by a rope to sing the
climactic number "Jesus Christ Superstar" remained in my mind for a long
time afterwards...and since the soundtrack album starring Ian Rennie of
Deep Purple was played fairly regularly in our home for years afterwards,
this movie was probably one of the strongest influences on my "faith" adn
"belief" as I was growing up. 
As I grew older, I thought about he movie every so often and pondered
it...eventually deciding that it was written by Lloyd Weber in order to
identify with the cynical anti-establishment culture that existed around
1970, as the flower-power movement ate itself up and descended into
anarchy.  (Woodstock to Altamont, perhaps?)  The musical (and the movie) 
takes the famous moments from the Gospel and turns them on their side,
portraying Jesus as a disillusioned rabble-rouser who was getting tired of
running around the countryside and who wondered if his work would outlast
him, or if it would die with him; while at the same time Judas sees Jesus
as becoming enamoured with his own myths, believing the hype.  The movie,
in turn, is definitely a product of the early 1970s, and the visuals
haven't aged very well.  Every time I watch this film and see the
long-haired actors singing their roles, I get an urge to wear bell-bottom
pants and not take a bath for a week.  The movie outraged many religious
figures when it came out, of course; but then again, even "The Greatest
Story Ever Told" had bomb threats being sent to movie theaters.  If
there's *any* movie about Jesus that hasn't sparked a firestorm of
controversy, then I haven't heard of it. 
The film's use of modern-day images as a way of "symbolising" the
relevance of the Biblical story, while updating it for modern audiences,
seems very awkward.  The Roman soldiers wear modern-day Army uniforms and
carry machine guns, while jet planes soar overhead to represent "angels"
during the moment when Judas betrays Jesus.  The beginning of the film
shows the cast members arriving at the site of the film on a bus, and the
film ends on a solemn note as the cast boards the bus and looks back sadly
at the cross they've left mounted.  These moments are meant to tell us
that this isn't a "literal" telling of the Gospel story, but it almost
certainly caused people to scratch their heads in confusion when the movie
was first released (like I said, I was too young to understand it myself),
because heavy-handed symbolism of this sort tends to fly over the heads of
most audience members. 
And yet, despite the film's flaws, there's still an underlying message
underneath that is re-worked in Martin Scorsese's "The Last Temptation Of
Christ," and which influenced my own beliefs as well..the idea of Christ
as a human being, one who is struggling to change the world and who is
afraid of the fate awaiting him.  This is a portrayal of the idea of
Christ that I've grown to accept, and it's one that I've personally found
more comforting than the one portrayed more commonly in church: that of
the omnipotent judge sent down with complete knowledge of what was going
happen, and who didn't break a sweat even when he was being crucified. 
Maybe it's just the cynic in me, but I find the idea of Jesus as a *man*
instead of *God* more comforting, because it inspires me to find strength
within *myself* -- just like he did. 
So if "Jesus Christ Superstar" is a dated product of the 1970s that people
can point to as a way of showing how silly the hippie movement could be,
it's still a thought-provoking movie that I found a lot more inspiring
than "Godspell." 

Title
Review for Mad Dog and Glory (1993)
     In these days of Hollywood "cop" movies, where the good guys are
macho dudes and the bad guys are slimy and totally evil, a movie like
MAD DOG AND GLORY shines because it cares about something far more than
brainless melodrama.
     This a comedy, but you won't be rolling in the aisles with
laughter.  It's leisurely and even slow-paced, and you won't be on the
edge of your seat (until the climax).  There's some very brief nudity
and one extended sex scene, but it's not very erotic and there's almost
no T-and-A.  It has lots of gangsters, but there are no chase scenes,
no big shoot-outs, and the only time we see people blown away is during
the first five minutes.  So if you go to this one expecting the likes
of MARKED FOR DEATH or LETHAL WEAPON, you're going to be sorely
disappointed.
     MAD DOG AND GLORY isn't interested in pandering to our love of sex
and violence.  The director, John McNaughton, is interested more in
character development than in chase scenes and shoot outs.  This is
what makes the movie such a delight:  We CARE about the characters.
     The film does everything possible to distance itself from the
standard Hollywood cop movie, even in its choice of leads.  Robert De
Niro and Bill Murray headline the film, and one would expect De Niro to
play the cool, suave gangster (in a replay of his role in THE
UNTOUCHABLES), but it's Murray who's the heavy here.  De Niro is a cop
named Wayne (his friends call him "Mad Dog"), and he carries a gun, but
he hasn't used it in fifteen years.  He's a photographer: he
photographs the corpses of crime victims for police records.  Unlike
your typical Hollywood cop, he's shy, nervous, and unsure of himself,
so that when he stumbles across a holdup in a grocery store, one night,
he's willing to let the robber have anything he wants.  He's far from
perfect, and he feels guilty about it: later on he even fantasizes
about blowing away the robber, the way he "should have" done (and the
way we see cops shoot down bad guys in one movie after another).
     Bill Murray, meanwhile, doesn't look like such a bad guy at
first.  He's a gangster, Frank, and he does nasty things, but he wants
to make people laugh; he even does stand-up comedy at one of his own
clubs.  (He's not a very good comedian, however; all of his best lines
are stolen from someone else.)  De Niro saves his life during that hold
up--but he's the "bad guy" and ol' Mad Dog is the "good guy." So what
does he do?  He picks him up, and they go out drinking.  Cops and
gangsters aren't supposed to fraternize like this, of course, but real
life isn't the black-and-white world of Hollywood cop movies.  Stuff
like this happens all the time, and there's a fine line that both sides
occasionally tread.
     Which is why Frank decides to reward Wayne: he sends a girl over
to "be his friend" for a week.  It seems that she owes Frank "a
favor"--everyone seems to owe things to Frank--and she's paying off
her debt in this fashion.
     But as the trailer for the movie shows, things get a little more
complicated than anyone expects.  Wayne falls in love with Glory, and
Frank doesn't like this.  So he gives Frank an ultimatum: give Glory
back--or else.
     It sounds like your typical Hollywood cop plot, doesn't it?  But
I'm not giving away anything here, because the plot is the least
important part of the entire film.  What makes it such a joy to watch
is De Niro's typically amazing performance, backed up by a wonderful
role from Uma Thurman, who plays Glory.  Bill Murray is also good; this
may be the best role I've ever seen him play.
     I love watching De Niro in his "quiet" moments.  He can entrance
an audience just by talking softly, so much so that the sound of his
breathing is as mesmerizing as his voice.  He becomes his characters,
and he makes them so three-dimensional and lifelike that by the time
the climax rolled around I was watching his actions (including an
important financial transaction) and thinking "Really?  I didn't think
Wayne wouldn't do that."  I was rooting for him during the final fight
scene, and he underplays his character superbly.
     Uma Thurman is equally impressive as the equally insecure and shy
Glory.  Here are two characters who are tailor-made for each other, but
they have to overcome their initial shyness and self-doubt before they
can trust each other.  They're a long way from the brainless "macho"
cop and the whorish "moll" who jumps into the sack with the hero just
because he blinks in her direction.
     There's a sex scene that deserves especial mention: it's funny at
first, as Wayne and Glory finally get to know each other better; but it
becomes sad and tender as they embrace each other.  They're not merely
banging away and getting the audience hot and bothered; they're really
holding onto each other for security, for comfort.  They CARE about
each other, and that's why we care about them.
     The laughs in this film don't come from out-and-out gags, except
for one hilarious fight scene between a cop and a thug.  Instead, it's
the characters, both good and bad, who hold our attention and keep us
interested.  This movie is a character piece, and its strengths lie in
the way it works better when we THINK about the characters.
     John McNaughton is making a career for himself as a Hollywood
outsider.  A couple of years ago, he was asked to make a horror film
that could be marketed to the splatter-film crowd--but what he
delivered was HENRY: PORTRAIT OF A SERIAL KILLER.  The studio didn't
know what to do with it (especially since it was threatened with the X
rating), so they dumped it to the "art-house" market and released it on
video.  Now he's taken the "macho cop vs. gangster" cliche and turned
it on its side, giving us a film with no breathless action, little
blood-and-guts, and no car chases or smashing plate glass windows.  So
Universal released the film in the "quiet" period between Christmas and
Memorial Day, hoping to cash in on De Niro's reputation (and Bill
Murray's sudden popularity from the success of GROUNDHOG DAY).  The
film is fading fast from theaters, too--it's not going to be
remembered by anyone except the movie critics by the time the Christmas
movie season rolls around.
     But box-office isn't everything.  MAD DOG AND GLORY is a
delightfully original film, and if you enjoy original performances and
character development over chase-and-crash scenes, you'll be won over
by this film.  Check it out.
     When John McNaughton's next film hits the theaters, I'll certainly
be there to see it.

Title
Review for Lion King, The (1994)
     Walt Disney came up with a winning formula when he made SNOW WHITE
AND THE SEVEN DWARFS, back in 1937; over the years, his company refined
that formula to a science.  With the re-birth of Disney in the late
1980s, the "magical" formula for Disney animation was re-discovered by
Jeff Katzenberg and Michael Eisner, the studio heads.  Unfortunately,
these two men are not Walt Disney: they're Hollywood studio
executives.  That means that you can expect them to milk a winning
formula for all it's worth, and not dare to push the edge.  If it
works, why change it?
     Because you can wear it out, that's why.  The spectacular
box-office success of Disney's animated films (except for THE RESCUERS
DOWN UNDER, which deserved to do better) has blinded the men on the top
of the heap; as long as the money keeps rolling in, they're not going
to want to make any changes.  But they don't see that when you rely too
heavy on a safe, predictable formula, you risk losing the life-granting
"spark" that infuses your creations with energy--and keeps the money
rolling in.  THE LION KING is going to make another pile of money for
Disney, and as a result we can expect to see no changes in the formula
for Disney animated films in the future.  That formula is laid bare
here:
     - Pour lots of money into producing great animation.  This is the
easy part.  The Disney studios have hundreds of artists and the latest
computer technology to produce lavish, dazzling animation that can be
matched by no one else.  There are some amazing moments here,
especially during the opening sequence (which Disney has pushed for
months, revealing this sequence at its many Disney Stores as early as
February) and a scene where Mufasa speaks to his son from the clouds.
The animation on the rest of the movie is also good, as one expects
from Disney.  But is great animation the only reason we watch Disney
films?  No. The formula has more ingredients, such as ....
     - Create an evil, sneaky villain, and then let him be utterly
defeated (preferably in the midst of an inferno of some sort, with
lightning and smoke and explosions and fire to make it more dramatic).
With the Disney formula, there are only the Good Guys and the Bad
Guys--you know whom to root for, because the Bad Guys are always drawn
in a cartoonish way that makes them look less than human.  The perfect
hero and heroine battle the freaks, and guess who wins in the end?
     - Create a hero, and give him a girlfriend--but make sure the
hero is nice and bland.  What's the difference between Simba, the hero
of this film, and Aladdin?  Nothing at all, other than being drawn
differently.  They're both young and naive; they both make a big
mistake; they both correct that mistake by beating the Bad Guy once and
for all.  And the girlfriend must be equally bland, though at least in
ALADDIN Princess Jasmine was a major character.  In THE LION KING, the
girlfriend is merely there for the hero to grow up with, and to bring
him back to face his big mistake so that the movie can reach its
climax.  Why must the hero and his girlfriend be so generic and
uninteresting?  So that they won't overshadow the supporting
characters, as we see in the next ingredient ....
     - For comic relief (and merchandising), through in a few goofy
characters to play the hero's friends.  These characters always act
silly, and they get the lion's share (pun intended) of the laughs,
except during the climax when they stay by the hero's side and battle
the bad guys.
     - And of course, include a bunch of musical numbers.  Ever since
THE LITTLE MERMAID won the Oscars for Best Original Score and Best
Song, Disney has been pushing its animated films as the last bastion of
the Hollywood musical.  Each of their animated films includes a bunch
of bouncy numbers as filler, one Busby Berkeley surrealist musical
number, and a sappy, treacly "love" song to get the audience all
weepy-eyed.
     When this formula works, it can awaken the child in us.  I enjoyed
THE LITTLE MERMAID, because it made the Disney films seem fresh and new
again.  I loved ALADDIN in spite of its flaws--but if it weren't for
Robin Williams, that movie would have fallen flat on its face, because
it was nothing but Disney formula.  THE LION KING doesn't have Robin
Williams; and while it does have James Earl Jones' booming baritone as
Mufasa, the great king, that's not enough to keep this film from
feeling like a re-hash.  There's nothing new here, and there's not
enough creativity to make it seem refreshing.
     Sure, the animation's great--that's easy for Disney to do,
because they've got millions of dollars to do it.  But there's more to
making a great film than merely dazzling the eyes, whether it's with
animated lions, computer-generated dinosaurs or exploding bridges
(which we'll see in TRUE LIES).  As in all great movies, it's the story
and the characters that count, and there's nothing in here that we
haven't seen before.  Mufasa himself is a regal, majestic figure; the
comic-relief characters are funny; and the evil Scar is wicked and
properly evil.  But Disney has given us a long line of majestic, funny,
and evil characters, from Cruella de Vil and Stromboli to Gaston and
Iago; the characters in THE LION KING simply aren't charismatic enough
to come out from the shadow of their predecessors.
     As if to add insult to injury, the musical numbers are downright
awful.  There's nothing in here to match the catchy, joyful "Under The
Sea and "Be Our Guest," or even the fun "Prince Ali" and "Never Had A
Friend Like Me."  The songs were written by Tim Rice (who also worked
on the ALADDIN soundtrack) and Elton John--who also sings the "love
theme" over the ending credits.  Bleah.  Disney is certain to push this
soundtrack for the Oscar...but if it actually wins, it will be
undeniable proof that taste is dead in Hollywood.  There IS a
reasonably good musical score by Hans Zimmer that's based on on African
music (though why didn't Disney just bring in some real African
musicians to compose it?), but that's about all the praise I can give
it.
     The problem is simply that we've seen it all before.  Nothing is
new here, and one gets the impression that Disney is merely spinning
its wheels.  The Disney formula is starting to wear thin ... but as
long as it keeps making millions for the company, we're not going to
see anything different.
     In this respect, one can say that BEAUTY AND THE BEAST was the
most original Disney film in a long time, because while it included
many aspects of the Disney formula (animation, musical numbers, comedy
relief characters), it actually worked on real characterization (at
least on the part of the Beast himself) and an entertaining story
(though I detested the character of Gaston).  But that film proved to
be an exception to the rule.  ALADDIN, despite Robin Williams'
delightful presence, was merely a return to the old formula ... the
same formula that mires down THE LION KING.
     This does not bode well for the long-term future of American
animated films.  Hollywood is falling once again into the trap of
trying to imitate Disney, rather than experimenting with other ways of
making animated films.  But Walt Disney himself knew that if you don't
keep looking forward and aiming for something new, fresh, and
different, you're liable to dig your own grave.
     Disney has reached the height of its popularity; in fact, it may
have already passed that peak (note the troubles of Euro Disneyland).
But if corporate history has any precedents, it is that the bigwigs at
the top don't notice that the tree is sick until it's already rotten
and ready to collapse or be cut down.  I suspect that the same thing is
starting with Disney:  THE LION KING is merely one symptom of corporate
rot that is starting to seep into the Disney empire--its movies are
safe, non-controversial, and bland; the theme parks are expanding with
seemingly endless re-hashes of the same few ideas (movie-based rides);
and all of the company's other projects (the BEAUTY AND THE BEAST stage
musical, or their proposed ceremonies for the World Cup tournament)
consist of them spending money like water to flash and dazzle the eyes
and promote themselves.
     Disney is in trouble--but they don't know it yet.  The next few
years are going to be *very* interesting times, indeed.

Title
Review for Tonari no Totoro (1988)
     Hayao Miyazaki is one of the most popular animators in Japan.  He
makes animated feature films with a strong appeal to the entire family;
young kids can watch his movies as well as grown-ups.  This, plus the
fact that he draws heavily on Western sources for his stories, has
attracted the attention of fans of Japanese animation fans here in
America, who want his movies to reach as wide an audience over here as
they do in Japan.
     A few of Miyazaki's animated works have been translated into
English and released on video, but they've had no major impact on
American audiences, children or otherwise.  Now another attempt is
being made to introduce Japanese animation (called "anime" - pronounced
AN-ee-may - by the Japanese and Japanimation fans) to America.  Troma
Pictures, the company that made a name for itself after producing such
deliberately awful movies as THE TOXIC AVENGER and SURF NAZIS MUST DIE,
is trying to shed its schlock-film image (perhaps they're finding
themselves trapped by it) by forming a new movie distribution arm
called 50th Street Films.  The first film to be released to theaters by
this new company is Miyazaki's MY NEIGHBOR TOTORO, an animated feature
film that was one of the biggest box- office hits of the past few years
in Nippon.  While this new project has absolutely no chance of toppling
Disney from the throne, it's given us a chance to see a delightful
fantasy film for children that might have otherwise gone completely
unnoticed.
     MY NEIGHBOR TOTORO is the story of two young children, ten-year-
old Satsuki and her sister Mei, who move with their father to a house
in the Japanese countryside.  As they acquaint themselves with their
new home, they get the feeling that the house is haunted by mysterious
"dust bunnies" - spirits that gather in old houses and that are
dispersed by laughter.  Their suspicions prove true, and they meet
Totoro, an ancient spirit living in a giant tree by their house.
Totoro is a huge, furry creature that looks like a ten-foot-tall cross
between a rabbit and a pillow; he takes the children on a magical
journey through the forest that's full of wonder and laughs.
     Anime has been appearing on American video shelves, though its
appeal has largely been to the teenage action-flick market: most
Japanese animated films (such as the popular AKIRA) are full of robots,
guns, women with large breasts and lots and lots of graphic violence.
Fans of this type of animation will avoid MY NEIGHBOR TOTORO like the
plague, because it's a quiet story that will appeal mostly to young
children and their parents.  If you watch this movie expecting guns and
death, forget it.
     However, if you're a parent with young children, or you're just a
person who likes watching movies with good animation and good stories,
you'll be pleased with TOTORO.  It's a far cry from THE CARE BEARS,
because not only will your children be entranced by it - you'll enjoy
it, too!  You'll chuckle with glee when little Mei encounters a "dust
bunny" spirit for the first time, and when Totoro helps the children
make the seeds in their garden sprout, and when they take a ride in a
delightful, living Cat-bus that reminds one of the Cheshire Cat.
(Several elements of this story are taken from "Alice In Wonderland,"
including Mei's fall down the rabbit hole into Totoro's Wonderland.)
You'll smile all throughout the movie - and I'd much rather enjoy a
children's story than wince at sickly-sweet treacle such as we get with
MY LITTLE PONY or Barney the Dinosaur.
     The film is not all sweetness and light: the children's mother is
in the hospital, being treated for an illness, and while there's
nothing here as shocking as the death of Bambi's mother, the climax of
the film where Mei runs away and Satsuki searches desperately for her
may cause anxiety among small children.  But it certainly won't
traumatize them for life - and there's a happy ending that everyone
will be sure to love.
     In addition, the animation is done with care and love.  The
opening credits look very silly, and parents may wonder what they're in
for when they watch them, but once the credits are over the movie is
lushly animated, with beautiful, realistic scenery and many delightful
touches, such as a cluster of pollywogs in a pond or Totoro making it
rain by stomping on the ground and shaking rain off of the trees.
There's no computer animation here (Miyazaki prefers the traditional
hand-drawn method of animation), but while the animation may not be as
dazzling as that in THE RESCUERS DOWN UNDER or ALADDIN, it's very well
done nonetheless.
     Also of note is the transition from Japanese into English.
Dubbing into another language is always difficult, especially with
children's films, because the voice actors in these films often sound
like thirty-year-olds trying sound like children.  That's not the case
here: the voices here come from the same company that dubbed other
Japanese animated films, such as GUNBUSTER, but this time they've taken
the care to sound more like children and less like squealing
grown-ups.  The dialogue is good; you won't wince with embarrassment
from the translation.  Some films, such as LAPUTA, are sometimes
unintentionally funny by using ridiculous phrases to simulate the
movement of the character's mouths - as when two children are falling
down a hole and one says to the other "We can go all the way!" There's
none of that here.  This is one of the best dubbing jobs of a Japanese
animated film I've seen, and I applaud the effort taken to make it
sound right.
     Because of the language barrier (and the fact that Disney has a
near-monopoly on animated feature films in this country), it's been
difficult to introduce Miyazaki's films to American moviegoers.  But
his fans have made some progress: Streamline Pictures, a company formed
especially to translate and distribute Japanese animated films in
America, has managed to get a couple of Miyazaki's movies to play in
American art-house theaters.  THE CASTLE OF CAGLIOSTRO, a wild and
hilarious James Bond type of adventure starring a noble thief called
"The Wolf" (his Japanese name is Lupin III), was subtitled and played
at art houses across the country; I saw it at the Brattle Theater in
Cambridge, Massachusetts, where it played to a packed house and
received loud applause from the audience.  LAPUTA: CASTLE IN THE SKY,
one of Miyazaki's most enchanting films (and one of my personal
favorites), was dubbed into English and likewise sent to art-house
theaters.  But outside of anime fandom, these movies have had
absolutely no impact on the mainstream moviegoing audience, whose sole
idea of going to the movies consists of heading to the local mall to
see ALADDIN and SNOW WHITE AND THE SEVEN DWARFS.
     MY NEIGHBOR TOTORO is suffering from the same lack of exposure.
Troma Films failed to land a major distribution contract with any of
the major Hollywood studios, and thus they're reduced to sending a few
prints to theaters across the country.  Not many people are going to
have the chance to see this movie on the big screen - and if it does
come to their town, there won't be any TV commercials or big ads in the
newspaper, and it might pass them by completely.  Keep a close eye out
for this one, and if you see it at a theater, take the kids and go.
But even so, you might sit in a near-empty theater.
     The best thing to do is wait for the video release - probably by
Christmas of this year.  When it appears, rent MY NEIGHBOR TOTORO and
watch it with your children.  You're in for a treat.
.


Title
Review for Secret Garden, The (1993)
     Hollywood hates children.  The major studios see movies made for
the entire family as quick money-makers that portray the world as
sweetness and light.  They also have to be simple so that kids "can
understand them," with clear-cut good guys and bad guys and a happy
ending where the bad guys are defeated so that the good guys can have a
happy ending.  Movies for children these days must contain idiotic
slapstick, such as with the HOME ALONE movies and DENNIS THE MENACE, or
else they must be shameless, stupid tearjerkers like FREE WILLY or
HEART AND SOULS, or else they must be animated and full of special
effects and talking animals, as in the Disney films.  None of today's
Hollywood directors seem interested in making a challenging,
entertaining film that the entire family can enjoy.
     So it's no surprise that the most remarkable Hollywood debut since
Kenneth Branagh's HENRY V has come from Europe.  Agnieszka Holland, who
is best known for directing the outstanding drama EUROPA EUROPA, has
come to Hollywood, and in particular to Francis Ford Coppola's Zoetrope
Studios.  She made THE SECRET GARDEN, which utterly destroys the
conventions of Hollywood "family" movies.  It's the most amazing
feature film since THE BLACK STALLION (which also came from
Zoetrope--not a coincidence?), and it's a movie likely to be remembered
for years to come.
     This film has everything that Hollywood movies don't: a complete
lack of "good guys" and "bad guys," outstanding acting, believable,
lifelike performances from all--children and adults alike--beautiful,
haunting scenery, a warm, life-affirming message that everyone is good
(but the message is not the least bit sickly-sweet), and a storyline
that will genuinely touch your heart and soul.
     Based on the classic novel of the same name, it's the story of
young Mary Lennox, a spoiled young girl born to a "society" family in
India--but because her parents are part of society, they have no time
to give their daughter a proper upbringing.  She can't even dress
herself without a servant, and she is ignored her whole life.  She
never even learns how to cry.
     But when Mary's parents die in an earthquake, she is sent to
England to live with her uncle, Lord Craven, in a huge, mysterious
mansion in the English countryside called Misselthwaite.  It's a dark,
lonely place, completely shut up and seemingly trapping all life inside
it, refusing to let things grow.  Mary is promptly told by the head
servant, Mrs. Medlock, where her place is: just as before, she is to
keep to herself and be ignored, because Lord Craven refuses to see
her.
     But Mary is a stubborn, feisty spirit, and she will not allow
herself to be stifled.  It isn't long before she's out and about,
roaming the castle and the land around it, discovering the secrets of
why Misselthwaite came to be such a desolate place.  She soon unlocks
the door to the heart of the mystery: a garden, hidden away and
untended for ten years, visited by no one except the animals.  This
garden is not dead, however--underneath the weeds and the neglected
growths, there is life waiting to emerge and grow once again.
     Here's where the film's message makes itself clear: love and
caring will heal the deepest wounds and cause flowers to burst forth
from the most barren ground--even the cold, lonely hearts of
Mrs. Medlock and Lord Craven himself.  It's all told in an utterly
believable, careful fashion, so that we are never once hit over the
head by the message and we look at it as gooey Hollywood sap.
     As she breaks down the rigid order of things at Misselwaite and
allows life to enter the manor once again, Mary makes some friends at
last: the young, naive farmboy Dickon, who loves the animals and knows
how to care for the garden; and the pale, sickly Colin Craven, a young
boy who represents the stifling effect of the manor.  He's been
bedridden for ten years, tended by doctors and the well-meaning
servants, but what he really needs is love to bring him back to
health.  That's what all the residents of Misselthwaite need, and Mary
causes them all to sprout and reach for the sun once again.
     Much of the credit for the film's success goes to director
Holland, who is not afraid to use darkness to make us appreciate the
light.  We feel the ominous presence of Lord Craven's curse throughout
the entire film; it's there, behind every corner, waiting for the
chance to strike us down.  It's a far cry from the cheap, treacly-sweet
world of Hollywood kiddie movies, where you can't even say the word
"death" for fear of upsetting the children in the audience.  Its thesis
darkness that gives this film its resonance, letting us feel for Mary
and her friends.
     Animals are used as metaphors for the re-birth of life: a robin
leads Mary to the garden, it raises a family, and more and more animals
appear (squirrels, woodchucks, deer, lambs) as the garden is re-born.
It's been said that you should never appear in the same scene with
animals, because they steal away all of the attention, but that's not
true here.  They play their part as well as the actors, appearing on
the sidelines and making us smile, but never milking our sympathies so
that we say "aww, cute!" There's no "cute" here, but there is great
beauty.  The film exults in the joys of Nature, and we revel in it.
     This story seems obvious as I type it down, but on the screen the
elements blend together so beautifully--the darkness, the acting, the
scenery, the story--that not once did I ever think it was
predictable.  I found tears welling my eyes from the film's pure joy,
and my heart was stirred.  As the film moved towards its end, I found
myself thinking and even praying that there would be a happy ending.  I
cared for the characters so much that I did not want to see a tragedy,
such as death, put in to add cheap drama and make s cry.
     Suffice to say, the film does not descend to the level of crass
manipulation.  It never falters, from the first frame to the last.
     And here is where I have to report the bad news: it seems doubtful
that THE SECRET GARDEN will be seen by many of the people it was made
for.  This is a G-rated movie--an endangered species in
Hollywood--because it contains no violence.  It is not animated.  It
has no action scenes, no special effects (except for a scene where the
garden springs to life over the course of several weeks), and the
audience Hollywood caters to above all others--teenagers--will probably
find the movie boring because of this.  As a result, Hollywood decides
to promote ridiculously moronic comedies like THE CONEHEADS and
SON-IN-LAW as "family" entertainment.  Warner Bros., the studio
releasing THE SECRET GARDEN, is promoting FREE WILLY as the "family
movie of the summer!"  They don't realize what a treasure they have
here.  In the Boston area, this movie is only appearing at one single
theater (the Copley Place mall), while the mean-spirited and cruel
DENNIS THE MENACE was released to nearly two thousand theaters across
the country.
     Therefore, I urge you: go and see THE SECRET GARDEN now, before
it's too late.  It's an experience you won't forget.  You will be
delighted, entertained, moved, and you will leave the theater with a
smile on your face and joy in your heart.

Title
Review for Death Becomes Her (1992)
     I remember reading a short story about the Fountain of Youth back
in high school; the story's title was something like "The Strange
Experiment Of Professor Heidigger."  It was the story of a group of old
men (and one woman) who had wasted their lives in frivolous pursuits,
and they come to the Professor seeking a second chance.  He gives them
the Fountain of Youth, and they become young and beautiful once again--
but have they learned their lesson?  Heck, no; within a few minutes
they're at each other's throats, engaging in the petty squabbles amd
making the same mistakes they made the first time around.
     This is the moral of DEATH BECOMES HER, a supernatural black
comedy from today's number-one slapstick Hollywood director, Robert
Zemeckis.  It doesn't matter how old or how beautiful you are--it's
what you are on the inside that counts.  We've heard this message
before, of course.  Supposedly, it's taught to us from day one, though
in truth the idea of "beauty" is forced upon us by our very society,
which believes that in order to be beautiful you have to be young and
thin.  Grow old and fat, and forget it--you're history.
     The movie revolves around Meryl Streep, playing the character of
Madeleine Ashton.  She's an aging stage star, but she refuses to admit
it: she is absolutely, completely obsessed with being young and
beautiful.  She applies enough makeup to herself to keep the whole
cosmetics industry rolling in dough; she makes weekly trips to her
plastic surgeon; and she still sees young men in order to promote the
illusion that she's still young and beautiful.  Of course, all of her
efforts to stop aging are futile.
     Goldie Hawn, meanwhile, is Helen Sharp, who has an obsession of her
own.  All her life, Madeleine Ashton has been stealing her boyfriends
from her, and the last straw happens in 1978, when Maddy seduces and
marries Ernest Menville, her fiance (played by Bruce Willis).  This last
one leaves Helen's life in shambles, to the point where she will do
anything for revenge.
     Cut to 1992.  Madeleine is growing old fast, and Ernest is reduced
to a drunken mortician who interns Hollywood corpses.  Maddy's life is
at a dead end--until she attends a party thrown by Helen, and sees that
her rival has mysteriously remained young and beautiful.  She has her
revenge, it seems--and Maddy is willing to sell her soul to be young
again.
     Here's where DEATH BECOMES HER takes off.  Maddy meets an
incarnation of the Devil himself, played with relish (and without much
to wear) by Isabella Rossellini.  She gives Maddy a potion that will let
her live forever--*if* she takes good care of her body.
     And so the stage is set.  The two ladies begin fighting again like
two cats on a fence, with poor Ernest caught in the middle.  I don't
want to spoil the comic moments (of which there are many), so let it
suffice to say that this battle royale is a special effects
extravaganza, where some scenes will make your eyes gape and you'll
wonder "How'd he *do* that?"
     Robert Zemeckis truly has a gift for comedy.  Of the movies he's
directed so far, his masterpiece was 1988's WHO FRAMED ROGER RABBIT."
It's easy to see why: Zemeckis has the heart of a cartoon director.  He
can do slapstick in the style of the great comedians of old (and in the
style of the Warner Bros. cartoons, too), and his sight gags and visual
comedy style is superb.  The special effects and the slapstick are where
the laughs come from in DEATH BECOMES HER: this is a live-action
cartoon.
     And here lies the movie's greatest fault: like a cartoon, there's
nothing underneath the gags and the laughs.  There's nothing *wrong*
with the story, and the plot holds together quite well.  Meryl Streep's
performance is great, as she threatens to go over the top into comic
farce but in fact remains firmly in control; Goldie Hawn easily holds
her own and balances the movie nicely.  Bruce Willis' role is good, if
unexceptional.  But the lessons and the "theme" of the movie (vanity
will be your undoing) are laid out in the first five minutes of the
film, and after that you can effectively shut off your brain and just
laugh at the sight gags.  This is a very funny movie--it's just not very
"deep."
     DEATH BECOMES HER is good summer fare--despite its morbid subject,
it's actually a very light-hearted comedy.  It's better than most of the
other big-budget movies to come out in 1992; there are no real flaws to
spoil the audience's entertainment.  Go see it; you'll get lots of
laughs.
     Just don't bother *thinking* about the movie afterwards.

Title
Review for American Beauty (1999)

The Church of the SubGenius has a motto for breaking away from the chains
of conformity: "Repent!  Quit your job!  Slack off!"  And that's
essentially what AMERICAN BEAUTY is about: waking up and realizing what a
sham modern life is, before it's too late.  But there are powerful forces
at work forces determined to keep us subservient and asleep; if you're not
careful, you'll invoke the wrath of these all-powerful gods and they'll
destroy you.  So it is with films of this sort: when the protagonist (you
can't call him a "hero") wakes up and begins enjoying life to its fullest,
he is soon destroyed by the inability of his companions, co-workers, and
family to allow him the freedom to rebel.  In other words: If you dare to
break away and be yourself, you're screwed.
AMERICAN BEAUTY follows the path tread by other movies of this sort, from
David Lynch's BLUE VELVET to Linklater's SLACKER, or BREAKING AWAY, or
even ROBOCOP.  The setting of a peaceful, perfect-looking suburban town
suggests echoes of Lynch, but rather than following BLUE VELVET's idea
that "it's a strange world" lying beneath the surface of picket fences
and bright colors (the opening scenes of this movie include a white
picket fence and dazzling red roses, reminiscent of Lynch's creation),
this movie dares to suggest that you can become *part* of the weirdness --
and if you do, then you'll realize once again that life can be fun and
exciting.
Kevin Spacey is Lester Burnham, the man who repents, quits his job, and
slacks off.  He describes himself as a pethetic loser, but in fact
everyone in his world is so screwed up by their attempts to be successful
and "normal" that he's the only one who bothers to acknowledge it.  And
when he gets a glimpse of his daughter's best friend (a luscious
17-year-old cheerleader), he reacts in a manner that any grown-up man
would when he spies a girl of that sort.  But he's so beaten down and
numbed by his screwed-up "grown-up" life that the sudden feeling of
emotion takes him by surprise, overwhelming him and causing him to wake up
at last.  For a 42-year-old man to be lusting after a teenage girl is the
epitome of depravity...but Lester isn't really the dirty, sleazy child
molester that some critics of this movie have labelled him.  He's reaching
back to the time when he was 20 years old, free of responsibility,
listening to rock music and smoking pot, and lusting after teenage girls
when he was at the age to do so.  Lester was probably so much of an
outcast that at 20, he didn't have the courage to approach the object of
his fantasy.  And because his soul has been chained to a rock of
conformity and obedieance, he isn't able to wake up and achieve his goals
until now.
But *they* don't like that: how can this man actually expect to rebel
against authority and conformity, and even manage to be HAPPY?!?  Lester
may have been screwed up, but what none of the other characters in his
world want to admit is that they're even worse off than he is.  One of
this movie's strengths is the way that while we're given a lot of biting,
vicious laughs at the expense of Lester's wife, we also see that she's
terrified of the world -- so much so that we pity her, and we can honestly
understand her feelings during the movie's climax, as she drives home to
confront her husband for one last time.
And Lester's daughter -- played by Thora Birch, with a hairstyle and
makeup resembling Christina Ricci -- is so ashamed of her screwed-up
parents (and herself, for being raised in an environment like this) that
she saves money for a breast implant she doesn't really need and listens
to her best friend bragging about her sexual conquests.  So when the son
of her next-door neighbor comes into her life, offering her an alternative
from the asphyxiating "normality" of her everyday surroundings, she jumps
at the chance and bares herself (literally) to him.  In fact, it's the
neighbor's kid -- the one who gives Lester his first joint and encourages
him to rebel against society -- who's happiest in this movie.  (The fact
that his character spent two years in a mental instution probably
contributes to this: the world of AMERICAN BEAUTY is so insane that the
institution was enough of an escape to allow him to come to terms with
himself.)
The characters are what make this such a fascinating and entertaining
movie: they're out of control, every single one -- and yet we have no
problem seeing a little bit of ourselves there, right on the screen.  Am I
as hopeless and pathetic as Lester, scurrying to my job every day and
taking abuse from my boss?  Is my life destined to become as empty and
shapeless as his?  Or is it still possible for me to Repent, Quit my job,
and Slack Off? 
The story has a few awkward moments, mostly during the scenes that shape
the ongoing plot and make it seem a bit too contrived at times --
especially during the scene where Lester's next-door neighbor spies him
"seducing" his son, and later going to his home to confront him.  But the
movie is still off-kilter enough to keep us guessing to the very end...and
while the ultimate resolution of the movie isn't quite as satisfying as it
could be, it still doesn't feel like a cop-out.
But in spite of alll this blathering, I haven't really been able to show
you what a wicked black comedy AMERICAN BEAUTY is.  It's one of the few
Hollywood movies to come out that dares to go for the jugular, shoving a
mirror into our faces and making us laugh at what a mockery our lives are.
If the world of real life wasn't as screwed up as it is, then we might not
need a movie like this.  But, unfortunately, we do.

Title
Review for Schindler's List (1993)

     At some point in a director's life, he may be seized with an urge
to make an Epic that will be remembered, he hopes, as his Magnum Opus.
He pours his heart and soul into his work, producing a movie that
expresses his inner feelings, baring his soul for the world to see.
     For instance, in 1980 Martin Scorsese had sunk into a depression,
and he felt that his life was nearing its end.  So he decided to make
one "last" movie, something that would bring all of his emotions and
feelings to the surface; it would serve as a cleansing, so to speak.
The result was one of the greatest "biopic" dramas ever made: RAGING
BULL, a brutal, shattering portrait of a man whose greatest enemy was
himself.
     Other directors have created their own "epic" films, though not
all have been successful: Bernardo Bertolucci's 1900; Francis Coppola's
APOCALYPSE NOW; Michael Cimino's disastrous HEAVEN'S GATE; even Sergei
Eisenstein's IVAN THE TERRIBLE, Walt Disney's FANTASIA and the
legendary GREED by von Stroheim.  It's as though the artist is seized
by the need to produce something memorable, something that will be
remembered even after it disappears from the theaters.
     Pauline Kael notes that these personal, shrive-my-soul projects
differ from so-called Hollywood "epic sagas," in that they're made with
something else in mind besides raking in bucks at the box office:
     "This form of gigantism is not to be confused with the producer-
initiated or studio-initiated big-budget pictures (CLEOPATRA, DOCTOR
DOLITTLE, THE TOWERING INFERNO [or TERMINATOR 2 or JURASSIC PARK, if I
might add], and so on).  The artist-initiated epic is an obsessive
testing of possibilities, and often it comes out of an overwhelming
desire to express what an artist thinks are the unconscious needs of
the public.  It comes, too, from a conviction, or a hope, that if you
give the popular audiences the greatest you have in you they will
respond.  The moviemaker has an idealistic belief that no matter how
corrupted mass taste is, people still retain the capacity to receive a
vision.  These epics try to vault over the film industry and go
directly to the public."  ("Hail, Folly!" from Kael's "When The Lights
Go Down.")
     Which brings me to SCHINDLER'S LIST, the story of one man and the
Holocaust, from the most "Hollywood" of Hollywood directors: Steven
Spielberg.
     Spielberg, of course, is the man who earned more money for one
Hollywood studio than perhaps any other director.  His name is
synonymous with God in the land of box-office receipts and account
books--so when he announced that he wanted to shoot a drama about the
Holocaust that was over three hours long, and in black-and-white, no
less, then who was in a position to say no?  No one else in Hollywood
has the power and influence to get a studio to spend so much money on a
film that is almost guaranteed to lose money.  In this day and age, how
many moviegoers are willing to watch a black-and-white movie?   Why
risk so much when you could turn in a quick profit filming something
like WAYNE'S WORLD 2 or MRS. DOUBTFIRE?
     But Spielberg has aspired to be something more than a director of
action movies and box-office hits.  He wants to be an auteur filmmaker,
to produce something that can stand up in the roster of cinema greats
like 8 1/2, THE THIRD MAN, THE AFRICAN QUEEN, NASHVILLE--and RAGING
BULL, among others.
     Spielberg has been trying to grow up, to escape the image of the
Disney wanna-be child at heart who can only make light-hearted "family
entertainment" movies.  His previous attempts at making "adult" drama
have met with mixed acceptance at best: THE COLOR PURPLE was a fine
movie, but he merely went through the motions with EMPIRE OF THE SUN
and ALWAYS, and thus he failed.
     The fatal flaw in his movies has been that of character: he has
trouble bringing truly "lifelike" characters to the screen in realistic
settings.  While he's given us larger-than-life heroes like Indiana
Jones, or everyday people in fantastic situations (as in CLOSE
ENCOUNTERS and JAWS), he's used fantasy as a crutch to escape from the
real world.  He says so himself when referring to SCHINDLER'S LIST as
his true awakening.
     But is SCHINDLER'S LIST a true rebirth for Spielberg?
     It's a well-crafted movie, and it has many scenes that will stand
out in your mind for a long time after it ends.  But it only scratches
the surface of its characters, including Oskar Schindler himself, and
it never lets us see them as real people.
     This movie is little more than a World War II melodrama
masquerading as great entertainment.
     Spielberg's attempt to produce a human-centered "epic" falls into
the classic "Hollywood" style of storytelling: it has clear-cut good
guys and bad guys, lots of suspense, a lily-white hero to root for, and
a happy ending--just like every other Spielberg movie.
     And yet, this is still a good movie.  The acting is superb, even
if the actors' roles are limited; the cinematography fresh and
energetic; the use of black-and-white superb; and the editing keeps the
story flowing so that we are never bored.  As entertainment, it's
certainly one of the better films to be released in a year where we've
had some very good movies.
     But as a character portrait of an enigmatic man, the movie fails.
It's based on the story of Oskar Schindler, a Nazi Party member who
bucked the system in the heart of Germany's occupation of Poland, and
who managed managed to save the lives of over a thousand Jewish
citizens of Poland by employing them as laborers in a war-supplies
factory.  Initially, Schindler supplied the army with basics such as
pots and pans, but near the end of the war, out of necessity, he moved
his base of operations to central Europe and ran a munitions factory.
     Over the course of the war, Schindler became very rich.  He didn't
have to pay his workers because they were Jews, and he exploited their
labors for his personal benefit.  But by the end of the war he was a
changed man, and he spent his entire fortune in bribes and "favors" to
Nazi officials to make sure that his operation, and his favored
treatment of the Jews, was never noticed.
     What made Schindler tick?  What caused him to undergo such a
drastic change in his character?  Was he really the heaven-sent angel
portrayed in the movie?
     Of course he wasn't.  Very few people in history turn out to be as
pure of heart as they're portrayed in the movies.  They're far more
complicated than this, and rare is the movie that dares to dig
underneath and let us understand just why a person does what he does.
     The story's basic flaw lies in the screenplay, where the
characters are not fully fleshed out.  Steven Zaillian, the
screenwriter, knows how to write characters as plot devices--but he
can't give them the "feel" of human beings.  He made a similar mistake
in this summer's SEARCHING FOR BOBBY FISCHER (which he directed), in
which every character had a part to play, but they never seemed like
anything more than living plot devices.  For example, Ben Kingsley's
role as the professional chess tutor was a character of pure logic and
no emotion; he existed solely on that level.
     Here he plays the role of Itzhak Stern, Schindler's accountant;
once again, his character seems to be single-mindedly devoted to one
purpose.  He is Schindler's conscience, there to serve as a gopher and
to occasionally remind Schindler that he could get in a lot of trouble
if his true motives are ever discovered.  But that's all we know of
him, and we never feel any emotion for him as a human being--because
here he's not one.
     Schindler himself begins the film as a war profiteer.  Profit is
everything to him, and he bases his cooking-utensil factory on the
cheap labor he gets from employing Jewish workers.  But he sees the
reality of Nazi persecution for himself--and he doesn't even see it up
close, the way we do; rather, he only gets a distant glimpse of the
slaughter in the Krakow ghetto, from horseback.  This, of course, is
irony: he's rich and powerful, and this power has come from the
exploitation of other people who have no rights of their own.
     The symbolic importance of the girl in the red coat is the
"marker" by which we can judge Schindler's transformation into a
selfless angel of mercy--a complete 180-degree turn, which cheapens
and simplifies the actual real-life awakening of Schindler to the
horrors of war.  Before seeing her, he is greedy and heartless;
afterwards, he's an altruistic humanitarian.
     The film takes pains to portray Schindler as a good guy: it
downplays his casual use and abuse of the women working for him, so
that we can easily forgive him of this "petty" fault.  Even after the
Krakow massacre, he continues to amass wealth and to befriend important
Nazi officials--but we know now that it's just a ruse, and that he's
doing it to ensure the survival of his "employees."  The movie would
have us believe that he didn't enjoy wealth and power, because we never
see him basking in the fruits of his labors.
     Therefore, Schindler is a Good Guy, and everything he does is for
the good of his fellow men.
     Still, Liam Neeson plays this role to the hilt.  After turning in
a stellar performance in Woody Allen's HUSBANDS AND WIVES, he has
managed to land some very choice roles in recent Hollywood movies.  His
star is on the rise, and he is being showered with praise for this
role.  He and the other actors turn in good, solid performances,
underplaying their roles and never acting preachy or bombastic.
     This is a plus for Ralph Fiennes, who portrays the evil Nazi
commander Amon Goeth as a true monster.  He casually sits on his seat
overlooking the Plaszow Forced Labor Camp, shooting Jews because he has
nothing better to do.  He's heartless and cruel, and while Fiennes
could have easily slipped into caricature here, he maintains the
character as believable.
     Goeth believes, like a true Nazi, that Jews are sub-creatures and
less than human.  But after he talks with and befriends Oskar
Schindler, he gains a soul and a conscience--temporarily.  Here the
film goes even further to portray Schindler as a pure angel: he
inspires pity in the worst demonic dregs of humankind.  But Geothe is
the Bad Guy, and his fate is inevitable--as we see at the end of the
film, when Schindler is rewarded and he is not.
     We're also given glimpses of of the Jews themselves, though once
again they're portrayed as plot devices, and not as human beings.  The
Jewish citizens of Poland exist in this film as a prize to be won,
either by the Nazis or by Schindler.  The movie takes pains to
emphasize the fact that no one under German occupation knew whether he
would live or die--but because of the conventions of the motion
picture, with Schindler as the Jews' guardian angel, we know that their
safety is assured.  Sadly, this lessens the impact of such scenes as a
card game played between Schindler and Goeth, with the life of the
Jewish servant girl Helen Hirsch hanging in the balance.  We know
exactly what's going to happen; likewise, when Itzhak Stern pleads with
Schindler for him to take an elderly couple (who obviously can't work
in a factory), we know what their eventual fate is.

Title
Review for Dawn of the Dead (1978)
George Romero's NIGHT OF THE LIVING DEAD in 1968 was a true horror
classic, filmed in crisp black-and-white and shot on a low budget.
The film's lack of major distribution resulted in it being sent to
Saturday matinees, where legend has it young children saw the movie
and fled the theaters crying.  The primitive, rough feel of the movie
gave it an edge of realism that works even today, instilling a
chilling, creeping feeling of stark terror unlike any other horror
film made since then.  In 1990 Romero re-made NIGHT OF THE LIVING DEAD
in color and with a much bigger budget, but he wasn't able to
re-capture the intensity and the "realism" that only seems to spring
from the camera and mind of young, maverick directors who enjoy taking
risks and having fun with the camera.
In 1978 Romero made the first sequel to his horror masterpiece: DAWN
OF THE DEAD.  This film has become a classic in its own right, and
deservedly so.  It's a worthy followup and successor to NIGHT OF THE
LIVING DEAD, but it succeeds because it ventures down a slightly
different, more satirical path.  While we are terrified when we watch
NIGHT OF THE LIVING DEAD, the horror of DAWN OF THE DEAD stems from
the way the second movie turns a mirror on us and asks us who is more
frightening: the zombies, or the humans?
The first half hour of DAWN OF THE DEAD actually follows in the
footsteps of NIGHT OF THE LIVING DEAD, ingeniously conjuring up the
same oppressive, relentless atmosphere of terror with its very first
scene.  A TV station is desperately trying to stay on the air, but it
seems more an act of futility than anything else: two "experts" are
shouting at each other over the moral aspect of killing all of the
zombies, while the station manager insists that the station will
continue broadcasting locations of "rescue stations" that people can
go to for shelter from the zombie plague -- even though half of the
locations listed by the station have been abandoned.  The government
has declared that people can no longer live in their homes, and we see
one extended sequence of policemen (or stormtroopers?) bursting into
an apartment complex, rounding up the residents, and herding them
outside.  The inhabitants have been keeping a cache of zombies in the
basement, because they still believe in respecting the dead.
This first half hour of the film continues director/producer Romero's
theme begun in NIGHT OF THE LIVING DEAD, by showing us how people
react when presented with the end of civilization as they know it.  In
one way, it could even be a reflection of H.G. Clouzot's THE WAGES OF
FEAR, which put four "tough" men into a life-and-death situation and
showed how their actions in that situation would surprise everyone,
including themselves.  So it is with DAWN OF THE DEAD: with murderous
zombies overwhelming civilization, and the survival of humanity itself
in doubt, the characters in the film let their true selves come forth.
It's not a pretty sight, as one SWAT patrolman goes berserk and guns
down innocent people; while the film's ostensible "hero," a
square-jawed guy named Peter, realizes he has better chances of
survival by taking off on his own.  (It's one of Romero's more
deliberate ironies that the lead roles in both his first film and this
one are black; what better way to thumb his nose at Hollywood
stereotypes?)
But after about half an hour of scares and chills, the film takes a
sudden detour and explores new territory.  Instead of going for the
inexorable terror of the first film, the story veers into satire...but
the satire works.  In fact, it works well enough that many fans of
DAWN OF THE DEAD consider the first half hour of the movie to be its
weakest part.
Our four heroes are fleeing in a helicopter, looking for fuel and
food, when they come across a huge, abandoned shopping mall.  The mall
is completely intact (amazingly enough), and our heroes realize it's a
perfect place to stay.  It has everything: food, clothes, guns and
ammunition for killing zombies; and so they figure out how to block
the entrances and get rid of all the zombies inside, putting
themselves in a situation that many people have dreamed of.  What
would you do if you had the run of the entire mall, able to take
anything you wanted with no one else there?
The characters actually have to explain to the audience what a
shopping mall is -- this film was made during the days when huge
mega-malls were unusual and scarce, not residing on every street
corner and downtown district in the country.  This may have made the
satire even more subtle back then; since malls and "consumer culture"
have pervaded our society to the point where we now decorate our homes
to resemble malls, it's easier for us to point out the black humor and
realize that Romero is stabbing at us when the characters ask why the
zombies are here, roaming aimlessly throughout the stores.  Peter, the
hero, notes that they seem to be coming there because of instinct:
"this place used to be an important part of their lives."  In fact, if
this film were made today, it might have actually suffered from "been
there done that" syndrome.  Cultural in-jokes that point out our
dependence on (and subsurvience to) malls are a dime a dozen
today...which only shows how much influence the "mall" has had on our
culture.  DAWN OF THE DEAD was fortunate enough to be in the right
place at the right time, and over the time its message has become more
meaningful.
As for the film itself: unlike the original 1968 classic, this movie
is filmed in widescreen (1.85:1) with bright, crisp color.  The
mutilations, decaptitations, exploding heads, gunshots, and
(especially) devouring of human flesh are shown in abundance, in
explicit detail; however, this actually lessens the terror because it
leaves less to the imagination.  The flesh-eating scene of NIGHT OF
THE LIVING DEAD is an unforgettable moment in screen horror because
the black-and-white cinematography actually made it more "dreamlike"
and fired the imaginations of the audience (in fact, the zombies
looked like they were eating fried chicken), but the splatterful
special effects of Savini make up for it by adding a comic-book appeal
(which also helps the satire).  When zombies die, the blood splashes
all over the place; one particularly gruesome exploding head near the
end of the film is especially memorable.  The "director's cut" of the
film (which has about fifteen minutes of additional footage) also
includes more scenes of zombies eating humans alive, ripping out and
devouring the entrails of their still-living victims.  (Yum!)
Still, the movie asks us, are the zombies actually evil?  After all,
they're doing nothing more than roaming the countryside and looking
for food.  As our hero Peter says early in the film, "It wasn't one of
those things that nearly blew me away" -- referring to another
character who nearly shoots him.  Humanity may be physically able to
withstand the onslaught of the living dead, Romero says, but because
we can't even trust each other and be able to live together, it will
be humanity's own selfishness and inability to get along that will be
our undoing.  The point here is emphasized in one of the final TV
broadcasts of the film, as an "expert" asks whether humanity is worth
saving.
Even the final battle of the movie, as an army of looters invades the
mall and smashes things left and right, makes this point.  The
"heroes" shouldn't have stayed in the mall where they were vulnerable;
but they were seduced by the appeal of its "convenience" and they felt
they had to defend it from intruders.  The zombies don't care about
any of this -- they just want their food.  In fact, the zombies are so
ineffectual that the people who die during the final battle wouldn't
have died if they were only fighting the zombies.  They're fighting
each other.
Of course, the "message" of DAWN OF THE DEAD only works if it's a good
movie -- and that's what it is.  It starts out as an effective horror
film, and the horror stays with us throughout, even as the zombies are
locked outside the mall and the heroes don't have anything to do
except get drunk and try on clothes.  Splatter fans have loved the
splatter, and the movie gives us all the gore we expect in a "living
dead" movie, plus some.  The film is more than just a re-make of NIGHT
OF THE LIVING DEAD: it expands upon the original and continues the
"saga" of one of the most memorable horror series of modern times.
