Authors
Toby Donaldson
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Godzilla (1998)
Big, loud, and stupid: that about sum up Godzilla, a summer B-movie
with A+ special effects. The point in seeing this movie is to see
Godzilla destroy New York, eat some helicopters, and evade an army of
heavily armed Keystone Kommandos.
If you expect more than that, then you're probably not going to like
this movie. For starters, the acting and dialog is generally quite
poor. Matthew Broderick is abominable as the scientist who figures out
what makes Godzilla tick.  He looks kind of sleepy throughout, and
except for a little bit of comic relief, has all the personality of a
stick. His romantic interest is a little more charming, but not so
charming as to make the idea of the two of them being squished
mid-kiss under the big green foot of Godzilla any less appealing. Some
of the secondary characters are a little more interesting, but nothing
special.
Whenever Godzilla is on the screen, the movie is quite
entertaining. Unlike the lumbering, irritated, and angry Godzilla of
Japanese monster movies, this Godzilla is more like an inflated
lizard, possessing remarkable stop-and-turn-on-a-dime agility, and the
nimbleness to hop over and through buildings. He is quite speedy, and
it's fun to see him barreling around the streets of New York,
out-pacing the attack helicopters sent to do him in.
While the original Godzilla was the Frankenstein monster of the
nuclear age, there is no attempt to make any moral or symbolic
connections in this story. The modern Godzilla is the product of
French atomic tests, and swims across the world to lay eggs (thanks to
the miracle of asexual reproduction) in New York. The movie suggests
that reptiles often travel great distances to lay their eggs, and so
their is no arguing with the movie-logic that, since he's just an
extra big lizard, Godzilla would swim the extra-far distance to New
York to lay its eggs. Thus, Godzilla's rampage through New York is
really just misunderstood maternalism, and all the destruction is 
what you would expect of any giant lizard frightened and lost in
downtown New York at night. There does not seem to be much reason for
this change in the Godzilla story, other than, perhaps, to steer clear
of more horror-style themes that might lessen its mainstream appeal?
As mentioned, the one twist on the whole Godzilla theme is the
introduction of eggs that hatch into nine-foot tall baby
Godzillas. This is not so much a new idea as a ``borrowing'' of the
velociraptors from Jurassic Park. The movie could probably have cut
the baby Godzillas with little harm to the overall plot (indeed,
probably *any* 20 minute segment of this movie could have been chopped
out with little noticeable effect), and certainly little harm to the
overall entertainment value. There's no doubt that one big Godzilla is
better than 200 small Godzillas, who hardly destroy anything, but
instead just meander around, eat popcorn, and look for fish.
The plotting, as you may have guessed, is none too tight. Not many
parts of this movie hold up under scrutiny, and you are setting
yourself up for a big disappointment if you go see this movie prepared
to think your way through it. Apparently, including advertising, this
movie cost about three-hundred million dollars to make. I wonder how
much they spent on the writing?  In fact, I wonder if they ever
considered getting, say, a writer, to write the script? The screenplay
was penned by the director and the producer (Roland Emmerlich and Dean
Devlin), so hiring a writer might never have crossed their
minds. Whoever talked them out of also doing the special effects
themselves should be congratulated.
Whether or not you like this movies is probably going to depend on
whether or not you think the scenes with Godzilla are enough to make
the movie worthwhile. What nobody wants is for you to go see this
movie, then come back in a huff and write a review complaining about
the bad plot, dialog, and acting --- that would be like going to the
opera and complaining about too much singing. Instead, you should go
to this expecting nothing more than seeing New York pulverized by the
king of the monsters. You might still come out disappointed, but at
least you started out in the right frame of mind.
