Authors
blj@mithrandir.cs.unh
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Drowning by Numbers (1988)
     Three women, all named Cissy (Joan Plowright, Juliet Stevenson,
Joely Richardson), end up drowning their husbands.   The local coroner,
Bernard Hill, covers up the drownings, but wants sexual favors in
return.
     Earlier this year, I saw the film PROSPERO'S BOOKS, also by Peter
Greenaway, and, because I disliked it, I decided I would never see
another of Greenaway's film.  A reader of my review of PROSPERO'S BOOKS
recommended DROWNING BY NUMBERS, so when it came to my local art theater
I decided to see it.  I am glad that I did, DROWNING BY NUMBERS is
everything that PROSPERO'S BOOKS could have been.  After seeing this
film, my opinion of Peter Greenaway has changed, and I will be trying to
see other films of his to see if they are as good as this one.  I highly
recommend that you go see this film.  I can't promise that you will like
it, but if you don't give it a chance you'll never know.  On a scale of
zero to five, I give DROWNING BY NUMBERS a four.   DROWNING BY NUMBERS
is rated R for female nudity, male nudity, adult situations, adult
humor, and explicit language.
     DROWNING BY NUMBERS, even though it is on videocassette, will lose
some of its beauty off the big screen.  I recommend if you are tempted
to rent DROWNING BY NUMBERS instead of seeing it in the theater in order
to save money that you reconsider.   DROWNING BY NUMBERS is different
from most of the films on the market today.  It is not pulled down by
cliches, nor is it out to please everyone.  I feel that it is safe to
say that not everyone will like DROWNING BY NUMBERS.  I recommend that
people who are already fans of Peter Greenaway go to see this film along
with anyone willing to give the film a chance.  I even advise that the
people who disliked PROSPERO'S BOOKS see this film, for it is very
different from PROSPERO'S BOOKS.  Peter Greenaway, as usual, was
obviously not worried about whether some people would be offended by
this film.  There is complete frontal nudity of both males and females,
sex, and black humor related to killing one's husband.  The story line,
itself, is black in nature and sure to offend some people.  I highly
suggest that anyone who is bored with today's cinema or has a taste for
the bizarre venture to see this film -- for Peter Greenaway's film can
certainly not be described as "the same old thing."  The use of nudity
was very different in this film than in PROSPERO'S BOOKS.  In PROSPERO'S
BOOKS it was just there.  In this film it is used in an erotic fashion.
In fact, the entire film has erotic backing to it.
     The plot to DROWNING BY NUMBERS, I feel, is not very important to
the film.  Mostly the beauty lies in the photography and scenery that
was used.  I found the characters in DROWNING BY NUMBERS much more
interesting than in PROSPERO'S BOOKS.  In PROSPERO'S BOOKS the
characters seemed to almost be cardboard.   In DROWNING BY NUMBERS the
characters have more life added to them; they are interesting, and you
get drawn into the film.  Not all the characters in the film are
likable, but each is itself.   None of the characters is held down by
standard Hollywood cliches that harm some films.
     Throughout the film the numbers one to a hundred are placed.   Some
are very obvious and some are intricately woven into the scenery.  The
number one may be the easiest for it is just placed on a tree.  For
others you really have to be observant.  For the few slow spots, one can
count the numbers, but for the most part you will probably either be
enjoying the scenery or the acting.
     The scenery used for the film was quite good.  It seemed to have a
sort of magical presence to it.  It is like the very end of GONE WITH
THE WIND where Scarlet is silhouetted with the tree and the sun in the
background.  It has a charm to it, but is not tacky.  Something should
also be said about the props used in the film.  Some of them were very
imaginative I feel.  The whole look of the film is refreshingly
different.   It is a welcome change in the movie industry, and I hope
that Peter Greenaway continues to make films more like this one, and
less like PROSPERO'S BOOKS.
