Authors
Robert Workman
Number of Reviews
21

Title
Review for Entrapment (1999)
Bob the Happy Bastard's Quickie Review:
Sean Connery is an old thief who steals simply for the love of it;
Catherine Zeta-Jones is the insurance agent who wants to bust him wide
open during the heist of a much-adored Chinese mask.  However, as the
movie unfolds, there's many twists and turns to endure, some of which
come across more as puzzling rather than smart.
Still, the movie's got a bit of eclectic zip, thanks mostly to the
onscreen performances by the classy Connery and the delectably sexy
Zeta-Jones.  Ving Rhames doesn't really do much as a side character,
however- it would've been fun to see more of him in the act.  The story
has holes, but, for the most part, delivers the goods, and the heist
scenes are decent espionage fun.
The movie seems to fall apart in its final few minutes with TOO many
twists for its own good, but credit director Jon Amiel for at least
giving believability for a run for its money and for choosing, for the
most part, two actors just right for the lead roles.

Title
Review for Virus (1999)
The Happy Bastard's Quick Movie Review
Damn that Y2K bug.  It's got a head start in this movie starring Jamie
Lee Curtis and another Baldwin brother (William this time) in a story
regarding a crew of a tugboat that comes across a deserted Russian tech
ship that has a strangeness to it when they kick the power back on.
Little do they know the power within...
Going for the gore and bringing on a few action sequences here and
there, Virus still feels very empty, like a movie going for all flash
and no substance.  We don't know why the crew was really out in the
middle of nowhere, we don't know the origin of what took over the ship
(just that a big pink flashy thing hit the MIR), and, of course, we
don't know why Donald Sutherland is stumbling around drunkenly
throughout.  Here, it's just "hey, let's chase these people around with
some robots".
The acting is below average, even from the likes of Curtis.  You're more
likely to get a kick out of her work in Halloween H20.  Sutherland is
wasted and Baldwin, well, he's acting like a Baldwin, of course.  The
real star here are Stan Winston's robot design, some schnazzy CGI, and
the occasional good gore shot, like picking into someone's brain.  So,
if robots and body parts really turn you on, here's your movie.
Otherwise, it's pretty much a sunken ship of a movie.

Title
Review for Holy Man (1998)
The Happy Bastard's Quick Movie Review
More like Holy Crap.  The film stars Eddie Murphy as a mystical-ish
figure named G on a strange journey of some sort when he comes across
two network execs (Jeff Goldblum and Kelly Preston) with a flat tire on
their hands.  Somehow he ends up in their car and on their channel, a
line-up of infomercial programs featuring the likes of Betty White,
Morgan Fairchild, and a slew of other celebrities and nameless figures.
It's here that he seems to hit his stride, speaking of life instead and
somehow boosting sales.  At this point in the movie, of course, morality
comes into play, particularly on Goldblum, who suddenly feels he can
market the magical G into megabucks to get in good with his boss (Robert
Loggia).
It doesn't take long for the movie to unfold into sappy mush, with
realizations taking place left and right and poor plot points.  Only a
real zippy sequence involving frying Morgan Fairchild's face seems to
have any interest in the movie.  Murphy lends nothing to his character
and poor Goldblum looks as if he'd rather be someplace else.
Some may argue that the movie has a message, but all that came across to
me is that I could probably get more entertainment watching that
informercial with the guy in the question mark coat.  At least he has
something for us to laught at...

Title
Review for Matrix, The (1999)
Bob the Happy Bastard's Quickie Review:
What's worse than Y2K?  How about a fully digital future where NOTHING
is real?  That's what computer programmer Neo (Keanu Reeves) slowly
learns as he enters the dangerous world that is The Matrix, a movie
directed by The Wachowski Brothers (the guys behind the hip thriller
Bound).
Before you groan at the presence of Reeves in the lead role, hold on.
There's actually a story with depth here.  It seems that a group of
hackers is out to stop the system that is The Matrix, led by the bald
but brilliant Laurence Fishburne and assisted by Carrie Ann Moss, who
looks quite cool in leather, I must say.  Neo (Reeves) is pretty much a
key player in this fight, although he really doesn't look it at first.
Could this amateur be "the one" as Fisburne thinks he is?
Credit the Wachowskis for putting together a great story that allows
suspense to build, something that few special effects-laden films seem
to do these days.  There's plenty of effects to go around, of course,
but at least there's a backbone to build them on as well.  Reeves is
surprisingly good in his role as Neo, particularly in a fight scene with
Fishburne that comes across as goofy, yet great.
I wish the villains weren't quite so "generic" (leftover G-Men from
looking for a sweet sci-fi actioner with plenty of stop-motion swooping
camera angles and, of course, a motherlode of a helicopter explosion.
Now the Wachowskis are headed into horror films with their next project.
Bring it on.

Title
Review for Go (1999)
Bob the Happy Bastard's Quickie Review:
I must admit, No Doubt's single "New" is quite catchy.   It was bouncy
and energetic enough to get me to go see this new film from director
Doug Limon, the man who had brought us the humorous Swingers a little
while back.  The result?  A movie that's just as good as that song,
really.
It follows the lives of several individuals over the course of one
weekend.  First we hear about a grocery bagger (Sara Polley) who runs
into a monetary situation problem and ends up selling bogus drugs at a
rave (with bad results, as a drug dealer feels he's been swindled by
her); then comes the story of an English grocery store worker (same
store) who heads to Vegas for the weekend with friends, where sex,
gunplay, and stolen car trouble come into play; then we see the story of
two gay movie actors (played by Scott Wolf and Jay Mohr) who deal with a
cop's strange insurance presentation and hitting a girl (Sara) with
their car; and, finally, we come to another grocery worker (Katie
Holmes) who has a strange fascination with said drug dealer (the one
mentioned earlier).
Really, it's all confusing to keep track of in review format, your best
bet is to just, well, go.  The movie features some very good acting from
all angles, and Limon adds the same humorous energy he had with Swingers
to this particular product.  The dialogue is pretty snappy and the
resolution is pretty well realized, not going for the sappy happy ending
nor the dreaded bad ending.  Think of it as a, well, ending.
The intertwining of stories is a particularly good element to the movie,
as it's never really confusing and tells different sides of the story,
like Sliding Doors kinda did.  However, it's better suited for the
younger generation who want a little spice in their flicks, which
Sliding Doors kinda isn't.

Title
Review for Wild Wild West (1999)
The Happy Bastard's Quick Movie Review
A better name for this movie might've been "Wild Wild Waste".
Warner Bros., in an attempt to get their own Men In Black style of
movie, had managed to lasso in some big names (actor Will Smith and
director Barry Sonnenfeld, the duo behind MIB's success) in order to get
their own Fourth of July blockbuster, a contemporary big-screen update
to the classic western/sci-fi series The Wild Wild West starring Robert
Conrad.  But somehow, they ran into a problem along the way.  They were
so busy trying to fill specific roles that they forgot one in general
that would've made all the difference- a story writer.
Wild Wild West's story and script was compiled by six different people,
rather than just the one who put the brilliant touches on Men In Black,
Ed Solomon.  If Warner Bros. had gotten him, the movie would've possibly
been five times better than what it is.  Heck, ten times.  As is,
however, the story and screenplay is a mess, filled with dead laughs,
enough racist and sex jokes to make even Will cringe as he's performing
them, and a complete lack of chemistry that made the TV show work so
well.
Here's the story: US Army member James West (Will Smith) teams up with
creative genius Artemus Gordon (Kevin Kline) to take on a ruthless
villain by the name of Arliss Loveless (Kenneth Branagh), whose lower
half was blown off during the Civil War, leaving him to roll around in a
steam-controlled wheelchair.  They catch onto a plot of his involving a
superweapon that can basically be considered an 80-foot tarantula
(although it looks bigger than that), hellbent on destroying anything in
its path.
As I said, the way the script unfolds is a complete mess.  But the
acting doesn't help either.  Kevin Kline is miserable as Gordon, failing
to display even a smidgeon of care as he did in the 1985 western
Silverado.  Smith seems to be having a better time as West, although
he's not nearly as charming as he was in MIB.  Branagh goes excessively
over the top as the villain, perhaps to the point where we can't even
stand to look at him or his strange beard.  And Salma Hayek is along for
the ride to search for her missing father, but mostly she exists just
for sexual attention.  Her acting is barely passable, but what a "breath
of fresh ass".
Director Barry Sonnenfeld isn't of great help either.  Even though he
shows some good creativity at some points, his overall urgency for
directing is lost.  It's as if he feels he's directing a TV movie, a big
no-no when you're helming what's supposed to be a big-screen hit.
Last but not least, there are huge gaps of logic that are just plain
unacceptable.  At one point, Smith defies gravity when first boarding
Kline's train.  He jumps on the back, gets launched straight UP in the
air, and somehow manages to land three cars ahead on the train- WHILE
IT'S STILL IN MOTION!  Also, he seems to be strangely comfortable
talking about racism in front of a lynch mob, particularly considering
the fact that his family was killed by the likes of such folks.  Last
but not least, why is he still making kissing faces when he KNOWS he's
not kissing a woman as he's looking through a peephole at the enemy?!
The ONLY saving grace for Wild Wild West come mostly in the form of
special effects.  The huge mechanical spider is a technical marvel, very
authentic looking and considerable to the creativity of the show.
There's also a good sequence involving metal magnet neckbraces and
spinning saw blades, but, again, a logic question comes into play
regarding their polarity.
I would say sit back and have a good time with Wild Wild West, but it
really isn't possible.  If the racist and sex jokes don't bother you,
the performances will.  If the performances don't bother you, the story
will.  If the story doesn't bother you, the racist and sex jokes will.
There's no end to the vicious circle.  Go rent Men In Black instead and
pretend Smith and Tommy Lee Jones are wearing cowboy hats.  You'll have
a better time.
If you DO go, keep an eye out for Robert Conrad in a role as president
Grant.  I bet HE wishes he were somewhere else...

Title
Review for American Pie (1999)
The Happy Bastard's 30-Second Review:
   The summer of raunch continues to spread into theatres with this
latest yuk fest, filled with sick jokes and teen dialogue aplenty.  If
you go expecting Dawson's Creek, you're in for a problem.  If your
expectations are lower (and better, I might add), you will enjoy the
hell out of American Pie.
   The movie casts several unknowns, with the only real recognizable one
being SCTV's own Eugene Levy as a happy-go-lucky dad.  The story
revolves around four high school seniors who have one goal before the
school year gets out- get laid.  That's pretty much it.
   Throughout the movie, little sick comic bits are sprinkled
throughout, including a memorable scene involving an apple pie (I won't
give it away, but you probably know what it is) and an Internet
broadcast gone horribly awry.
   Of course, the movie has some slightly sentimental bits, but they
don't drag the movie's humor content down that bad.  Most of the actors
get their job done, but it's Levy who's a hoot, a father who tries to
talk sex with his son with the help of some curious "visual aids".
   I couldn't stop laughing during this movie, and if you can stand all
the raunch and the sex references, then American Pie is for you.  If
you're one of those "conservative" types, well, I'll bet you're having
fun at home while this, South Park, and Austin Powers II plays in
theatres, now aren't you?

Title
Review for Big Daddy (1999)
The Happy Bastard's 30-Second Review
   Happy Gilmore as a father?  Of course!  That's the latest scenario
presented by Adam Sandler in the new movie Big Daddy, a movie that's
passable but isn't really considered some of Sandler's best work.
   He doesn't actually play Happy Gilmore in the movie, but a variation
of him.  He's Sonny Coufax, a man who's living off a settlement he got
for a cab running over his foot and his one-day-a-week gig as a
tollbooth man (Tollbooth Willie?).  His girlfriend (Kristy Swanson) is
fed up with his lifestyle and demands a change before she leaves him.
Enter a 5-year old kid, who's mysteriously dropped at his doorstep and
intended for his preppy roommate (Jon Stewart), who's off in China on a
business trip.
   From there, Coufax basically acts as the kid's father, teaching him
different things like peeing on the side of a building and tripping up
skateboarders with sticks.  He even manages to use the kid in a sort of
con game to get the attention of a beautiful law office worker (Joey
Lauren Adams), but, somehow, he also garners the attention of Social
Services, who aren't particularly pleased with Coufax's actions, as he
pretends to be his roommate to keep the kid.
   The reason I say it's not really Sandler's best work is because it
gets really sappy towards the end of a movie, showing some odd feelings
that somehow didn't really belong in a Sandler vehicle.  I mean, it fits
the movie's tone and everything, and Sandler handles it well, but it's
just oddly placed, that's all.  Fortunately, it doesn't destroy the
goofy glee path it's been following and it still makes you feel good.
   Sandler does a good job here, as he does in most of his movies.  Rob
Schneider, however, is irritating as his friend, an immigrant delivery
boy who can't read.  Stewart, in his minor time on screen, is great, and
Adams remains a joy to watch.  Look for Steve Buscemi as well as a
homeless bum.  He's a hoot.
   Directed by Dennis Dugan (director of Happy Gilmore), the movie
remains a good couple of hours to pass the time with.  Again, there are
faults, but, hey, everyone needs to get emotional sometimes.  

Title
Review for Corruptor, The (1999)
Bob the Happy Bastard's Quickie Review
Chow Yun Fat continues his American invasion of sorts in the
action/drama flick The Corruptor.  This time, he's part of a squad of
cops in Chinatown that's been put on task to investigate a gang on the
rampage.  All's well until a new office in the squad, Mark Wahlberg,
stops in.
>From there, the story takes different directions, some more favored than
others.  How does one define a dirty cop?  Why is someone giving
Wahlberg some good tips on bad crimes in Chinatown?  And why is the same
Uncle Benny from Lethal Weapon 4 appearing in this film?!  Is he just a
popular Chinese villain or what?
Director James Foley does a credible job for keeping the pace, at least.
Some of the dialogue is kind of outta whack (I wished for closed
captioning in some parts of this movie- WHAT DID THAT GUY SAY?!), but
the action scenes are very well filmed.
Wahlberg holds his own with a performance that's a slight bit under what
he gave in last year's The Big Hit, but who cares?  It's Yun Fat's show,
and this actor truly delivers with some great lines, over the top
attitude and, of course, the ability to provide excellent gunplay.  The
guy's got more done here than he managed in The Replacement Killers, and
I'm sure his third movie will be even better.
The Corruptor's not a bad piece of work when it comes to cop films, and
it features  a terrific car chase scene where innocent people actually
play a part of, some of whom get slaughtered quite brutally.  At last,
no "get out of the way" ridiculousness, it looks hauntingly real.  I
only wish the story weighed in a little more, but, as is, there's plenty
to like here, particularly if you're a fan of Yun Fat's.

Title
Review for Mallrats (1995)
The Happy Bastard's Quick Movie Review
Is there life after Clerks?  Kevin Smith answers that question with this
comedy regarding the misadventures of two mallrats (Jeremy London and
Jason Lee) trying to get back the girls who broke up with them (Claire
Forlani and Shannen Doherty).  Along the way, they encounter plenty of
good and bad characters, like Jay and Silent Bob (Jason Mewes and Smith
himself) and a crusty mall cop named LaFours.  Oh, and Stan Lee's in
here somewhere, too.
A lot of people seem to look at this movie and think it's a wasted
effort when reflected upon against the likes of Clerks, but, hey,
considering it's really Smith's second studio effort, it's a good show.
There's plenty of snappy conversation about, not to mention interesting
characters and situations.  Where else are you going to see Ben Affleck
act as a snotnose tough working at a FASHION STORE?
True, it's not as good as Clerks, but I think Smith was trying for
something different but same with this effort and hit the bullseye.
London and Doherty only deliver average performances, but Lee is a riot
throughout, Forlani is sexy as always, and, of course, Mewes and Smith
score as Jay and Silent Bob.  "Fly, fatass, fly!"  If you've seen Clerks
then you'll fully want to soak in the Mallrats, and if you haven't,
well, something's very wrong with you...

Title
Review for Rush Hour (1998)
Bob the Happy Bastard's Quickie Review:
So what's the problem with 48 Hours clones these days?  They always try
for the same thing that Eddie Murphy and Nick Nolte had.  That was the
problem that plagued these clones, not to mention the actual sequel:
Another 48 Hours, a complete waste of film.  But, at last, someone has a
different take on the matter, and it's director Brett Rainer.
Rush Hour features Jackie Chan in his first U.S. action movie, playing a
Chinese detective who's being flown to the US to investigate the
kidnapping of the Chinese Consulate's daughter.  Of course, the FBI is
upset that he'll be interfering in their investigation, and stick him
with an LAPD office with a big mouth- of course, that's Chris Tucker.
What makes Rush Hour work so damn well is the chemistry between the
energetic Chan and the absolutely hilarious Tucker.  Tucker mouths off
to Chan at every given opportunity ("I'm Michael Jackson, you Tito."),
and Chan delivers a few zingers of his own, as well as some terrific
fight scenes.  The story's pretty much your average fare, but with a
decent twist involving the main villain, a highly clouded figure named
Jun Tao.
At least it's entertaining, and the concept is excellently realized.  A
particular fight scene in a Chinese office, where Chan and Tucker duke
it out with the bad guys, is funny and energetic at the same time.  And
the finale's a real treat as well...Chan delivers yet another fantastic
stunt for the fans with a 10-story drop.
Rush Hour is just the sort of film you'll get a kick out of on any night
of the week.  Just make sure you don't look for anything culturally
different and you'll be fine- Drunken Master II this ain't.

Title
Review for Hudson Hawk (1991)
The Happy Bastard's Quick Movie Review
What could easily be the biggest blemish in Bruce Willis' movie career
(next to The Bonfire of the Vanities and, well, most of his flicks in
general), Hudson Hawk is a loopy little flick that, taken in the wrong
context, is one of the worst movies ever made.  If you rent Hudson Hawk
and expect a serious, dynamo action flick in the sense of Die Hard, you
will be extremely let down.  However, if you watch it with a
happy-go-lucky, could-give-a-damn-less attitude, like I usually do with
movies (they're made for fun anyway), you might actually have a goofy
old time.
Willis plays the Hawk, a slick burglar just getting out of jail after
serving some time for a botched job.  Immediately following his release,
he and his partner Tommy Two Tone (Danny Aiello) land back in trouble
with a mob led by the Mario brothers (Nintendo players may have figured
that one out already).  But the theft has unfolded a bigger conspiracy
involving a power-hungry couple and several henchmen named after candy
bars- not to mention a former CIA man leading them (played hilariously
by James Coburn).  It turns out a greater power awaits if Hawk can steal
the right parts- the ability to create gold ala an old machine created
by Leonardo Da Vinci.
Somewhere in this story, there's also a love interest for Hawk- a nun
(played by Andie McDowell) who actually works for a sort of Vatican
secret service (please don't ask).  This leads up to a rather romantic
request by Hawk later in the movie: "Will you play Nintendo with me?"
(Yes, I'm kidding).
The movie is by no means a classic, as the story is so botched and
filled with in-jokes that it couldn't even be considered seriously for a
second.  But it almost plays out like a Zucker-Abrahams-Zucker film,
with plenty of intended (and somewhat unintended) laughs galore.  Willis
is pretty good as the smarmy Hawk, even if he is glorifying just a tad.
Aiello and McDowell turn in decent performances, and Sandra Bernhard is
a hoot as the power-hungry wife, complete with shifting attitude and
face gesturing.
And some of the action is pretty likable as well.  Take, for instance,
the scene in the hotel with the botched firing of a bomb launcher.  Or,
perhaps, Hawk's battle with a butler who carefully unsheathes knives
from his sleeves like a pro.  Like I said, though, take it pretty much
with a grain of salt or you'll be sorry.
Again, not classic material, and not up to everybody's taste in terms
of, well, everything, but Hudson Hawk is a lot of fun if you simply
allow it to be.  If it's real gusto you're looking for, turn to Die
Hard.  If it's all-out goofiness you want, Hudson Hawk will suit you for
a one-evening rental.

Title
Review for Kingpin (1996)
The Happy Bastard's Quick Movie Review
The concept of enjoying a stupid comedy is best realized as keeping it
stupid, really.  Shift gears even once and the audience can be thrown
miserably out of control.  Sadly, that is the case with Kingpin, a film
directed by the Farrelly Brothers, the duo that brought us There's
Something About Mary and Dumb and Dumber.  Since the duo directed and
didn't write the script, I can assume that's part of the problem.
The story seems good enough: a pro bowler in the 1970's by the name of
Roy Munson (Woody Harrelson) is sitting on top of the world.  His
popularity has gone through the roof and he's getting his career off the
ground.  Then, however, he runs into Ed McCracken (Bill Murray), a rival
bowler with hardly any real consideration for, well, anything.  These
two form an ill-timed relationship that involves risky betting, and,
before Roy sees it coming, Ed's abandoned him and he's about to lose his
hand in a bowling ball machine.
Forward seventeen years later, where Roy has become quite the loser,
complete with mechanical hand, torn-up car, and, of course, the
occasional knocking up of the ugly-ass landlord to avoid paying rent for
a while.  However, he finds a glimmer of a hope upon a visit to a local
bowling alley, where he runs into an Amish kid named Ishmael (Randy
Quaid), who has quite the bowling arm.  With the kid's help, he figures
he can be known again, particularly at the biggest bowling tournament
rapidly approaching in Reno, Nevada.
Of course, the Amish kid needs some coaxing, particularly when you
consider, well, he's Amish.  This leads to some of the best comic scenes
in the film, such as Roy's process of removing horseshoes or milking the
cow.  Finally, the duo get on the road and, along the way, pick up an
additional helper- a beautiful hustler (played by the gorgeous Vanessa
Angel).
The main problem I had with Kingpin wasn't the fact it wasn't funny.  In
fact, it does have some rather hilarious scenes in it, such as the
aformentioned above and Roy's explanation of not having children
(something involving a cheese grater?).  But that's just it- scenes.
There's a couple of really serious scenes that throw off the entire
momentum of the movie, like the abuse Angel takes from her hustler
ex-boyfriend.  I mean, was this really necessary?  Couldn't have this
been handled just a bit wackier?  I mean, this is a comedy, why throw
ethics in?  Particularly in a Farrelly Brothers vehicle, where hair gel
can be easily mistaken?
That really ruined it, however, and that's too bad.  The acting is top
notch, especially from Angel and Murray, and the really funny scenes are
worth noting.  Still, if you're going to think dumb, think dumb all the
way through, OK?  At least the Farrelly Brothers got back on track with
Mary or I'd still be a little bit irked.

Title
Review for Tarzan (1999)
The Happy Bastard's Quick Movie Review
For a minute there, I thought I was going to be groaning over the
release of Disney's latest, another adaptation of a legend from the
past.  (Remember the pathetic Pocahontas?  Yikes!)  But guess what-
Disney, a company that's been on a roll lately with animated films,
strikes again with another wonderful tale that pleases the eyes as well
as the inner kid in you.
The story is pretty basic- Tarzan is left orphaned and a female gorilla
who's lost her young adopts him into her group.  As he matures into a
much older man, Tarzan still wonders just why he's so much different
from the clan, and then arrives a hunter, a professor, and the
professor's lovely daughter, Jane- who meets Tarzan rather quickly after
getting in trouble with a group of feisty babboons.  From there, Tarzan
faces tough choices- should he stay with the ones that he grew up with
or go join his own kind in England?
The voicework here is pretty top-level.  Tony Goldwyn is very convincing
as the Ape Man; Minnie Driver adds a delectable touch to the
already-beautiful Jane; Nigel Hawthorne makes for a pretty nasty hunter
voice; Rosie O' Donnell keeps the laughs rolling as Tarzan's best ape
friend Terk; and Wayne "Newman" Knight has his moments as a panicky
elephant.
The movie is superb throughout, mixing a great script with incredible
computer-assisted visuals.  When Tarzan tree-surfs (a twist that was
added on top of the same ol' vine swinging- and a great one, I might
add), the camera twists and turns, allowing the trees all around to come
to life vividly.  I couldn't believe my eyes- Disney has come a long way
since starting in a ballroom for Beauty and the Beast.
And the music's not half bad, either.  Fortunately, there's no
ridiculous singing characters here, just a great set of songs by Phil
Collins that perfectly fit the mood.
There's some great action sequences here as well, including a
wonderfully done chase between Tarzan, Jane, and the aforementioned
babboons.  But, of course, it's not all action- there's a message here
as well that has to do with family.
This is easily one of Disney's best animated films of the decade and
it's one I can't wait to put in my home library...that is, if my VCR
still works in the year 2000.

Title
Review for Odd Couple II, The (1998)
Bob the Happy Bastard's Quickie Review:
Grumpy Old Men, it ain't.  Hell, My Fellow Americans, it ain't.
Walter Matthau and Jack Lemmon team up again for an even more worn out
vehicle than any of their films over the past few years.  Odd Couple II
feels terribly generic, where in the first movie, made thirty one years
ago, feels like a wonderful tale.  That's like repackaging Campbell's
Soup in a generic food can, really.
How writer Neil Simon could've made such a horrible mistake in screen
writing is beyond me.  Throughout the movie, I really didn't laugh once.
Honestly.  I mean, there were dumb situations, yeah, like the cropduster
who let these old geezers have it without any notice, but they just
really didn't seem funny to me.  And that car rolling off the cliff?
The only way I would've seen humor in that is if they were still in it.
And the ending gets all super-mushy, too.  In the final twenty minutes
or so, Lemmon meets a girl he thinks is the one, then loses her; Matthau
talks to his son (a wasted Jonathan Silverman) about his amrriage to
Lemmon's daughter; and, of course, Lemmon and Matthau have another
roomie situation on their hands.  Ooh, I really gave a lot away there,
I'm sure.  Consider it a hospitable gester, you won't waste your time
renting this muck.

Title
Review for Notting Hill (1999)
The Happy Bastard's 30-Second Review
   A cute romantic comedy from the writer of the hit comedy Four
Weddings and a Funeral, Notting Hill stars Julia Roberts as Anna Scott,
a very popular actress with a $15 million asking price for movies.  One
day she wanders into a travel book store owned by a simple London
resident (played by Hugh Grant), and sparks somehow begin to fly.
   Sure, there are points of turmoil, such as putting up with Grant's
slightly disgusting (but very hilarious) roommate Spike, Anna's pesky
ex-boyfriend (Alec Baldwin in a humorous cameo), and, on top of all
that, those damn press.  It's a fresh sort of complexity to see in a
romantic comedy, very different from, say, a stubborn father or "not the
right time" like as seen in usual flicks.
   Roberts is terrific as the astonishingly beautiful actress, and Grant
is surprisingly good as the straightforward guy still trying to get a
hold of what has actually happened with this girl.
   In short, a sweet romantic comedy that has a lot of good laughs,
particularly provided by Spike.  One tee-shirt really says it all about
him.  In an attempt to turn on a woman, he shows the front of the shirt,
which says: "You are the most beautiful woman in the world."  On the
back?  "Fancy a f**k?"

Title
Review for Mummy, The (1999)
Bob the Happy Bastard's Quickie Review:
Brendan Fraser's stuck in the past again, but at least this time he has
something better to do than to quote sitcom lines and try to woo Alicia
Silverstone...
Fraser is the lead star of The Mummy, the second directorial effort from
action director Stephen Sommers (who also brought us the decent thrill
ride that was Deep Rising).  It's a rough adaptation of the 1932 film,
and I say rough because it focuses more on special effects than on some
guy in bandages, like Boris Karloff was engulfed in.
But who cares, the movie has a sort of swashbuckling quality to it you
can't get from, oh, say, Godzilla or Armageddon.  Fraser plays a soldier
who gets a premonition during a battle with soldiers in an Egyptian
ground.  Basically, it's a little sign from the mummy buried underneath-
a priest named Ihmoetep who was buried alive for taking part of
murdering the King and making out with his mistress.  His plan- wake
back up and wake her up also, making him invincible.
Of course, Fraser returns to the site years later with a librarian
(Rachel Weisz) and her brother (John Hanna), along with a former buddy
of his (Deep Rising's Kevin J. O'Connor) and some "Americans"...and
guess what?  Yup, Ihmoetep (Arnold Vosloo) awakens and wreaks havoc.
Fire flies from the sky, flesh-eating beetles crawl about, and, well,
Ihmoetep's plan begins to unfold.
OK, so it's not really all that new a story, but the way Sommers tells
it is entertaining enough.  The special effects from Industrial Light
and Magic are top notch, and the acting from Fraser and Weisz isn't half
bad either.  The action is pretty intense (favorite scene: the
sandstorm) and there are a few shocking scenes just to jolt you
horror-loving folks as well.
No, it's no Phantom Menace beater, but if you're looking for a solid
warm-up to the summer movie season, you won't find a better film under
wraps than The Mummy.  If this doesn't give Fraser forgiveness from
Blast From the Past and Encino Man, then nothing will.

Title
Review for Analyze This (1999)
The Happy Bastard's Quick Movie Review
How does one do a comedy focused on the mob?  Well, a few years ago,
there was a sly little comedy called The Freshman, which had Marlon
Brando doing a romp of a send-up of his famous Don Corleone character
and, recently, the utterly stupid (in a bad way) movie Mafia! failed to
really get the joke.  This time around, however, Warner Bros. may have
gotten it right with Analyze This, a movie that hits its targets more
than it misses...and for plenty of reasons.
The story goes like this.  A mobster (Robert DeNiro) finds himself
receiving several panic attacks as of late, fueled by the stress of an
upcoming mobster meeting and a near-death following a drive-by shooting.
It's these attacks that prompt him to hire a psychiatrist (Billy
Crystal) who's mostly reluctant to take the mobster's case for two
reasons.  First, of course, he's a mobster, but secondly, he's trying to
get married and enjoy a quiet honeymoon with his wife (Lisa Kudrow) and
kid.  And, of course, he can't rest worth for a moment because the
mobster's goons are always needing the shrink for something, be it a
quick consultation or dream analyzation.
Fortunately, the movie is played out for plenty of laughs.  Director
Harold Ramis (who also helmed the comedy Multiplicity, which wasn't half
bad) keeps the tone peppy and light, even if it's sometimes sprinkled by
slight dramatic moments (shootings can't always be taken for laughs, you
know).  DeNiro does some of his finest comic work since The King of
Comedy, giving off a somewhat similar performance to his role in
Goodfellas, but with a bit of a lighter heart.  (A scene where he tries
to display his anger over the phone and fails miserably is hilarious.)
Crystal plays an excellent straight man to DeNiro's character, uplifting
him from such bombs as Father's Day and My Giant.  Kudrow is also a hoot
as Crystal's wife-to-be, who's on the verge of a breakdown thanks to
DeNiro's presence.
Is the movie perfect?  Not really, thanks to a simplistic ending and
some slightly wasted moments with a character portrayed by Chazz
Palminteri (he's a comic actor, too, come on, give him some more!), but
it is an enjoyable romp that lets DeNiro do something different but same
for a change, taking his dramatic act to a new field of comedy.  Kudos
to Crystal and Kudrow for not just making it his show, either.
Line of the movie: Crystal: "When you said you needed family therapy,
this is NOT the family I had in mind!"

Title
Review for Bulworth (1998)
Bob the Happy Bastard's Quickie Review
An honest politician?  Could it be?  That's the case with Bulworth, the
latest film from actor/director Warren Beatty, who does a complete
flipside of the ego he created in the flashy comic book caper Dick
Tracy.  This time around, he's a politician who's become so depressed
with his image and life, he chooses to hire a hitman to kill him to get
insurance money to his daughter.  Then, by a stroke of genius, he
chooses to be absolutely honest.  After all, what's the worse thing the
public can do- kill him?
The movie unfolds over a final weekend of desperate campaigning, with
Bulworth making several stops with his campaign advisor (a hilarious
Oliver Platt) and a particular female (Halle Berry) who has caught his
eye.  Soon, his honesty, as abruptious as it is with particular power
players, becomes a hot item, and Bulworth scrambles to cancel the
assassination he so dearly ordered for himself.
It's hard to label Bulworth as a straight comedy.  It's absolutely
hilarious in some parts, but it's also a fascinating political piece of
sorts, with a little bit of drama thrown in.  I guess you could
officially call it a political dramedy, if such a thing exists.
Beatty is great as the beguiled Senator, presenting some surprisingly
good antics that involve "rhyming" (rapping, but on his terms) and
mixmastering sexual references on the DJ table.  He also presents a very
believable role of a man who's been taken to the breaking point with the
fake world he's created around him, and it's like he's picked up a
hammer and begun shattering at its flacid shell.
Platt, again, is very funny as the advisor who just plain loses it as he
can't figure out just what his Senator is doing.  Halle Berry also
supplies ample work as a girl from South Central who's smarter than she
looks.
Beatty directs with a good amount of energy, matching the efforts
presented in an earlier political comedy, Bob Roberts.  It's not a
relaxed pace, but one that you can certainly feel comfortable with.
Some parts of the movie did sag a bit slightly, but, fortunately, the
whole is an important piece that talks about how much honesty has been
lost in politics while, at the same time, giving you something to laugh
and think about at the same time.  Will it change the world?  No.  Is it
one of Beatty's finest works to date?  Yep.  It's just a riot to see him
in a get-up that's reminiscent of one of the Fat Albert kids...

Title
Review for Austin Powers: The Spy Who Shagged Me (1999)
The Happy Bastard's Quick Movie Review
"I'm dead sexy!" yells an enormously large Scottish man, hellbent on
catching Dr. Evil's notoriously evil (and midget-like) twin Mini-Me for
a quick snack.  "Get in my belly!!" he bellows, and Mini-Me quickly
scampers back to Dr. Evil, who's hesitant on letting the guy (Fat
Bastard is his name) use his crapper.
It's moments like this absolutely ridiculous one that make Austin
Powers: The Spy Who Shagged Me just as much a fun romp as the original.
Mike Myers shows he hasn't lost any creativity, and, through lots of
comic timing, comes up a winner with a hilarious, if slightly
overwrought, sequel.
Basically, the story begins roughly where the first one left off.  The
honeymoon ends quickly for Austin and his new bride Vanessa (Elizabeth
Hurley in a funny cameo), and soon Austin is thwarted by the efforts of
his nemesis Dr. Evil, who's making it personal- this time, he's after
Austin's "life force", his mojo.
That leads Austin to travel back to 1969 to try and retrieve his mojo,
before Dr. Evil gets any bright ideas and uses it himself.  (Of course,
a scene where he gets a taste of the mojo is funny as hell.)  There,
Austin teams up with Felicity Shagwell (a very sexy Heather Graham),
who's just as horny as he is...er, was.  Along the way, we're introduced
to many characters, including the aforementioned Fat Bastard and
Mini-Me, as well as a younger Number Two (Rob Lowe), the ill-fated
Mustafa (Will Ferrell), and Dr. Evil's sarcastic son Scott (Seth Green).
Sure, the movie has some slight dull spots, and I think the gags
involving product placement were a slight bit overrun (Fat Bastard's
take on the Chili's song was pretty funny, though), but a lot of the
movie has inspiration, something a sequel usually lacks.  There's some
great new gags here, a gaggle of cool cameos (from Tim Robbins to Woody
Harrelson to...you guessed it...Jerry Springer), and, of course, more
"evil" than you can shake a stick at.  It's all in fun, and the overall
product is very shagadelic.
The Happy Bastard (no relation to Fat)

Title
Review for South Park: Bigger, Longer and Uncut (1999)
The Happy Bastard's Quick Movie Review
Any movie that has a musical number that goes "Shut your f***ing face,
uncle f***er" can't be all bad, right?
Unlike most TV-show-to-movie translations, South Park: Bigger Longer &
Uncut shows an incredible urgency as it arrives on the big screen,
offering the same old visuals and the same old setting, but introducing
energetic dialogue (complete with profanity) and musical numbers that
really stand out from the usual disgusting comedy scene.  Trey Parker
and Matt Stone are commended for not standing down to the viciousness of
the MPAA.
The story's rather ironic, considering it's likely to happen in real
life: the South Park gang, consisting of jewish Kyle, barfing Stan, big
fat Eric Cartman, and the ever-dying Kenny, sneak into an R-rated movie
called "Asses of Fire", starring their favorite Canadian duo, Terence
and Phillip.  Upon viewing of the movie, they pick up several pieces of
profanity that they begin spewing everywhere, particularly at their
school, where trouble begins to brew.  That's when Kyle's overdefensive
mother begins a campaign called Mothers Against Canada, and it soon
brews into a war between the United States and Canada, with Terence and
Phillip held as prisoners of war, scheduled to be executed following a
big USO show with Big Gay Al.  On top of all this, if they do die, Satan
and his new lover, the impeccable Saddam Hussein (whose real head is
actually used on a figure in the movie) will take over the world.  Still
with me?
As I stated, the animation is pretty similar to what was seen on the
show.  At some points, there is some computer animation assistance, but
not to the point that you're forgetting you're watching cardboard
cutouts.  Still, everything appears as it would in the world of South
Park, and I really wouldn't have it any other way.
The script and musical numbers, however, are the real surprise here.
Trey Parker and Matt Stone, the creators of South Park, simply could've
filled the movie with obscenities and it would've sold, but they've gone
the extra mile constructing great jokes and great little music bits like
the aforementioned "Uncle F***er" and an extended, choir-backed "Kyle's
Mom Is a Big Fat Bitch".  I even picked up the soundtrack just for
kicks.  There's some great sick jokes in here, too, not to mention a
clever little nod to The Phantom Menace and Dragon Ball Z.
The voicework is also top notch.  Although most of the voices are
provided by Parker and Stone, celebrities like George Clooney (who's
more than just a gay dog in the role of a doctor), Minnie Driver (who's
humorous in her bit as Brooke Shields- yes, Brooke Shields), and Eric
Idle (as a scientist who helps install a V-chip in Eric Cartman's head
to stop his incessant cursing- he's hilarious) add icing to the cake.
Also, a nod of the hat to Marc Shaiman for helping organize the great
musical numbers.  However, did we really need Satan doing a dramatic
number?  The irony is kinda funny, but the number was flat.
There's plenty of sick, disgusting laughs throughout the movie, as it's
smarter than your average curse-fest.  Sure, it's not for kids (make
sure they go see Tarzan instead- and STAY there), but adults will have a
riot of a time if they can tolerate the language.  I know I could, but,
then again, I'm a South Park fan.  And I'm not "fat ass".
