Authors
Scott Hamilton & Chris Holland
Number of Reviews
6

Title
Review for Hitler's Daughter (1990) (TV)
For the html version of this review with screen captures, please point
your browser to http://members.aol.com/stomptokyo
Hitler's Daughter is a surprisingly violent TV movie that aired in 1990.
We saw this in the local TV listing recently and just had to see it. What
you need to understand is that six months ago we happened to buy a bad
little pot-boiler by the same name at a used book sale. The cover declares
"Hitler's Daughter... Wants to occupy the White House." How could we
resist? And lo and behold, the movie, which was on at 2 in the morning,
sandwiched between an endless variety of sex talk line commercials, is in
fact based on the book! We were in cannabalistic pop culture heaven!
We are introduced to the main character, Ted Scott (Patrick Cassidy), and
he spends the rest of the movie wondering why he doesn't have a last name.
Just kidding. Ted is a White House press aide working for a lame duck
president during election season. The incumbent Vice President, Elliot
Benedict, is running for his boss' job. Virgil Rutledge is running for the
other party.
One day, Ted gets a call from an old professor of his named Bauman (Donald
Davis). The professor wants to meet with Ted because he has some very
important information to give him, but Ted blows him off. This is why Ted
is surprised when the Bauman somehow gets into the secured parking garage
at Ted's place of business just as Ted is leaving work. Bauman has a
package he wants to give Ted, but before he can, both Ted and Bauman are
attacked by men posing as security guards. Bauman is killed, Ted is
knocked out, and one of the guards shoots himself in the shoulder so Ted
will be framed as a killer. Then, taking a cue from every James Bond
villain ever, they leave Ted in a car rigged to explode along with
Bauman's bullet-ridden file, and they don't check back to make sure Ted is
actually dead or the file destroyed when the car explodes.
The car doesn't explode the way it should (the conspiracy has a lot of
trouble with that) and Ted is soon on the run with the file. It's the
oldest of suspense plots: the good guy has a file (or more recently,
computer disk) and the bad guys will do anything to get it back. All of
these plots take place in an alternate dimension, where copy machines do
not exist and the bad guys believe the good guys when they say they
haven't made a copy of the file... because it's actually true! Whether
it's the 39 Steps or The X-Files, we can hardly go to the movie theaters
or turn on the TV without seeing some poor schmuck (or beautiful woman)
running from faceless minions trying to get that darn file back.
Now what should raise this silly plot above all of the other versions of
this story we've seen is the tabloid nature of the file: That Hitler's
daugter is alive... And she wants to occupy the White House! All right,
now we're talking! That Hitler even had a daughter is only a remote
historical possibility, but it's fun to think about, in a Hard Copy/Jerry
Springer kind of way.
Which brings us to the central question... Who is Hitler's daughter? Well,
we don't know. The movie is structured in such a way that we have three
suspects, and we don't know which one is the titular character. All three
characters (a reporter, the VPs wife, and a Senator) seem to be power
hungry, and all three seem to be willing to claw (or sleep) their way to
the top, but because we aren't supposed to know who is really Hitler's
daughter until the end of the movie, none of the women ever actually do
anything particularly evil! It's not so much "Hitler's daughter wants to
occupy the White House" as "Hitler's daughter wants to be on Melrose
Place."
So, what are we left with? Not a whole lot. The story doesn't unfold very
smoothly, and there is nothing in this plot that we haven't seen before in
any number of other conspiracy movies. Besides, why would Hitler's
daughter go into politics? These days, the easiest way to spread evil
throughout the world is to write bad TV movies.
This review copyright 1998 by Chris Holland and Scott Hamilton of Stomp
Tokyo Video Reviews. http://members.aol.com/stomptokyo

Title
Review for Halloween 4: The Return of Michael Myers (1988)
 Halloween 4: The Return of Michael Myers
Reviewed by Chris Holland & Scott Hamilton
By the time most movie franchises have made it to part four, the life has
been sucked out of the concept and all that's left is to rehash the same
old scenes. Most screenwriters and directors making these sequels feel
little motivation to further the overall storyline or to break new ground
for old characters. For this reason, fans of the original film tend to look
down on all sequels and reject them as "not as good as the first one" once
the end credits roll. Halloween 4 has seen its share of criticism at the
hands of horror fans, but we feel that it deserves some credit for both
maintaining the feel of the original film and for covering new territory
with both new and old characters.
Because Halloween 3 did not take place within the Michael Myers storyline,
the producers of Halloween 4 gave it a subtitle that leaves no room for
misinterpretation: the inhuman killer with William Shatner's rubbery visage
will indeed return to Haddonfield, The Small Town That Just Doesn't Learn.
His favorite victim, however, is long gone.
Michael's sister Laurie Strode, played by Jamie Lee Curtis in the first two
films, is nowhere to be found in part four. Instead, her daughter, Jamie
Lloyd (so named in an obvious homage to Curtis), is still residing in
Haddonfield after the death of her parents. (Awww man, you mean Laurie
lived through all of that crap with Michael Myers only to die in a car
accident or something?) Why anyone related to a psycho killer with a
penchant for killing his own family would remain in the same town is beyond
us, but there it is. Adopted by the Carruthers family, Jamie lives an
insecure life, taunted by her classmates ("Your uncle's the boogeyman!")
and unsure of her relationship with her foster sister, Rachel. Rachel, for
her part, loves Jamie, but is a teenager and is subject to the normal
behavior problems incurred by being a teenager in a horror film.
-- "We're talking about evil on two legs." --
Meanwhile, back on the funny farm, Myers has escapedonce again, this time
by drilling his thumb into theskull of an ambulance attendant and slipping
away in the resulting crash. Doctor Loomis, to the dismay of the asylum's
director, departs in pursuit of the killer, because that's what he does.
Loomis (the tireless Donald Pleasence) is looking pretty haggard ten years
later, and his last run-in with Michael didn't help any. (Loomis sacrificed
himself in order to kill Michael by blowing up a hospital operating room.)
Myers, of course, is headed back to Haddonfield, to look up his niece and
cut her throat. (Avon calling!)
Up to this point, the pacing and character development are fairly good.
Loomis has a roadside run-in with Myers at a truck stop before making it to
Haddonfield, the inevitable sex scene is set up, and the police are alerted
just as Michael begins his killing spree. To their credit, the sherriff
takes Loomis at his word and sends out an alert immediately. "There aren't
many people in Haddonfield who can forget your name, Doctor," says Sherriff
Meeker. "Especially the police."
-- "This is startin' to spook me, Doc." --
Unfortunately, the movie fizzles soon thereafter. After a brief chase by
Michael, Rachel and Jamie hole up in the sherriff's house, which is a
sensible thing to do, but not very exciting. There's a pointless romance
subplot in which Rachel argues with the sherriff's daughter over a
pointless male character (who, as we all can predict, is destined to die
before the film ends anyway), and the sherriff leaves the house to reign in
a posse that has started taking pot shots at the local populace in the name
of hunting down Myers. Just when you're thinking to yourself, "Where the
hell is Michael Myers?", he arrives at the house and the killing begins
again.
To be fair, Halloween 4 has some genuine scares. One nice touch set up
early in the film is Jamie's choice of Halloween costume -- it's a clown
costume similar to the one Michael wears at the beginning of the first
film. Also, there's a bewildering and frightening scene in which multiple
Michaels appear, surrounding Loomis and the sherriff. The cinematography is
clean and the production values are high. Nice little details like these
make Halloween 4 more than the average underbudgeted slasher flick.
The best acting, of course, comes from Pleasence and, surprisingly,
Danielle Harris as Jamie. This little girl can scream pretty well. The
expected goofy teenager peformances are given by Ellie Cornell as Rachel
and the other adolescent members of the cast, although Cornell is clearly
the best of the bunch.
 -- "You can't kill damnation, mister. It don't die like a man does." --
Undoubtedly, the most important thing about Halloween 4 is its ending,
which is probably the most creative and suprising ending ever filmed for
the fourth film in a series. It's a development at which you could probably
guess, but it's still darn creepy to see it on screen, especially with the
reactions of Doctor Loomis.
While not the equal of the first Halloween, The Return of Michael Myers
justifies its existence as a continuation of the Myers story. It's not at
all innovative in terms of action, but it does further the plot and
provides some satisfaction to those of us who are continually asking: "What
happens next?"
For the html version of this review, including screen captures, please
visit Stomp Tokyo Video Reviews (URL below).

Title
Review for Beauty and the Beast: The Enchanted Christmas (1997) (V)
Beauty & the Beast: The Enchanted Christmas
Reviewed by Scott Hamilton & Chris Holland
Stomp Tokyo Video Reviews (http://members.aol.com/stomptokyo/)
Our rating: Three lava lamps (out of five).
By now, we've all gotten used to the Disney Plan for Animation: Release an
animated movie with as many possible elements in common with previously
successful films, and if it takes off, release sequels to video. With
really successful movies, like Aladdin, those sequels may even spawn a
television cartoon series.
Unfortunately, the direct-to-video sequels thus far have been
disappointing. The Return of Jafar and Aladdin and the King of Thieves,
while commercially successful, were rather pale knockoffs of the original,
in story, song, and animation. By the time King of Thieves came out, we
were ready to give up on Disney's OAV (original animated video) efforts for
good.
This winter, however, Disney has released Beauty and the Beast: The
Enchanted Christmas. While it's still not in the same league as the
original film, it is a much better effort than either of the two Aladdin
videos.
When we heard about this sequel to Beauty and the Beast, we were concerned
that any film taking place after the original would not feature the Beast,
who was a large part of the appeal of the first movie. Fortunately, this
movie takes place during the winter montage of the original film; it is
presented as an "untold chapter." Thus all of the original characters are
present, and with their original voices (including Jerry Orbach, Angela
Lansbury, & David Ogden-Stiers). Also present are several new characters,
with equally impressive voice actors. And let us not forget the inimitable
Frank Welker, man of a thousand voices, most of them attributed to animals.
As Christmas approaches during Belle's first few months in the Beast's
castle, the enchanted servants inform her that the Beast has forbidden the
celebration of Christmas in the castle. It was on Christmas Day that the
self-serving prince turned away the enchantress in disguise and was placed
under a spell, transorming him into the Beast. Not wanting to celebrate the
day of his own downfall, he calls a halt to Christmas.
Belle, of course, plans a Christmas celebration without him, enlisting the
help of the various servants-turned-household-objects. This leads to the
introduction of Angelique (Bernadette Peters), the castle's former
decorator, now transformed into an Angel tree-topper. Excited at the
prospect of celebrating Christmas once again, an initially-reluctant
Angelique and the other servants begin to decorate the castle and make
preparations. 
Unfortunately, some of the castle's residents are conspiring to ruin
Belle's Christmas. These residents are Maestro Forte and Fife, a pipe organ
and piccolo who don't quite fit in with the rest of castle life. Maestro
Forte (voiced by Tim Curry) was once the court composer with a penchant for
gloomy compositions. Fife (Paul Reubens) is Forte's crony, doing Forte's
dirty work at the promise of a solo written expressly for the piccolo.
Because the Beast's depression has turned him on to Forte's dark music,
Forte feels the need to defend his newfound territory -- even if it means
killing Belle. In the end, of course, there will be a happy ending, because
this is not only a Disney film, it's a Disney film about Christmas.
As we mentioned before, the first thing to suffer in previous Disney OAV
sequels was the animation. Characters became distorted, the frame rate
dropped tremendously, and the backgrounds were just plain shoddy.
Fortunately, Enchanted Christmas doesn't suffer as much. Most of the
character animation, while not theater-quality, is well above average, and
the character design has barely changed. We think we can detect a slight
change in Belle, but the other characters are flawless. The specialty
animation, including the entirely computer-animated Maestro Forte, is
dazzling. Several musical sequences feature uniquely-animated segments that
are distinct from the rest of the film, and quite memorable. Watch for
Belle's storybook sequence and the ectoplasmic Cupids in Forte's big song.
The music, too, is above par. The tunes in the Aladdin sequels were either
forgettable or based on tunes from the original film, but these songs are
both original and memorable. We would have liked to have heard more from
Bernadette Peters, one of the most accomplished singers in voice acting,
but she was given at least one big number, so we did get something. 
Like all Disney movies, Enchanted Christmas has a message, and it hammers
away at that message until all viewers are guaranteed to remember it.
Fortunately, this film's message is the same on multiple levels: just as
Belle reminds us that Christmas represents hope, so too does Enchanted
Christmas represent hope for quality OAVs from Disney. Okay Mickey, don't
drop the ball now.

Title
Review for Jason Goes to Hell: The Final Friday (1993)
For the html version of this review with screen captures, please point
your browser to http://members.aol.com/stomptokyo
By this, we mean that Jason Goes To Hell: The Final Friday is not the
worst horror film we've ever seen. It's not even the worst Friday the 13th
film we've ever seen. But it is pretty much pointless, and loses what
little cleverness it has after the first ten minutes of screen time.
That said, let us focus on those first ten minutes. Like many other such
films, Jason Goes To Hell opens with a young woman arriving at an isolated
location. She spends a few minutes making said location (in this instance,
a cabin at Crystal Lake) more habitable, and is startled a few times by
slamming doors and bursting light bulbs. Behaving logically, she then
takes off her clothes and hops in the tub.
Because this is a horror film, the lights go out, and our heroine must
depart the tub wearing only a towel to investigate the cause of the power
loss. This turns out to be a psychopathic madman with a sharp object. (One
of these days the young woman will merely replace a fuse and return to her
shower, but not this time.) And so, our hockey-masked friend Jason
Voorhees chases the girl out of the cabin and into the woods, where she
falls down, moans pathetically, and scrambles back to her feet, obviously
terrified. She's going to die.
Or is she? Hey, is that a clearing up ahead? Why is she diving behind that log?
Jason is suddenly caught in the glare of a dozen spotlights. It's a trap!
Hooray! Someone finally got smart and sent a battalion of policemen (or
FBI agents, or something) after this freak! Jason is blown away in short
order and his pieces are carted away in a zip-lock bag.
But no, we are then treated to the autopsy, during which Jason's heart (a
nasty black thing) possesses the doctor, reincarnating the killer in the
doctor's body. A couple of gruesome deaths later, Jason is out and about
once again.
By way of a segue, we are given a couple of interesting additions to the
Jason mythology. The best is the fact that Jason is apparently famous,
nationwide, as a serial killer. The "American Case File" tabloid tv
program spotlights Jason's killing spree in the morgue and asks a famous
bounty hunter, Creighton Duke, to speculate on what Jason's next move
might be and how to stop him. Duke (Steven Williams, best known as Mr. X
from The X-Files), of course, lights out for Crystal Lake after the
interview, because killers always return to their haunting grounds.
Now at some point along the line here, it was decided that Jason can be
reborn from another Voorhees and can only be killed by another Voorhees.
So, Jason makes a beeline for his only living relatives, his sister Diana
(Erin Gray), her daughter Jessica, and her new granddaughter. Never mind
that Mrs. Voorhees clearly stated in the original Friday the 13th that
Jason was her only child. Now Jason has a whole gaggle of blood relatives
to stalk.
The upshot of all this is that Jason moves from body to body trying to get
in a position to kill or possess Diana and descendants. The weakness to
this scenario is that Jason is in the bodies of other people, so we don't
get to see our favorite hockey mask-wearing psychopath for most of the
movie. We end up watching various unappealing character actors stalk and
kill other unappealing character actors for most of the hour and a half
that this flick lasts.
On the plus side, our favorite horror movie convention is invoked: Those
who have premarital sex are slaughtered -- and wow, that's pretty explicit
sex! Too bad you guys decided not to use the condom. In today's
politically-correct world, Jason punishes those who decide not to practice
safe sex. Just look at that dramatic shot of Jason's foot treading on the
unused prophylactic.
Perhaps the greatest thing in this movie's favor is that the woman
resolves the plot. Some of our more astute readers may have noticed our
continual annoyance at women who scream their way through an entire movie,
waiting for a man to come solve their problems. None of that here -- all
the man gets to do in this movie is get his butt kicked. It's all up to
Jessica to put Jason away once and for all -- until the next movie.
Speaking of the next movie, the final dramatic shot of this film is one in
which Jason's mask is dragged underground by the clawed hand of that other
horror movie great, Freddy Krueger. This, of course, is in preparation for
New Line Cinema's next magnum opus: Freddy vs Jason. Coming soon to a
theater near you.
This review copyright 1998 by Chris Holland and Scott Hamilton of Stomp
Tokyo Video Reviews.

Title
Review for Turning, The (1992)
There's only one conceivable reason for watching The Turning, and that's
the same reason the film was released on video: it features, however
briefly, the unclad mammaries of Gillian Anderson. Anderson, otherwise
known as Agent Dana Scully from TV's incredibly popular X-Files, did her
early dues-paying as a young actress in this goofy and depressing
small-town drama.
The Turning is based on a play called "Home Fires Burning," and it's
obvious that the source material was meant to be presented on stage: there
are lots of scenes in which characters do nothing in particular besides sit
around and talk. Contrast this to other movies in which characters sit
around and talk, but do it in interesting locales or while doing something
that doesn't look silly on stage, like driving a car.
At any rate, the story focuses on Clifford Harnish (Michael Dolan), a young
man who returns to his home town of Pocahontas, Virginia, after an absence
of four years. Cliff has apparently been hanging out with Neo-Nazis,
because his new mission in life is to rebuild his family while wearing
swastikas. Unfortunately, his arrival coincides with the day his parents'
divorce is made final. When he discovers his mother, Martha (Tess Harper),
sinking into an alcoholic depression and his father's new life with a
different woman (played by Karen Allen), Cliff decides to take matters into
his own hands.
Believing Glory, Dad's new girlfriend, to be the cause of the divorce,
Cliff decides to terrorize her into leaving his father, Mark (Raymond J.
Barry). Cliff arrives at her house and slips in under false pretenses. He
warns her to stay away from Mark, and tells her to show up at the lake the
next morning, where Mark and Cliff will be fishing, to break off the
relationship in Cliff's presence.
Instead, Glory decides to expose Cliff in Mark's presence (a decision no
one in real life would make, considering she had ample opportunity to talk
to Mark before the fishing trip), and Mark must then decide how to
reconcile his love for his son with his repulsion for the psychotic
hate-monger that Cliff has become. Lots of dramatic speeches result,
including one scene in which everybody seems to be holding everybody else
at gun point -- with only one gun in the room.
But we can tell that our discerning readers really don't care about the
psycho plot of this sick coming-home drama; they want to read about Gillian
Anderson and what does or doesn't appear on screen. The tape we screened
was released by a small distributor named Leo Films and featured two
previews, one for a low budget sci-fi John Woo rip-off, the other for what
looked like the Australian version of Thelma and Louise. The cover proudly
declares that The Turning features Gillian Anderson of X-Files fame,
complete with logo. The tape's box art prominently features Ms. Anderson,
to the exclusion of any other actors who were in the film, and shows her
unbuttoning the top button of her dress.
So, what part does she play in the movie? You may have noticed that she was
not mentioned in our plot synopsis above. This was apparently her first
movie work, as she is listed in the credits as "And Introducing Gillian
Anderson." She plays April, a waitress at a local diner. We would estimate
her screen time at less than ten minutes. It turns out she was Cliff's
girlfriend before he left town years before, and, in the only scene most of
you reading this care about, she and Cliff have sex on a kitchen floor.
The question then becomes: is watching this movie worth a glimpse of
Scully's secondary sexual characteristics? Alas, not by a long shot. The
movie was shot in a real town, and the production looks very authentic,
which is why the pretentious and circuitous dialogue stands out as being so
fake. No one in this real situation would act like these characters, or say
the things these characters say. And the ending is particularly bad; it
left us feeling unfulfilled. If you must rent it, do so, but don't say we
didn't warn you.
(Note: To dispel the notion that we are total sexist pigs, we are actively
looking for some embarrassing early work David Duchovny may have done.
Unfortunately, it seems he did most of his early work wearing a dress and
heels, so finding anything that would be comparatively embarrassing is a
real chore. We would also point to our equal-opportunity embarrassment of
the cast of Mad About You.)
Copyright 1997 Scott Hamilton & Chris Holland
For the html version of this review, with screen captures, please see Stomp
Tokyo Video Reviews:
http://members.aol.com/stomptokyo/

Title
Review for Con Air (1997)
For the html version of this review with screen captures, please point
your browser to http://members.aol.com/stomptokyo
If Cameron Poe, Nick Cage's character in Con Air, had had a better lawyer
at his trial, then it would have saved us all a lot of grief. Somehow, his
attorney (A rare appearance by Lionel Hutz outside of The Simpsons,
perhaps?) convinces him to plea guilty to a manslaughter charge as part of
a plea bargain, and then the judge turns around and gives him the full
sentence anyway. A real lawyer might have objected, raised his hand,
coughed loudly, something, but not Poe's. Poe's lawyer waves bye-bye as
they haul his client off to jail.
You see, Cameron Poe, veteran Army Ranger, killed a man who assaulted him
outside a bar. Again, a real lawyer might have tried to claim it was in
self-defense, or even in the defense of his wife and unborn child.
Instead, this Hollywood lawyer lets Poe go to prison when the judge
mutters some nonsense about his Ranger training qualifying him as a deadly
weapon. If we had a good lawyer, we might think about suing Touchstone
pictures for false advertising -- they claimed this was a good movie.
Con Air is one of the latest in the long string of action "event" movies
that have visited us each summer since 1988's Die Hard. Unfortunately, few
of them have managed to capture Die Hard's magic, although the body counts
and testosterone levels have only gone up. Con Air isn't one of the better
efforts.
Poe is paroled about seven years after his conviction, and he's scheduled
to go home to his wife and daughter aboard a prison transport plane.
Because Poe is in an action event film, however, his plane is hijacked by
the other prisoners. These aren't just any prisoners, though. They're the
meanest, orneriest, most psychopathic killers and rapists that the
screenwriter and casting agents could cook up. Frankly, they're a bit
disappointing.
First up is Cyrus "the Virus" Grissom (John Malkovich), the mastermind
behind the escape. His second-in-command is Diamond Dog (Ving Rhames), a
black militant playing along with the white guy until the breakout is
over. Steve Buscemi shows up later in Hannibal-Lecter-style restraints as
Garland Greene, serial killer extraordinaire. There are also a dozen other
inmates too inane to describe.
Poe plays along, hoping for an opportunity to extract himself from the
situation, but he's prevented from doing so by certain contrived
circumstances. Circumstance #1: his diabetic cell buddy, Baby-O, is also
on board, and needs a shot of insulin to live. Circumstance #2: The only
guard to survive the first round of hijack hyjinx is a woman named Bishop
who quickly becomes a target for the token serial rapist. The rapist,
Johnny 23, is played by Danny Trejo, who should stick to acting in Robert
Rodriguez movies. Even when he played a vampire in From Dusk Til Dawn, he
was allowed to let his charisma (or as much charisma as a mean scary
Mexican ex-convict can muster, no offense Danny) shine through. Here he's
just repulsive.
Tracking down these escapees from the ground is U.S. Marshal Vince Larkin
(John Cusack). He's the good cop. Forcibly partnered with Larkin is DEA
Agent Duncan Malloy. He's the bad cop, and he's played by Colm Meaney.
Huh? Colm Meaney? Likable, huggy-bear, "Chief O'Brien" Colm Meaney?
Considering that the casting agents on this film seemed to have every
found every unsavory character actor west of the Mississippi, what
possesed them to cast one of the most instantly likable character actors
working today as the cop at whom we're supposed to hiss? His sole
qualification for the role seems to be his ability to swear convincingly.
Fair enough. But as soon as he showed up in Con Air, his appearance
heralded by smarmy music, we started to have trouble suspending our
disbelief. We mean, c'mon! Colm Meaney would never be any less than a
concerned, good-hearted guy, and these people have him parking in the
handicapped spot.
The object of the film, of course, is to allow Cage to get in some serious
good-guy time, pretending to go along with the bad guys while looking out
for his buddies and saving the day. He manages to alert Larkin to the
escapees' actual destination, and then continues to foil the convicts'
plans even after they discover that he's working with the cops. Cage
himself set off our Fake Accent Detector with a southern drawl so bad that
one wonders how he could have been so good in Raising Arizona and so bad
in this movie.
The action junkies in our readership have been patiently waiting for us to
mention the stunts and fight scenes. There are plenty of them, but they
seem a bit watered-down, as a lot of American action movies seem in these
days of John Woo and Quentin Tarantino. It's neither gonzo enough (Woo)
nor is it particularly shocking (Tarantino). The gunfights have a routine
feel to them, and the various plane-crash sequences didn't get our
adrenaline pumping. There are a few good visual gags that result from the
carnage, but you've seen all this action before and done better elsewhere.
Perhaps the strangest thing is that the final conflict takes place on a
speeding fire truck after the titular plane has crashed. After a plane
crashes on the Vegas strip, did the film makers really think we'd be
excited to see what amounts to a car chase? Hint to future action
moviemakers: End your movie on a high note.
All through the film, we're hammered again and again with what a great guy
Cameron Poe is. He's loyal, chivalrous, a good parent (!), etc etc. All of
this is supposed to contrast against the backdrop of the scum of society
all around him. It's obvious that the moviemakers have a message for the
audience, but the clearest message to us was that we should have rented a
different movie.
This review copyright 1998 by Chris Holland and Scott Hamilton of Stomp
Tokyo Video Reviews. http://members.aol.com/stomptokyo
