Authors
Gabby J-Man
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Trainspotting (1996)
The URL of this review is 
http://moviereviews.com/jman/trainspotting.html
Channel Four Films (1996) Starring Ewan Mcgregor, Jonny Lee Miller, 
Ewan Bremner, Robert Carlyle. Directed by Danny Boyle. 93 minutes.
***massively raw, hardcore direction and dialogue.
Ewan Mcgregor is plain awesome as Renton, and the supporting play is 
very solid indeed - sick boy is amazing.
***very funny in places, and rather sad at others times - it takes 
an unusual film to achieve both in such frequent and convincing 
succession.
***a real filmlover's movie - the action is uniquely cinematic and 
couldn't be done with similar effect in any other medium. You'll 
know what I mean when you see the film.
***Extremely inventive - although the film was totally storyboarded 
one gets the feeling many of the creative touches were thought up on 
set. Characters jumping from out of one scene and into the next, 
subtitles to make dialogue understood in a noisy nightclub, photo
sequences in the place of 24-frame film, dead babies crawling along 
the ceiling...interesting!
***Simply manages to be unusual, astonishing, hilarious, shocking, 
and even fairly enjoyable - all on a $2 million budget, and shot in 
six weeks. A considerable achievement, considering some films a 
hundred times the budget can't even hold water. 
***Too many Tarantino-isms, though I'm sure Danny Boyle didn't plan 
on this - it just comes across in that way. The sudden, shockingly 
violent outbursts with blood everywhere. We are meant to think a 
glass tankard shattering bloodily on a innocent bystander woman is
funny. If you think this kind of thing is funny, file this under 
"pros".
***Considering the massive hype (in the UK), the film is basically 
disappointing as a whole.  It's just not entertaining enough - 
though some sequences are wonderful (the scene where
Renton climbs into the toilet and finds himself swimming in a Blue 
Lagoon type paradise).  It alternates uncomfortably between a very 
stark reality and total "movie magic" (see toilet
bit) - rather strange and it didn't work quite right for me.
***I didn't feel any real depth to this, which would have been fine 
if the basic film was entertaining enough - but it wasn't. Renton's 
withdrawal bit in his bedroom at home is a nightmare to watch - 
again, for those who like their movies grim and cringemaking, file
this under "pros".
Another film I had really high expectations for, with those high 
hopes ultimately getting a little floored. I'm not normally into 
outlining the story in my reviews, but as most of the US audience
won't have heard of Trainspotting I'll make a brief exception here. 
This film is mainly concerned with detailing the exploits of a group 
of heroin druggies, how they steal together, get wired
together, and ultimately try to clean up - the main focus is on a 
character called Renton, and how he lives his sordid life. If that 
sounds depressing then I've only slightly misled you - the film does 
do its best to disgust and shock, but has (perhaps) a slightly 
optimistic ending. There's such a total lack of sentimentality or 
cliche here, you actually may find yourself secretly looking foward 
to the comfort of the next la-la John Hughes production, certainly 
one of the guys I saw it with said he "didn't go the movies to see 
this kind of trauma". Still, considering the tiny bugdet, 
considering the limited and home-grown production team, the props 
hand picked from charity shops and jumble sales, and the relative 
lack of experience of the writer/director/producer team - 
Trainspotting is a wondeful achievement. The film's been praised for 
just about everything over here, and that's natural because British 
people become very excited after they make a good film, but in truth
Trainspotting's greatest asset is probably it's sheer range of 
shinning visual creativity, a true testament to the special art of 
the low-budget film if ever there was one. 
