Authors
Chris Rose
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for 8MM (1999)
    Everybody at work talking about how good this movie looks from the
trailer? They should be. Nicholas Cage has set himself apart as one of THE
top action/thriller actors with films like Face/Off, Snake Eyes, Con-Air and
now 8MM.
    Cage plays Tom Welles, a private detective living in Pennsylvania with a
smallish practice serving clients with simple, mundane detective work, until
he's approached by a wealthy woman looking to find out about an 8MM film
found in her dead husbands bank vault.
     The film is disturbing to say the least. Its a snuff film. A
pornographic rape that ends in the murder of the victim, a young runaway
girl. The director, Joel Shumacher, spares us the viewing of the entire film
but gives us enough of it to chill us. It has a deeper effect on Cage. He
becomes obsessed with finding the producers of the film and perpetrators of
the murder.
     The movie takes us into the dark world, and its filmed that way. Most
of the film is a gritty, dark picture and it gives you that feeling of
creepiness. That's a good thing in this picture because that's what its all
about when making a thriller. We want to be pulled in, we want to be
shocked, we want to be scared. It's not a horror film, but a journey into
the underworld of porn and murder, and the writer, director, and actors,
especially Cage, do a wonderful job of  almost, but not qute, sickening us
at what type of people are really out there.
     Cage's performance of Tom Welles is amazing. You follow along with him
as he searches and eventually finds the people who are reponsible. Each step
of the way you go in deeper with him. When it starts to get to him mentally,
you feel it. Possibly one of his best performances as far as the action
films go.
     The Co-Stars of the film also do a good job of setting the feel of the
film. Joaquin Phoenix plays Max, the clerk at a porn shop in Los Angeles who
helps Cage track down the poeple responsible. Catherine Keeners plays Welles
' wife Amy, who has to deal with Welle's downward spiral and the effects it
causes on the family. And James Gandolfini and Pete Stormare do a wonderful
job as the evil people behind the film.
    How good is it? Extremely good. Cage can pull off the mentally breaking
down, on the edge of collape, emotionally unstable detective better than
anyone. The story grabs you and continues to pull you in til the end. The
action isn't as intense as say Face/Off but at times the movie just rocks
on. Go see it, tell your co-workers on Monday how good it was.
Read this and other reviews at : http://start.at/net-hip
Reviews for the normal people!
