Authors
Peer Wandel Hansen
Number of Reviews
6

Title
Review for Somebody to Love (1994)
    This is a charming movie about the young actress Mercedes (Rosie
Perez) making a living as a "taxi-dancer" (dancing with the customers
for money) in Nick's (Steven Randazzo) Dance Club.  At the same time she
is desperately fighting for just a little part in a Hollywood
production, that will get her recognized and eventually famous.
    Her lover is the former TV-star Harry Harrelson (Harvey Keitel)
but he doesn't support her all that much in fulfilling her ambition.
Instead she throws herself in the arms of Ernesto, a Mexican admirer she
meet at Nick's Dance Club.  This relationship develops into a strange
love affair, where Ernesto declare his love to her by tattooing her name
all across his chest.  But Mercedes can not leave Harry, but he still
refuses to leave his wife and see his life develop in the right
direction after he has been offered to play a part in a new Tarzan
movie.  This is where we see the famous scene where Harvey Keitel is
reciting Shakespeare, wearing only leopard-pants.
    Mercedes want to get out, but need a large sum of money, so she
can leave the city and fulfill her dream.  Ernesto take contact to
Emillio, a shady gangster (Anthony Quinn) who will give him the money
but in return he must assassin one Emillio's enemies, with fatal
consequences for Ernesto.
    This is the second move from Alexandre Rockwells, and the
captivating atmosphere found in the former IN THE SOUP (1992) has
been preserved, even though the budget for this movie is somewhat
larger.  This is a great movie and Rosie Perez, Harvey Keitel play their
parts astounding, and Quentin Tarantino has a small part playing the
Bartender in one of the scenes, making one of his notorious speeches
(like in SLEEP WITH ME)

Title
Review for Maniaci sentimentali (1994)
Rating (0-10)   6.0
Directed by     Simona Izzo
Written by      Graziano Diana, Simona Izzo, Giuseppe Manfridi
Cast            Barbara De Rossi, Ricky Tognazzi, Alessandro Benvenuti,
                Monica Scattini, Giuppy Izzo, Veronica Logan, Pat O'Hara,
                Edoardo Mottini, Clelia Rondinella, Alessandro Giannini
Cinematography  Alessio Gelsini Torresi
Music by        Antonio Di Pofi
Produced by     Renato Izzo, Giorgio Leopardi, Ricky Tognazzi
     MANIACI SENTIMENTALI is a sweet and funny movie by Simona Izzo but
as the movie progress it's becoming almost to neat.  To me it looked
like a mix between PETER'S FRIENDS with all the chaos happening in the
house, and HANNAH AND HER SISTERS with the adultery and deception
taking place.  Everything is perfect, the actors, the setting, the
story, no detail is accidental and because of this it is a bit boring.
     Situated in the house "La Casa," a family feast is being
prepared.  The audience are introduced to all the characters, and it's
difficult to keep track of them all.  Mara (Barbara De Rossi) has been
married for a decade to Luca (Ricky Tognazzi) and they still love each
other, but facing his midway crisis Luca is also in love with Cristina,
or so he think.  Luca's sister Serena is chasing all men and so does
both of Mara's sisters, but they are not sure with whom they are in
love and how.  Sandro, a friend of Luca visit the house.  He is not
really interested inn women but take part in all the fun and so does
all the other lovers and mistresses that pop up when the story need
some action.
     Eventually it all come a major conflict where the air get cleared
and life can go on.  The story has some rather funny moments.  In
particular I remem- ber a part where a cellular phone is lost in the
forest and it start to ring.  A frog approaches and begin to croak in
the same rhythm, like it is attracted to the phone.  Or when the family
Labrador is made a guinea pig for some Fettuchini with mushroom picked
on the forest, a small drama ending up with the dog giving birth to a
puppy.
     You will really enjoy this film if you thought that FOUR WEDDINGS
AND A FUNERAL was the masterpiece of the century.  If you have a
romantic (naive) idea about the family life of the Italians, this movie
will not let you down, but if you want renewal, difference or a moving
picture, this is not the one.  It portray Italians almost lifeless, the
more they yell and scream at each other, the less passionate they
seem.  The central conflict between Mara and Lucas become a matter of
secondary importance to the story.

Title
Review for Love and Other Catastrophes (1996)
Directed by Emma-Kate Croghan
Written by Helen Bandis, Yael Bergman, Emma-Kate Croghan
Cast: Alice Garner, Frances O'Conner, Matthew Day, Matthew Dyktynski,
Radha Mitchell, Kym Gyngell and others
Cinematography by Justin Brickle 
Running Time 82 minutes 
This campus-story is situated around Melbourne University with a setting of
confused students and their problems with school, sex, money and drugs. It
is difficult to outline a plot but it all fit together, nice and easy. It
is a fresh movie with an unknown but very talented cast. The atmosphere is
sort of a mix between 'Trainspotting' (especially in the beginning) and
'Reality Bites'.
Michael (Matthew Day), a shy medical student, has difficulty getting along
with his room-mates, they seem to party and smoking dope round the clock.
Finally one morning he has had it with them, while Michael is brushing his
teeth a guy rushes into the bathroom and vomit in the wash basin. Michael
goes househunting for a room but no one seems interested to share their
flat with a med. student. At the same time Alice (Alice Garner) and Mia
(Frances O'Conner) is looking for a new room mate to their three-room
apartment. Mia doesn't want her girlfriend Danni (Radha Mitchell) to have
the vacant room, she has other plans with her professor Leach (Kym 
Gyngell). Michael learn about the vacant room from Ari (Matthew Dyktynski),
a fellow student, part-time gigolo and a friend of Mia. During his inter-
view for the apartment, Danni find she is not moving in with Mia and find
another lover.
Alice has problems of her own. Her thesis on Doris Day as a feminist
Warrior is long time overdue and she is always on the run from her guidance
counsellor who want to see some results. She is also looking for a 
boyfriend but her standards is a bit high, she has not had any luck in 
three years. Ari seems to fit her demands but he can't quite comply to the
honesty part, his part-time gigolo job is in the way and he is not that
interested in Alice.
Mia decides to change department at the University, it is too painful to
have professor Leach as a counsellor. He is oppose to the plan and Alice
must fight the bureaucracy which is complicated by the sudden death of the
doughnut-addicted Leach. By the help of Alice and Ari they break in to the
late professor Leachs office and stamp the transfer form.
At the end Alice and Mia is throwing a big party. All the girls are 
attracted to Ari, Michael on the other hand feels like the odd man out and
find refuge at the bathroom. At the end Alice meet Michael and she realise
that he is the one. Mia confide to Danni that their breakup was a mistake
and ask her to move in.
I found Love And Other Catastrophes both refreshing and fun. The cast are
brilliant and director Emma-Kate Croghan manages to control all the 
sub-stories with a steady hand in this day-in-the-university-life story.
The cast are unknown here in europe except for Matthew Day (Muriel's Wedding).
My favourite is Mia as the self-centred lesbian with a crush on her mentor
and is always getting into hopeless situations. 
The movie is apparently made for only $50,000 and shot in two weeks, a
masterpiece in my mind. It is a pity that it has not received a wider
audience. In Denmark it has only been shown at the NatFilFestival a total
of 6 times and is not planned for further distribution.
Peer Wandel Hansen - Copenhagen, Denmark 

Title
Review for Breaking the Waves (1996)
Date Released: July 5'th 1996 (Denmark)
Running Length: 2:38 
Starring: Emily Watson, Stellan Skarsgaard, Katrin Cartlidge, Jean-Marc Barr,
Adrian Rawlins, Jonathan Hackett, Udo Kier and more .. 
Director: Lars von Trier
Story: Lars Von Trier, David Pirie, Peter Asmussen
Cinematography: Robby Mueller, Jean Paul Meurice
Music: Joachim Holbek
   The latest epos from Lars is a blast, although a rather moody one.
This lovestory is situated in a small town in the rough dreary cliffs in the 
vestern part of Scotland in the 1970 something. The church (Calvinistic) is so
strict that the church bells has been removed from the clocktower, they are
considered being too unrestrained. In these surroundings we find the to-be-weds
Jan and Bess, played by Stellan Skarsgaard and the remarkable new movie actress
Emily Watson. Jan is on leave from the Oilrig and Bess .. is just Bess, a bit
naive and innocent (in every aspect of the word), at first. At the wedding
party we are told an anecdote, illustrating her infinite kindness, she once
lend a bike to an stranger, her best friends bike however. But Bess is
suffering in this scary religious society. We soon take part in a funeral
where a man, fallen off the orthodox path, is laid to rest while doomed to 
Hell. Women are not allowed to attend funerals or speak up in the church.
When the end of the honeymoon approaches we see Bess idolizing Jan in such
an intend, almost manic, that her friends try to calm her down a bit. The
time has come when Jan is to return to the rig, Bess is falling into the
darkness of depression, her yelling of grief and sorrow are heard above the
breaking of the waves. She can't stand the thought of life without her
husband. We witness her dialogues with God (she speaks both parts, Paranoia ?) 
convincing God to return Jan from the Oilrig, and her prayers are heard.
An accident on the rig bring him back, paralysed from the neck and down. Now
he can't satisfy her need for physical love, he try to persuade her into
finding a lover, with the ulterior motive to make her describe these affairs
to him in every detail. At first she resist, but her love for Jan and his
assurance that this will make him recover more rapidly make her comply.
Imagine what this is doing to the poor girl ?  
The story is cleverly divided into eight chapters parted by beautiful pictures
made by Danish artist Per Kirkeby, accompanied by music from the era; Procol
Harum, Deep Purple, T-Rex and others. The use of hand-held camera and lack of 
any make-up make the characters solid and help to separate this movie from
others in the sentimental genre. The incredible performance from the actors
makes the movie brilliant, though a bit too gloomy for my taste. I would 
say that it is in the genre of Betty Blue (37.2 le Matin) and Bitter Moon
(Lunes de Fiel). Emily Watson as Bess and Katrin Cartlidge as her best friend
Dodo deliver outstanding performances, this must be the reason for giving it
the "Grand Prix du Jury" in Cannes this year (although we had hoped for the
"Palme D'or"). The screenplay is now available in print, the transformation
being made in the period from ultimo May to July, just in time for the
Danish premiere.

Title
Review for Mina Tannenbaum (1994)
   The story is situated in Paris in the period from 1958 to present    
day, where we follow the friendship between the two main characters Mina
(Romane Bohringer) and Ethel (Elsa Zylberstein).  Mina and Ethel are born
the same day in the same hospital, but meet for the first time as six   
years old in the ballet institute where they are taking lessons.        
   The movie now take us into the teenage years and their first         
experiences with love, and their friendship grows stronger but their    
personality grow more and more apart.  The two girls become each others  
ideal, even though they approach life different.  Mina is artistic and   
has the courage to do what she believe in, where Ethel in contrast takes
life less serious and live from day to day.  As the movie approaches and 
the girls get older the differences become larger.                      
     This is one of the most brilliant French movies I have seen in a
while.  I will especially emphasize the manuscript as fabulous, and it
received the "Palme d'Or" price in Cannes in 1994.  This is only the
second movie from Martine Dugowson (according to The Movie database at
Cardiff) and is show some experimenting with light and cutting We see
inspiration from David Lynch (Wild at Heart) with close-up of a
cigarette being lit.  The main characters, Romane Bohringer and Elsa
Zylberstein play they parts astounding.
   Martine Dugowson describe the move as a mix between a comedy and 
a Western.  Westerns because they often are centered around a strong,
unbreakable friendship between two widely different individuals.  I  
highly recommend this movie, and I'm looking forward to see what the
writer/director will bring us next time.                            

Title
Review for "Riget" (1994) (mini)
     The story is situated in the Danish National Hospital
(Rigshospitalet) a.k.a. The Kingdom (Riget).  The site was originally a
bleach pond where clothes were damped and laid out in the sun to
bleach, causing the moor to be constantly shrouded in fog.  Now the
Hospital is located were the pond used to be, with all its doctors,
scientists and technology, defining life so superstition never again
will shake believe in science.  But perhaps this arrogance and the
consistent denial of the spiritual has been too much.  The cold and
moisture have returned and the solid and fashionable building has begun
to show signs of fatigue.  The gate to the Kingdom has begun to
reopen.
     This is how the new thriller from Lars von Trier opens.
Originally THE KINGDOM was a television series in four parts, but
simultaneously it has now been released as a movie.  One of the main
characters is mrs.  Drusse, a professional patient and clairvoyant, who
hears the cry of a little girl ghost in the corridors of the Hospital.
Her task is to reveal the plot of the film.  Whenever she is
discharged, she invents a new disease to be hospitalized so she can
explore the mystery.  Her contrast is Dr. Helmer, chief surgeon and a
stupid bastard who eventually ends up worshipping the occult area, as
the Zombie culture is normally regarded.  This is one of the
characteristics in Lars' movies: to blend scientific research and
metaphysics, science and superstition, the exact and the occult.
     The inspiration from "Twin Peaks" is turned from fire into water
steaming from the broken pipes in the basement parking lot.  The
strength in this story is the small anecdotes--for example, the medical
student who can't stand the sight of blood, but spend the time on duty
in the sleep-laboratory by watching a horrible bloody movie on VCR.
There are many references to other pictures, Ridley Scott having
provided material to some of the spiritualistic scenes.
     Eventually the story reaches its climax in the end where the
Minister of Health visits the hospital and all the spirits are led
loose.  The series reached almost cult status in Denmark: while it was
running in December, the streets were almost empty when a new episode
was shown.  Everywhere people were discussing the latest development in
the series, more often than to debate the weather.  It will be exiting
to see the promised sequel, and how the rest of the world will welcome
this black-humoured thriller.
