Authors
David W Holtzen
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Blair Witch Project, The (1999)

For me, a movie like "The Blair Witch Project" comes along every four
or five years. It is the kind of movie that leaves me shaking....with
anger.  Angry that I was pick-pocketed out of $8 at the door (which, it
turned out, was the scariest part of my Blair Witch experience)?
No, angry that I spent an unrecoverable hour and a half of my life on one
of the most vapid, go-nowhere movies I have seen in a long time.
To obtain the most effective fright from any suspense/horror movie, I
walked into "The Blair Witch Project" with little prior knowledge, eyes
wide shut.  I had not visited the movie's website, had only seen the (very
interesting) trailer twice, and had heard secondhand that some critics
*loved* this movie. Thus, I was perfectly (un)prepared for the horrors
which I assumed would be laid out in the three filmmakers' documentary
footage--the remains and the cornerstone of the docu-horror premise. What
I watched instead was 90 minutes of three Gen Xers desperately trying to
find sense where there was none to be found. Once lost in the woods, they
puzzled over mounds of rock, suspiciously placed faggots, various
nighttime sounds, and worst of all how they could walk in a straight line
for 15 hours and wind up in the exact same place. Very, very frequently,
with cameras pointing at each other or into the dark woods of Maryland,
the twenty-something trio screamed and screamed and yelled "fuck" and "oh
fuck" and then screamed some more.  Suspenseful?  The first time. Scary?
Hardly. Annoying? Definately. Toward the end, during one of the many
running, screaming, oh-fuck scenes--long after I realized this dog was
going nowhere and about 5 minutes after one moviegoer in the aisle where I
was sitting left never to return--I cynically wondered if the actors were
screaming "oh fuck", because they realized that they had no script! 
With so many fundamentals missing from "The Blair Witch Project" (I was
unsurprised to learn afterwards that there was indeed no script for this
so-called film!), it is not difficult to see why such an effort fails so
miserably.  Without character development, without professional editing
(in addition to being a yawner, the damn thing was LONG even at 90
minutes), and with a film-as-you go approach, it is little wonder that the
movie finds itself running away from itself. 
The entertainment value of "The Blair Witch Project" comes later, long
after the "I've been had" anger subsides. It's a pathetic, PATHETIC,  
B-movie and laughing about it will no doubt entertain and take the sting
off of being ripped off.  At the viewing I saw in Boston last night (July
17), the audience began its hilarity immediately, during the first
millisecond of the closing credits.  They laughed, they heckled, they
mocked, and I can't help but wonder if they were thinking what I was
thinking:  I know what was in those woods in Maryland.  It was P.T.
Barnum.
