Authors
August Lamczyk
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Sleepers (1996)
This is a very difficult film to watch. I am not a paid critic but have
always loved the movies so feel able to throw in my two cents on the film. I
believe it is a good thing that Sleepers would come out in an election year. 
>From the very begining there are several references to poverty and
justice, to mean streets, and living among the torment, and the
possibility that one can survive and even enjoy ones environment thanks to
friendship and the salvation of God.
As you watch this film you begin to see it more then a story of four boys
growing up in Hell's Kitchen. We all make choices in life and most of the
time they are mistakes. But Sleepers takes those mistakes and enhances them
to be almost unbearably costly. The four boys make such a mistake and are
carted off to a children's home. The gaurds often molest, rape and torture
the boys. These scenes are difficult to endure. But I believe they are
necessary to take the viewer into the minds of the boys and the guards. 
Later the movie transcends the viewers to 1981 and a freek occurance that
puts two of the victims as excecutioners of the chief evil guard (played
well by Kevin Bacon). A trial is set with the prosecuting attorney (Brad
Pitt) purposely throwing the trial. Pitt was also one of the boys as well as
a newspaper reporter who also assits him at throwing the trial and exposing
the guards.
It is a stretch that things go soo smoothly, and this is my only fault with 
the film. At the heart is the need for justice. I disagree that it is
revenge. Revenge is beaten into the viewer's head that this is what is
needed for the victims. It is vigilanty justice implementing the justice
system. So it is a severely flawed film in a moral sense? The answer does
not come easy, and I believe this is the film's strength. It is a question
that each viewer must answer. No amount of of ideology can prepare one for
this film. It is a personal answer, and only we know it.
P.S. - I appreciate the chance to express my views rather quickly here. I
also wish to hear feedback on this review.
