Authors
Wallace Baine
Number of Reviews
13

Title
Review for Austin Powers: The Spy Who Shagged Me (1999)
This summer, Austin Powers may pass Elvis Presley as the world's record
holder for Most Bad Impersonations Inspired. The next time you have to
endure a woeful `You're shagedelic, Baby!' on an answering machine, you're
free to hate him for it.
But let's be mature about this, shall we? Let's learn to separate the
messiah from the fools who invoke his name. `Austin Powers: The Spy Who
Shagged Me,' the second big-screen adventure of the horse-teethed Carnaby
Street clown, is a howling good time, no matter how grating you may find
the promotional hype. However poorly Mike Myers's nutty creation comes off
on TV or magazine covers, the movie is a kaleidoscope of madcap brilliance
where the star is not Austin, but Austin's insanely conceived world.
`The Spy Who Shagged Me' is fundamentally a cascade of gags, many of them
puerile and delightfully disgusting and the rest saucy send-ups of
pop-culture clichés. In the long history of `Saturday Night Live' alums
elevated to movie-star status, Myers is, in fact, one of the few (the
only?) still doing `SNL'-style schtick, deftly adapting it to the
feature-film format and brazenly appealing to his audience's smarts and its
weakness for a well-executed poop joke.
Playing three of the film's central characters and having co-written the
script with `SNL' pal Michael McCullers, Myers is in full control of the
Austin Powers persona. With the help of fun-loving director Jay Roach (who
directed the original `Austin Powers'), Myers creates a set that captures
the lightning-in-a-bottle feel of inspired improvised comedy. The result is
an endless parade of sight gags, in-jokes, dopey sexual humor and wildly
depraved -- but never over-the-top -- satire. For every joke that doesn't
quite gel, there are four or five gems and one or two that are
wet-your-pants funny. That makes for a pretty good batting average.
When we last left Austin, he had landed the beautiful and highly shaggable
Vanessa Kensington (Elizabeth Hurley). The new film opens with the couple's
honeymoon which, for reasons best left under wraps, ends up with Austin a
suddenly single swinger again. In no time, however, the International Man
of Mystery is in the clutches of another stunning babe. 
CIA agent Felicity Shagwell (Heather Graham, in a star-making turn) -- the
kind of gun-toting, Jaguar-driving, miniskirt-wearing sex kitten that only
exists in the imaginations of 16-year-olds with extensive Playboy
collections -- pops up to help Austin battle the notorious Dr. Evil (Myers
again). The bald and effete Dr. Evil (who we first meet on the set of the
Jerry Springer Show) hires a monstrously obese Scotsman named Fat Bastard
(Myers yet again) to travel back in time to 1969 to extract Austin's `mojo'
while Austin is cryogenically frozen. As a result, Austin tragically loses
his libido at the moment of passion with a vamping Russian fashion model
named (ha, ha) Ivana Humpalot (Kristen Johnston of `Third Rock from the
Sun').
To recover the lead in his pencil, Austin himself goes back to 1969 and
there is a great sense of infectious fun in Austin's scenes at the center
of London's swingin' go-go scene, where he in fact he meets foxy Felicity,
who almost immediately also wants a piece of Austin's power.
Curiously, Austin Powers is not the catalyst for the movie's best humor.
That honor belongs to the persnickety, pinkie-kissing Dr. Evil, a cackling
bad guy with world-domination fantasies who has to deal with some
hilariously contemporary problems: a disaffected teenage son and the
awkwardness of a sudden sexual encounter with a co-worker. Disappointed by
his sarcastic slacker son Scott, Evil creates a companion in his own
likeness, a dwarf with the same bald head, gray suit and black heart he
touchingly christens Mini-Me (Verne Troyer). Scott hates the little guy,
Fat Bastard wants to eat him, but he brings out devoted love from the mad
scientist who is taken to blurting out to his Mini-Me things like `You
complete me' (smile, you `Jerry Maguire' fans).
As a piece of short-attention-span comedy, `The Spy Who Shagged Me' pays
attention to detail. The delights comes in diverse forms from unexpected
cameos from the likes of Elvis Costello, Tim Robbins, Woody Harrelson and
Burt Bacharach (a veteran of the first movie) to pointed spoofs of rap
videos to the casting of Rob Lowe as villanous, one-eyed Robert Wagner's
younger self to a series of deliciously dumb gags revolving around the
synonyms for the male organ (high-brow it ain't). The main satirical
scaffolding is, of course, the James Bond series. Bond fans will recognize
a number of sly references to Bond films but 007 is only one of dozens of
cultural allusions that will reward inveterate TV, pop music and movie
hounds. Even product placement, skewered so well in Myers's pre-Austin hit
`Wayne's World,' gets zinged. Starbucks, for instance, must have mixed
feelings that one of its franchises serves as Dr. Evil's world-domination
headquarters.
Unlike another, much-hyped summer blockbuster (you hear me talking, Jar
Jar?), `The Spy Who Shagged Me' lives up to its billing. It's less a
cohesive story that a series of set pieces, each explosive in comic
potential. To take one example, the scene of Myers as Fat Bastard, cocooned
in realistic-looking latex fat lying naked in bed drooling and eating
chicken while the lovely Felicity looks on in acute disgust is the kind of
pungency that makes this movie such a devilish treat. By mixing arch
pop-cult references with goofy, sexy fun and tossing in a handful of
expertly drawn bodily-function vulgarities, Mike Myers has created a movie
valentine to the under-30 crowd. Bow to Austin Powers, for he is the
learned Doctor of Scatology. Smashing, baby. Simply smashing.

Title
Review for Sick: The Life & Death of Bob Flanagan, Supermasochist (1997)
Most of us are determined to get through this life without witnessing a man
nailing his johnson to a board. So it is with extreme caution and deep
respect for the public's gag reflex that I recommend `Sick: The Life and
Death of Bob Flanagan, Supermasochist.'
Certainly, this startling documentary will be one of the most unpleasant
experiences you're likely to have in a movie house not involving Walter
Matthau and Jack Lemmon. But at the same time, it is a luminous statement
about art's ability to trump death. In the end, it's hard to determine
what's more difficult to watch: a man mutilating his own body or the same
man facing the very real specter of death.
Bob Flanagan is the kind of man who would give Jesse Helms a stroke. One of
the longest known survivors of cystic fibrosis -- a fatal disease of the
lungs that usually takes its victims in childhood or early adulthood --
Flanagan discovered the joys of sado-masochism in his teens. By the time he
reached 40, he had become an icon of the perverse, an artist locked into a
weird one-upmanship with the disease that was destroying his body.
Filmmaker Kirby Dick does not flinch from Flanagan's excesses. That nifty
demonstration of Flanagan's carpentry skills mentioned earlier is deeply
revolting, but it is only one in a long list of Stupid Human Tricks he
performs. He is spanked, cut with blades, burned, pinched, buggered, bound,
strangled, humiliated, mostly at the hands of dominatrix Sheree Rose, his
long-time lover and torturer. If Rose treats Bob like a giant steak in need
of tenderizing, she does so with an skewed sense of gratitude and motherly
devotion.
As an artist, Flanagan used a deadpan, at times morbid wit to express his
day-to-day misery, evoking the horror of his disease by illustrating its
principal by-product, i.e. the fluids that filled his lungs and gave him an
everpresent menacing cough (Wait till you see `The Visible Man'). One of
the film's more twisted visuals is taken from the opening of one of
Flanagan's New York art shows. While most artists would be sitting in the
corner in a nice sweater sipping chardonnay, Bob is hanging aloft, naked,
by his feet from the ceiling like some prized marlin. Whatever turns you
on, guy.
As a jarring and sad contrast, Flanagan's aging parents, the picture of
cozy middle American domesticity, are also interviewed. Despite living with
the dread disease through their children (Bob's two sisters also died of
CF), they seem perplexed about Bob's, uh, unusual lifestyle. `Where was I?'
asks Mom, shaking her head in sorrow.
`Sick' takes an astonishing turn when Flanagan's disease finally seizes the
upper hand. Director Dick was given full access to Flanagan's life even
when both knew that he wouldn't survive much longer. It is mesmerizing and
profoundly moving to see this S&M exhibitionist turn into a bewildered
child at death's doorstep. Flanagan's death is recorded with a tenderness
and dignity you wouldn't expect after seeing him utterly destroy the
mystique of physical pain.
An important collaborator was Flanagan's tormentor/lover Sheree Rose who,
as Bob's Yoko, had originally decided not to allow Kirby Dick to make the
movie. Eventually, she came around and made available many of her own
private videos of Bob, including some astounding footage in which Bob
painfully tries to persuade her that he is simply not up to taking her
punishment anymore.
Rose, it should be noted, does not come off like a monster, despite her
severe attitude toward Flanagan. In the end, she is genuinely
grief-stricken and, at this point it becomes apparent that the harsh
language of S&M they used between them was indeed a lovers' dialogue.
`Sick' is full of agony, disease, pain and more than enough stomach-turning
scenes of mutilation. To watch it is a small act of courage, which is
fitting considering the monstrous courage Bob Flanagan was able to summon
to live like he did. Only, don't ever expect to be able to hammer a nail
again without a flutter of fear in your belly. That you would be your Inner
Bob speaking.

Title
Review for Saving Private Ryan (1998)
Every combat veteran knows something the rest of us will never -- can never
-- really understand ... what it was like. The vet will likely try to
explain, but no matter how vivid the stories, words eventually fail. 
This is the territory Steven Spielberg attempts to traverse in the
straight-no-chaser near-masterpiece called `Saving Private Ryan' ... what
it was like, not only the chaos and the carnage, but how combat exists on
an entirely different plane of experience where morality, purpose,
rationality and decency all take on a different shape.
The first half-hour of `Saving Private Ryan' is a bone-jarring experience,
so horrifying it sometimes feels like the movie screen won't contain it. It
is a rendering of the legendary invasion of Normandy, what we've grown up
calling `D-Day,' June 6, 1944, the most decisive campaign of World War II.
>From the first minute that the first personnel carrier empties on the
beaches of France, we are witness to a massacre of staggering proportion as
the lapping ocean literally turns red with blood.
The camera is at grunt's eye level, sometimes shaking with the frenzy of
fear, always recording the gut-shaking details, the sound of empty casings
falling to the ground or of a bullet ripping through the surf at GIs lost
in the chaos, hiding underwater. There's also waves of the kind of butchery
that war films have always had problems with showing convincingly: limbs
blown away, entrails spilling into the sand, fierce soldiers transformed in
an instant to so much hamburger.
In one of the most haunting scenes, our hero Capt. John Miller (Tom Hanks)
watches in dazed horror as a GI carries off his right arm with his left,
his right shoulder a fraying bloody stump.
The tone thus set, we settle in with Miller and his eight-man squad as they
take on an unusual mission in the days after Normandy. They are to descend
into the French countryside, behind German lines, to retrieve one Private
James Ryan (Matt Damon of `Good Will Hunting'). The reason? Ryan is the
last surviving of four brothers fighting in the war and the Army has
decided that the Ryan family will not lose all their sons.
Of course, as one of Miller's men points out, they have mothers too and
thus begins an ongoing dialogue on the screwy ethical choices that war
brings forth. Is it worth it to risk the lives of eight men to save one
Iowa family?
Besides Damon, `Saving Private Ryan' features a number of youngish rising
stars who developed their chops on the indy-film circuit. Edward Burns, the
wisecracking writer/director of `The Brothers McMullen' plays Reiben, a
testy grunt who questions the wisdom of the mission. Giovanni Ribisi, who
`Friends' fans might recognize as Phoebe's doltish brother, plays the
squad's medic. Scrawny Jeremy Davies, the star of `Spanking the Monkey,' is
Upham, a well-read but skitterish interpreter who becomes the film's
conduit to explore questions of cowardice and courage.
Holding it all together is Tom Hanks, turning in another remarkable
performance as the enigmatic commanding officer disturbed only by a
shaking-hand condition that's getting worse as he gets deeper into enemy
territory. Hanks is emblematic of a kind of moral complexity you don't
often see from the director of `Jurassic Park.' Miller clearly thirsts for
victory over the Germans, but unlike the guts-and-glory war heroes of
Hollywood's golden age, his motives are murky. He just wants the ordeal to
be done with so he can get back to his wife. He's more Eisenhower than
Patton.
What's striking about `Saving Private Ryan' is the flinty, unsentimental
tone Spielberg establishes. There is a minimum of grandiose dying scenes
and deathbed speechifying. The death is cheap, sudden, merciless,
matter-of-fact. One scene of a dying soldier is characterized by a panicked
race to keep him from bleeding to death followed briefly by a helpless
yelping for his mother. No dewy, choked sentiments, just terror receding
into the abyss. This portrayal of the murderous violence of war gives the
film its integrity.
The exception to this hard-hearted realism is the film's frame, a
contemporary scene of an aging man in golf attire standing solemnly at a
military cemetery (Miller? Private Ryan?), a handsome family standing
respectfully behind him, a family we are reminded that one stray
battlefield bullet or grenade could have prevented from coming into
existence.
It's here where `Saving Private Ryan' addresses its most compelling theme:
the meaning of sacrifice and gratitude. The empty pandering of politicians
over the years has made such notions clichés, particularly falling on the
ears of the soft, jaded generation that by accident of history has been
excused from military service, to say nothing of combat. This picture
attempts to bring about a fuller understanding of sacrifice on the
battlefield and in that respect it is a moving and dignified salute to the
fallen.

Title
Review for Touch of Evil (1958)
Touch of Evil is a lurid, enjoyable B-movie thrill ride
It's a moment that still thrills film buffs. Near the end of 1958's `Touch
of Evil,' Orson Welles, corpulent and slurring, looks to Marlene Dietrich,
playing a seedy border-town fortune-teller. `Tell me my future,' he says.
She looks at him contemptuously, `You haven't got any. Your future's all
used up.'
That moment, of course, resonates far beyond the plot of this lurid,
gripping and satisfying B-reel film noir, newly re-released 40 years later.
>From that point, Welles himself had no future, at least not as the
filmmaker of importance he was destined to be after `Citizen Kane' in 1941.
>From the time he descends into a dark, dirty river in the last minutes of
`Touch of Evil,' it was a long slide into voice-over narration for someone
else's forgettable movies, embarrassing talk-show appearances and kitschy
wine commercials.
The re-release of `Touch of Evil' marks a redemption for Hollywood's most
famous fat man (Saturday marks the 13th anniversary of Welles's death).
This new artifact is not merely a 40th anniversary marketing ploy. It is,
subtly but fundamentally, a different movie. Bay Area sound man and film
editor Walter Murch, one of the most admired figures in the film industry,
actually re-cut the original `Touch of Evil' according to the wishes of its
long deceased director/writer who was denied a final cut on the original.
More on that later.
`Touch of Evil' is a pop culture landmark mainly because it remains one of
the finest examples of art emerging from trash. Using the streets of Venice
(that's LA; not Italy) to resemble a scuzzy, sinister Mexican border town
called Los Robles, Welles tells the story of Mike Vargas, an upright, newly
married Mexican law enforcement officer (Charlton Heston) dealing with a
double homicide, which compels him to lock horns with his opposite number
on the U.S. side of the border, a vicious, candy-bar-chomping,
turf-conscious autocrat named Hank Quinlan (Welles).
Vargas interrupts his honeymoon to investigate a fatal car-bombing. The car
explodes on American soil, but it's clear the bomb was planted on the
Mexican side, giving Vargas justification to claim jurisdiction. But
Quinlan and his cronies are interested in a quick frame-up to put the case
to rest. Vargas then turns his attention to Quinlan's corrupt methods (such
as routinely planting evidence) and as he seeks out allies to bring down
the embittered police captain, his comely young bride (Janet Leigh) is
sucked into a vortex of danger fueled by sex, drugs and organized crime.
Potentially delicious, certainly. But such a plot can also describe
boilerplate film noir, which is apparently what Universal had in mind when
the studio barred Welles from the set after seeing his first cut and then
released its own version, complete with re-shoots of added material. It was
harsh treatment for the one-time boy-wonder filmmaker and Welles responded
in kind with a 58-page memo to Universal, outlining to the smallest detail
what he had in mind for the film.
It is from that remarkable document that Murch (the editor of such films as
`Apocalypse Now' and `The English Patient') re-assembled the picture
according to Welles's wishes. Most notably restored is the famous opening
shot, the astounding, three-minute-20-second continuous shot that begins
with an anonymous figure planting the bomb in the trunk of the car, swoops
skyward to show the layout of Los Robles and to follow the ill-fated car as
it moves through the border checkpoint, finally settling on the startled
faces of Heston and Leigh, just about to kiss, the moment the car explodes.
(That technique has been copied several times over the years, most recently
in the opening to last year's `Boogie Nights'). The philistines at
Universal had slapped opening titles all over the shot much to Welles's
chagrin. The removal of the titles was the largest of about 50 changes
Murch made to the film -- the smallest included things such as adding
off-camera grunts to the soundtrack (Welles was nothing if not a
fetishist).
All that stuff is terrific, but what makes `Touch of Evil' such a kick is
how the characterizations blend so well with their murky, menacing
surroundings. Welles especially is transfixing as the toad-like, malignant
Quinlan. When we first see him, struggling out of his car at the site of
the car bombing, his bulk, his dyspeptic expression and the small, diseased
eyes that hint at a dead soul are striking. At the time, Welles wasn't the
eminence he was later in life and he needed considerable padding and
make-up to become such a monster. To underscore the fact that Quinlan has
slipped into an abyss of self-loathing, there's a scene near the beginning
when he walks into Marlene Dietrich's salon. The two obviously have a
history, but she doesn't recognize the man he's become. Pitifully sucking
on a candy bar, Quinlan explains away his size saying `It's the hooch
mostly,' then, almost tenderly, `I wish it was your chili I was getting fat
on.'
The other major change in the film has to do with intercutting Vargas's
struggles against Quinlan with his wife's desperate straits at a desert
hotel where she is threatened by a gang of toughs under the direction of a
sleazy crime boss out to intimidate Vargas. Previously, the plotlines were
offered separately, but here the stories are woven together to create
parallel suspense.
The scenes at the remote desert hotel, where Vargas had put his wife in the
mistaken belief she'd be safe there, are by today's explicit standards
almost corny. But they are also vividly surreal, like snatches from an
interrupted nightmare. Lounging in her hotel room in her unmentionables,
Janet Leigh, who just a few years later was to participate in cinema's most
famous shower scene, radiates a disturbingly sexual kind of vulnerability
who by her very ripeness seems to invite corruption (That corruption comes
in the form of drugs, not sex). Also unforgettable is a young Dennis Weaver
as the googly-eyed, maniacal hotel manager babbling incoherently from fear
and menace. All these characters tend toward the grotesque, reminding us
that `Touch of Evil' is after all a B-movie. Still, the manner in which
they are framed is low pleasure at its most intoxicating.
Only Heston, as the film's avenging hero, fails to connect. For one thing,
he's about as convincing as a Mexican as Garrison Keillor would be. He
seems to abandon a tentative Mexican accent half way through. He also seems
free of the demons that drive the characters around him. Even when Vargas
realizes that his wife has been kidnapped, his rage simply doesn't have the
same dimension as the dark emotions that run through the rest of the film.
Walter Murch, the man who carried out Welles's wishes from beyond the
grave, is a sound man at heart. And it is the sound innovations, coupled
with the director's dark, contrasty images, that give `Touch of Evil' such
a perverse vibe. In that famous opening shot, Henry Mancini's opening theme
is jettisoned in favor of an impressionistic swirl of street music,
squawking out of cheap tin speakers and swelling and fading as the
characters move through the set.
As any writer can tell you, what happened to Welles during `Touch of Evil'
can hardly be seen as merely a sad irony of history. It happens every day,
in TV and cinema, where writers routinely lose control over their
creations, eventually seeing the germ of their ideas warped and
misrepresented by non-writers with big money at stake. This is not always
the high crime against art that artists would have you believe. Some
auteurs could use some judicious collaboration (Have you seen Joel and
Ethan Coen's `The Big Lebowski'?).
But the larger-than-life Orson Welles gives screenwriters an example to
follow: write everything -- yes, everything -- down and leave it in a
prominent place where someone will find it 20 years after your death when
presumably your genius will finally be recognized. If this catches on, it
may spawn a whole generation of re-interpreters seeing in nearly every
finished movie a better one struggling to break free.

Title
Review for Truman Show, The (1998)
Peter Weir's dazzling daydream `The Truman Show' has been tabbed as this
year's `Forrest Gump,' but a more worthy comparison might be Frank Capra's
`Mr. Smith Goes to Washington.' Like that 1939 classic starring James
Stewart in the title role, `Truman' is about a guileless Everyman who
gradually confronts the vast, corrupt forces of cynicism that surround him.
In Capra's world, the setting was the vulgar world of capital politics. In
Weir's, it's much more ominous and to-the-point in our corporatized,
media-poisoned times. This time, Mr. Smith goes to cable.
Television has never looked so cancerous as it does in `The Truman Show,' a
surreal and immensely likable fable that straddles the line between comedy
and drama. Starring the elastic superstar Jim Carrey, `Truman' is set in a
postcard-perfect little seacoast town called Seahaven, as clean and orderly
as a Hollywood back-lot. In fact, it is a back-lot, an enormous,
climate-controlled Xanadu of a TV studio where everyone is an actor playing
a role and 5,000 hidden cameras broadcast the goings-on 24 hours a day to a
worldwide TV audience that dwarves `Seinfeld's' ratings.
The only guy not working from a script is the show's star, Truman Burbank
(Carrey), an amiable doofus who's been on candid camera since birth. He has
no idea that his every waking (and sleeping) moment is providing the world
with a compelling fix of voyeurism.
Watching on from a studio hidden behind Seahaven's fake moon is the show's
creator (or Creator, if you prefer), a quietly sinister character named
Christof (Ed Harris) who stage-manages every moment of Truman's life from
spoon-feeding lines to the actors who play his intimates to staging
elaborate hoaxes to keep Truman from learning the truth.
One of the many delights in this smart fantasy is Seahaven itself, a kind
of Stepford town whose ersatz charms have shaped Truman into what he is, a
decent fellow whose whole value system has been shaped by the mock
sincerity of a '50s sitcom. Especially creepy is Truman's wife Meryl (Laura
Linney), a dimpled blonde whose sing-song June-Cleaver-on-Prozac schtick is
put to use on nakedly commercial product placements or to dissuade Truman
from thinking too hard about his circumstances.
Weir, the Australian director whose lucid, penetrating pictures include
`Witness' and `Dead Poets Society,' makes several interesting choices. We
don't go behind the scenes of `The Truman Show' until about half way
through, allowing Weir to guide us through the unreality of Truman's world
as he lives it. One of the first signs that all is not well in Truman's
world is when a stage light drops out of the clear blue sky right at
Truman's feet. Instead of bringing us backstage where a roomful of
technicians are cursing their luck, Weir keeps us with Truman as he gets in
his car and hears an outlandish news report on the radio that a satellite
is dropping parts from the sky.
Soon, the enormity of the con becomes apparent when we are lifted into the
`real world,' (whatever that is) to learn just how big Truman's life is to
couch potatoes all over the world. Ed Harris as the lordly Christof
smolders with a kind of divine self-importance. He tells us that Truman is
the first child legally adopted by a corporation, that there had been a few
close calls with outsiders breaking into the set to tell Truman the truth.
What's going on here? Clearly, the response to this film (and I think it
will be a tremendous one) will have a lot to do with a growing unease about
corporate media and it's increasing lack of respect for the dignity of
privacy. Ultimately, `The Truman Show' is a film about paranoia,
justifiable paranoia. The public sphere is filled with surveillance cameras
these days, marketing is all about gathering personal information and the
courts have not shown much in the way of defending the so-called `right to
privacy.' Post-O.J., post-Diana, a scenario like `The Truman Show' becomes
a more and more vivid reminder that media realities, however true-to-life,
are contrived realities and our thirst for vicarious thrills trumps our
respect for other's dignity.
On another level, `The Truman Show' isn't about the mass media at all, but
rather a media-drenched take on mysticism. When Christof's says, in
explaining Truman's 30-year cluelessness about the forces shaping his life,
that `we accept the reality we are presented with,' he's talking about you
and me as well as poor oblivious Truman.
`The Truman Show' will give both the sane and questionably sane reason to
ponder the significance of coincidence and fate. But, as if to remind us of
our complicity in the sad life of Truman Burbank, Peter Weir brings it all
back to the curse of television with a devastating final shot. If all the
world's a stage, there's always another play going on somewhere.

Title
Review for Thirteenth Floor, The (1999)
Techies and software geeks need not get too jacked up over the glossy new
cyber-thriller `The Thirteenth Floor.' Sure, a really cool supercomputer is
at the center of things, but for all its nifty lighting effects, it might
as well be a Sharper Image version of an H.G. Wells-inspired way-back
machine.
Those waiting for a sophisticated fable about the computerized tomorrow
won't get too much sustenance from what is primarily nothing more than a
servicable noir borrowing plot points from virtual reality. This stylish
potboiler brings up fascinating questions, but leaves them on the table.
Not nearly as jarring an experience as `The Matrix,' to which it is
destined to be compared, `The Thirteenth Floor' -- like `The Matrix' --
plays with the notion of computer-invented planes of reality. But what
makes the thing go is a time-honored cinematic formula: dark interiors, a
mysteriously sad-eyed girl, a suspicious cop, a perplexed and paranoid hero
and an unsolved murder. Film Noir 101.
For such a high-profile pre-summer release (it comes from the same creative
team that afflicted us with `Godzilla'), `13th Floor' is pleasingly
star-less. The able cast is headed up by Craig Bierko (`The Long Kiss
Goodnight'), a kind of poor woman's Vince Vaughn, who stars as Douglas
Hall, a software hot-shot working closely with his mentor, the aged
computer science pioneer Hannon Fuller (Armin Mueller-Stahl). The two men
are on the verge of realizing a life-long ambition: the creation of a
virtual reality machine that re-creates a simulated world so real, the
computer-generated `people' have separate minds and free will.
The simulated world is Los Angeles, 1937, the period of Fuller's youth.
While the younger Hall is out of town, Fuller dives into his
virtual-reality machine before the kinks are ironed out to throw his money
around in nightclubs and bed down Depression-era show girls (talk about
your killer apps!).
One night, after one of these virtual joyrides, Fuller is murdered in a
dark alley and Hall, waking up not able to remember the night before, finds
a bloody shirt in his apartment. An intimidating cop (Dennis Haysbert)
fingers Hall as the prime suspect and Hall, not able to provide an alibi,
dives into virtual 1937 in search of clues on who could have murdered
Fuller, against the wishes of his techie assistant Whitney (Vincent
D'Onofrio, looking like a young John Malkovich).
Enter Jane (Gretchen Mol of `Rounders'), Fuller's mysterious but beautiful
daughter (whom Hall, Fuller's closest confidant, had never heard of).
Shooting off major seduction sparks in Hall's direction, Jane moves with
agility to claim Daddy's company.
If that weren't enough, Hall runs across more mysterious characters in 1937
(filmed in nicely burnished browns and golds). A suspicious bartender, a
virtual twin of his co-worker Whitney, holds the key to what happened to
Fuller. But the bartender, oozing malevolence, misleads a baffled Hall and
sets out on his sluething adventure. The bartender -- who is, remember,
just a computer-generated `unit' -- finds out the truth of his existence
and leads Hall to the humbling realization that he might not be `real'
either. Follow me so far?
Loosely adapted from Daniel F. Galouye's novel `Simalacron-3,' `13th Floor'
works on the proposition, as does `The Matrix,' that one's consciousness
can be downloaded into a living, breathing replica of one's self in a
artificially constructed world. It doesn't measure up to `The Matrix,'
however, in explaining the dangers and consequences of such reality
tampering, instead diluting its sci-fi ambitions with whodunit cliches. 
The film's reach exceeds its grasp when it settles into murky, existential
philosophizing on the nature of reality. The most advanced thinking in
computer science does indeed touch on the profound questions of
consciousness and perception. While `13th Floor' admirably ventures out
onto the shaky limb of such paradoxes, it does so in a facile manner,
postulating on what possibly isn't real but never really addressing is
real.
The film's most clever representation is, in fact, its view of 1937 LA,
balanced with just enough glitzy back-lot Hollywood touches to slyly
suggest that if we are able to create simulated worlds of the past, they
will be modeled more on romantic, movie-fed images of the past rather than
strictly historical models. Also, with the sober-minded professor Fuller
behaving in his made-up 1937 like Bill Clinton at a sorority mixer, the
film tantalizingly opens the question of whether morality and personal
conduct have any meaning in computer-generated worlds of pure fantasy.
These intriguing themes bow, however, to the demands of a rather rote
murder mystery, creating a faint but lingering air of disappointment -- an
emotion still unique to us carbon-based CPUs.

Title
Review for One True Thing (1998)

`I want to talk before I die,' blurts Kate Gulden (Meryl Streep) towards
the end of `One True Thing.' Kate is in the final throes of terminal
illness and with her ghoulish red eyes and oatmeal-colored complexion, she
looks the part. Then, as her horrified daughter looks on, she does
something unexpected: with mock petulance, she admits she doesn't know what
to say.
That comic hiccup in the middle of what should have been the inevitable
death-bed speechifying is only one of the moments when `One True Thing'
distinguishes itself from the ritualistic hanky movies that you might see
on Lifetime.
Based on Anna Quindlen's novel of the same name, `One True Thing' is a
convincing but restrained melodrama, at times attaining true emotional
power. Director Carl Franklin (`Devil in a Blue Dress') and screenwriter
Karen Croner (`Gas, Food, Lodging') don't always hit the buttons they set
out to hit. But they also keep the film from flying off into hysterics. The
most effective images are the most simple ones: A scene in which Kate,
ravaged by cancer, stands unsteadily in the town square among dozens of
Christmas-time revelers singing `Silent Night,' is certainly nothing
original. But its grace is undeniable.
Ultimately, `One True Thing' is about a young adult confronting the mystery
of her parents' relationships with her and each other. Ellen (Renee
Zellweger) is a driven New York magazine writer who, like most people her
age, thinks she knows her parents all too well. 
When she visits her leafy, upstate hometown for her dad's surprise birthday
party, her parents are playing true to form. Her mom Kate is a kind of
pre-feminist uber-housewife, chirpy, annoyingly sunny, super-attentive to
the trivial elements of her family's happiness while, at least in Ellen's
eyes, blind to the larger undercurrents of unhappiness. When we first see
Kate, she's ridiculously dressed as Dorothy from `The Wizard of Oz (the
party is one of those come-dressed-as-your-favorite-literary-character
deals) and her costume seems a fitting metaphor for her personality. To say
the least, Ellen who prefers basic black has certain compatability issues
with her mother. When the two exchange hugs at the party, Ellen cannot hide
her distaste.
Her father is a different matter. George Gulden (William Hurt) is a
National Book Award winner and head of the English department at the local
college. He's brilliant, headstrong and impatient with mediocrity and Ellen
has adored him since she was a child.
These perceptions begin to change, however, when George asks Ellen to move
back home to take care of her mother who has just been diagnosed with
cancer. Ellen is horrified at the idea but she does it anyway. When Ellen
is drafted into her mother's stultifying social club, a collection of
preening upper-middle-class hens consumed with make-busy projects, Ellen
feels lost: `The one thing I never wanted to do,' she confides to a friend,
`is to live my mother's life.'
Surprisingly, Ellen's relationship with her mother eventually becomes
secondary to her relationship with her father. In Ellen's eyes, George
moves from literary god to arrogant alpha male to philandering,
ego-besotted monster. Taking care of her mom eventually costs Ellen
everything she holds dear: her job, her boyfriend, her golden image of her
brilliant father. In the end, Kate rushes in to fill the vacuum in her
daughter's life.
As for the acting? Expectations are high when Meryl Streep plays a dying
mother and, of course, she's incredibly great. What's notable, however, is
that Streep doesn't outshine her co-stars. Hurt and Zellweger adopt similar
acting styles: a turbulent, but barely perceptible anguish that rarely
spills out into over emotionalism. We're talking about a white,
middle-class family with two Harvard diplomas in the household. The absence
of screaming jags and trailer-trash revelations that explain away all the
family's pathology gives `One True Thing' a refreshing dignity.
At one point, Kate trying to drink in the feel of the air and the small
sensations of life contradicts her husband's writing-coach philosophy `Less
is more.' No, she tells a daughter in the glow of a newfound respect, `More
is more.'
As a life philosophy, fine. But as a way to make a film about humanizing an
idealized family, George was right after all. Less is more.

Title
Review for Psycho (1998)
Alfred Hitchcock makes his obligatory cameo appearance in the original
`Psycho' early on in the movie. From inside a storefront office, we see
Hitchcock's unmistakable profile standing on the sidewalk outside, waiting
for a cab perhaps, his face turned away.
Gus Van Sant's absurdly obedient remake contains the same shot. But the
difference is telling. Van Sant doesn't merely take Hitchcock's place, to
wait for his own cab. Here, from the same office and from the same angle,
we see two men instead of one: Gus Van Sant, facing us, chatting amiably
with the same melon-shaped figure we briefly glanced the first time.
There is a point at which admiration bleeds over into adoration and because
Van Sant has so clearly crossed that line, Alfred Hitchcock is afforded a
uniquely bizarre media-age tribute. His movies aren't being re-invented;
they're being cloned. This new `Pyscho' is less a remake than the most
hyped karoake act in history. Its only distinguishing feature is color
film. Other than that, it's the same movie.
Of course, Van Sant is making no apologies. Enlisting the help of
Hitchcock's widow Pat, who appeared in the original, Van Sant worked from
Joseph Stefano's 1960 script and, in fact, used freeze frames from
Hitchcock's film to make his own. Stud film composer Danny Elfman pulled a
similarly monkey-see-monkey-do act on Bernard Herrman's original
screeching-violins score.
The result is a film that draws attention to its anachronisms. Corny
cinematic techniques common in the age of black-and-white -- echo-chamber
interior dialogue, swirling, fake-looking backdrops -- are kept intact.
Though Van Sant makes a point to make his story contemporary (the date in
the opening shot is Dec. 11, 1998, 2:43 p.m.), there are certain aspects,
namely the throwback wardrobes, that make the setting in time delightfully
ambiguous. Is there, for example, in this day and age, an office in
Phoenix, Arizona without air conditioning?
The acting, however, is thoroughly contemporary. Anne Heche who plays the
doomed Marion Crane is much more nuanced and world-weary than Janet Leigh
in the original. In the film's first scene, when Marion is getting dressed
in a by-the-hour hotel after a session of lovemaking with her lover Sam
(Viggo Mortensen), she delivers the same line Leigh had done 40 years
earlier: `I'll lick the stamps,' except that this time Sam in standing near
the window nude and Heche's eyes slide daringly below his waist.
I would have liked to see more of that kind of ironic script
re-interpretation. But from that point on, the film mostly stays earnestly
true to the original. Julianne Moore, who plays the Vera Miles role as
Marion's worried sister, carries a distinct post-feminist aggressiveness
which goes along fine with the Walkman headphones draped around her neck.
But William H. Macy, in the Martin Balsam role of the private investigator,
has the practiced look of a 1950s film-noir gumshoe.
To those who have never seen the original `Psycho' -- and you have to
believe that even a significant number of people who've come of age in the
`Scream' generation have seen it on video -- Vince Vaughn might make a
compelling Norman Bates. But in a film that all but begs comparison with
the original, Vaughn pales next to Tony Perkins. The significance of
Hitchcock's `Psycho' is that it was one of the first horror films to
suggest that monsters can indeed hide in amiable, clean-cut, mother-loving
nice guys. Perkins, with his Eddie Haskell grin and bright-eyed
attentiveness, was the perfect embodiment of that idea.
These days, however, such an image and the psychological theories of split
personalities that underly it are old news, hardly shocking even to
fourth-graders. We live in O.J.'s America, after all. Norman Bates can't
surprise us anymore.
Which is my problem with Vince Vaughn, a solid actor who for all his gifts
can't mask the fact that he could be a wacko. We are much more skeptical as
filmgoers these days to buy Vaughn as Bates. It would be more surprising if
Vaughn's Bates turned out to be an innocent guy.
Taken on its own merits, Van Sant's `Psycho' is a stylish, attractive
remake. You can't quibble with a movie so tight in plot and
characterization. But in context, watching this `Psycho' is a weird
experience. To anyone familiar with Hitch's movie, it is nigh near
impossible to lose yourself in the story of a young woman in trouble who
meets a brutal end by a chance encounter at a seedy hotel. You won't be
paying attention to the story of Marion Crane. You'll be paying attention
to how Anne Heche is playing Marion Crane and that uses a different set of
esthetic muscles. Gus Van Sant makes the assumption that most movie-goers
watch films with the same corrupted technical eye of the would-be director.
He does nothing to help us suspend that disbelief.

Title
Review for Horse Whisperer, The (1998)
To understand a horse, believes Tom Booker the title character in `The
Horse Whisperer,' you gotta know a thing or two about its past.
Same goes for directors. While director and star Robert Redford keeps
hearing comparisons to Clint Eastwood -- who also sought to redeem a
questionable piece of heartland fiction as director and star of `Bridges of
Madison County' -- the more appropriate jumping off point to assess this
nicely burnished cowboy romance would be Redford's own career as director.
Set in the same vast Big Sky landscape as his elegaic `A River Runs Through
It,' `The Horse Whisperer' is, oddly, reminiscent of Redford's first film
as director, 1980's `Ordinary People.' Both are concerned with the drama of
transcending family trauma, what we might today call `healing.' Only, in
this picture, the psychotherapy involves lariats.
Kristin Scott Thomas of `The English Patient' stars as Annie MacLean, a
rigidly ambitious magazine editor in New York City whose brittle emotional
distance could be a direct impersonation of Mary Tyler Moore in `Ordinary
People.' Annie's 13-year-old daughter Grace (a nicely poised Scarlett
Johansson) is involved in a horrific riding accident with her beloved horse
Pilgrim that kills a friend and causes Grace to lose a portion of her leg.
Pilgrim emerges from the accident deeply traumatized as well and though his
physical injuries eventually heal, his psychic ones lead the horse's doctor
to advise euthanasia.
Desperate to soothe the tormented horse's soul and to bring her daughter
out of the depths of self-pity, Annie looks up Tom Booker, a so-called
`horse whisperer' in Montana. Leaving behind her sweet-tempered but
ineffectual husband (Sam Neill), Annie drags a passive-aggressive Grace and
the demented horse across the country to convince a wary Booker to take a
look at Pilgrim.
What follows is the dude-ranch vacation of a lifetime for the two MacLean
women and a bracing break in the monotony of ranch life for Booker's
family, including his brother (Chris Cooper) and sister-in-law (a matronly
Dianne Wiest).
Longer than a Montana winter (actually, just short of three hours), `The
Horse Whisperer' moseys along establishing the gradual but striking
transformation of woman, girl and horse. Kristin Scott Thomas is especially
bewitching, morphing from pinched, bottled-up New Yorker to vibrant beauty
in blue jeans, her sharp features softening in the generous Montana light.
That old Western magic allows the relationship between mother and daughter,
heretofore charged with resentment and exasperation, to reach catharsis. It
does wonders for poor Pilgrim, whose post-traumatic stress syndrome begins
to ebb under Booker's quiet, firm guidance. And, predictably, it brings out
the sexual heat between the gentlemanly cowboy and the thin-lipped editor.
The love story is surprisingly chaste by today's standards (sorry, no
steamy sex). It's difficult to judge whether Annie is in love with Tom, a
divorced former Chicagoan with a yen for chamber music, or his image as
part of an intoxicating landscape of open spaces, campfires and simple
work.
What's more compelling is Booker's role in putting back together the
wounded relationship between Grace and her horse. The long lead-in
eventually comes to a powerful emotional payoff, particularly for anyone
who has experienced a bond with an animal.
It's too easy to dismiss `The Horse Whisperer' as soft-focus glop (though
admittedly, the camera keeps a respectful distance from the now craggy
Redford). This film finds a kind of awe for the majesty of horses, and in
the deep, spooked eyes of Pilgrim, you see a convincing glow of an animal
emerging from pain. The humans are OK, but that horse becomes the emotional
fulcrum of the whole movie. While Redford croaks out lines like `I didn't
choose to love you, Annie. I just do,' Pilgrim's eyes just whisper.

Title
Review for Star Wars: Episode I - The Phantom Menace (1999)

One of the enduring truths in the `Star Wars' cosmos is that the Force
cannot be manufactured. It's either with you or it's not. You can take
steps to attract it and manipulate it. But the Force defies mortal control.
In the filmmaker's lexicon, the Force is that ineffable magic that
separates mere entertainment from the deeply satisfying stories that strike
something deep in the collective psyche. That cultural `aha' moment is the
Force and, I'm sad to report, `Star Wars: Episode 1, The Phantom Menace'
just doesn't have it.
Granted, expectations are impossibly high for the most hyped pop culture
event since Moses dragged the stone tablets down from Mount Sinai. But in
between the predictable reactions sure to follow from both the Skywalker
idolators and the resentful grumps with the light sabers aimed at George
Lucas is this one inescapable truth: For all its technical wonders,
`Phantom Menace' -- which opens on 2,500 screens nationwide a minute after
midnight on May 19 -- is severely lacking in the human appeal that burned
the original `Star Wars' into our imaginations 22 years ago. In this case,
the ghost in the machine is missing the ghost.
Let's weigh the successes against the failures, but first a bit about the
story: As everyone over the mental age of six knows by now, `The Phantom
Menace' is the first chapter in a planned trilogy that precedes the
original trilogy in history by about 30 years. 
A trade dispute between a giant, malevolent organization called the Trade
Federation and the proud queen of the planet Naboo results in the
Federation's de facto invasion of the small planet. Two Jedi knights from
the governing Galactic Republic are sent to mediate the dispute only to
find that the Federation has no plans to talk to them. Qui-Gon Jinn (Liam
Neeson) and his young sidekick Obi-Wan Kenobi (Ewan McGregor) quickly
become fugitives. With the help of Jar Jar Binks, a clownish outcast from
the bizarre Gungan tribe, the Jedis find the planet's queen (Natalie
Portman) and spirit her away to Corsucant, the planet that serves as the
Republic's capital.
Problems with their spacecraft, however, lead the heroes to the
out-of-the-way desert planet of Tatooine. There, in an effort to score
spare parts, Qui-Gon happens upon a nine-year-old slave boy named Anakin
Skywalker (Jake Lloyd) who, the older Jedi believes, is the `Chosen One' of
Jedi mythology (He is, in fact, the future Darth Vader). Qui-Gon shrewdly
wagers with the boy's owner, a pot-bellied hummingbird-type creature named
Watto, to win both the spare parts and the boy's freedom.
With the boy in tow, the Jedis and the Queen's retinue finally make it back
to Corsucant where the Queen pleads for her planet's safety to the Senate
and Qui-Jon tries to convince the skeptical Jedi Council that young Anakin
is the Chosen One. Eventually, the action shifts back to Naboo where the
stage is set for combat between Republic and Federation forces and between
the Jedis and the film's dark lord, the evil Darth Maul.
The good: While George Lucas hasn't directed a film in 22 years, his
animators at Industrial Light and Magic has been honing their chops for
about as long in dozens of lesser movies with hopes of producing something
transcendent in new `Star Wars.'
Under the Lucas's supervision, the wizards of ILM have created no less than
four magnificent worlds: the white deserts of Tattooine; the claustrophic,
super-urbanized, vertically oriented cityscapes of Corsucant (imagine a
futuristic Tokyo that covers an entire plant); the lush Xanadu of Naboo;
and, perhaps most spectacularly, the underwater world of the Gungan, a
series of warmly lit, fairie kingdom bubbles hidden under the surface of an
otherwise anonymous lake on Naboo.
Many of the more stunning effects are, in fact, grace notes to the film's
central themes. For instance, in a too-brief sequence when Qui-Gon and
Obi-Wan are cruising the waters of Naboo in search of an underground
passage to the planet's other side, they are pursued by a number of
mind-boggling sea creatures. Just when it looks like the ship is about to
be snapped up by some disturbingly ugly serpent so big it makes a whale
look like a bath toy, here comes another even more immense creature to
dispatch that creature. `There's always a bigger fish,' says Qui-Jon wryly
and indeed, the sense of scale of the underwater monsters is convincingly
rendered. `Jaws' will never scare you again.
The film's computer-generated animatronics, virtually non-existent in the
first `Star Wars' triology, takes a giant step forward. Instead of actors
in wooly Chewbacca suits, Lucas this time opts for alien characters created
wholly from ILM software. The goofy Jar Jar Binks, a tall, floppy-eared,
horse-faced sidekick whose exaggerated gait suggests a drunk marionette
puppet, is convincing enough to blend in with the backdrop of his human
counterparts. Also impressive is Watto, a grubby, gambling Tatooine
junkdealer whose fluttering little bee wings labor to keep aloft his
bowling-ball belly. In the race to create wholly artificial live-action
characters, `The Phantom Menace' is a significant advance.
Also, this prequel gives `Star Wars' fans glimpses of those moments that
form the basis of the `Star Wars' mythos: We see the point when the famous
droids, C3PO and R2-D2, meet. When Qui-Gon introduces Obi-Wan to the boy
who would become Darth Vader, the moment will give you the thrill of fate
enjoined.
The not-so-good: The failures of `The Phantom Menace' seem niggling in
isolation. But taken together, they point to a frustrating lack of that
undefinable something that made the original movies -- particularly the
first `Star Wars' -- such a cohesive whole. They are, in the end, failures
of writing and serve as strong evidence that suggests Lucas is more
talented at marketing than storytelling.
For starters, the plot is built around an arcane dispute over trade policy,
not exactly a subject known for its sexiness. As a result, the reasons that
the Trade Federation moves in on Naboo are never clearly spelled out. The
planet's stately queen, bedecked like a kabuki diva, intones about the
suffering of her people, but we see none of that.
More importantly, the story sorely lacks the kind of swaggering appeal and
defiant humor that Harrison Ford's Han Solo gave the first trilogy. Han's
rough-and-tumble cowboy ethos, which served as a nice counterweight to
Luke's boy-scout earnestness, is nowhere to be found. Both male leads carry
the erect, humorless bearing of seminary students. Ewan McGregor, the
wild-eyed and charismatic indie-film star (`Trainspotting'), is
particularly gelded in his role as Obi-Wan Kenobi. He is left as a weak,
me-too lieutenant to the older Qui-Gon, who himself is Jedi nobility
personified (read: dull).
So many of the thematic elements of the original are missing in action --
the sexual tensions, the loyalties, the relationships, the
this-is-never-going-to-work desperation -- with nothing to compensate but
stiff political posturing and quasi-mysticism. Even the evil is a pale
comparison: the horned nemesis Darth Maul, whose satanically painted face
makes him look like a comer in the WWF, is given hardly any screen time to
really scare you. His menace is measly compared to the labored, artifical
breathing under the black mask of Darth Vader.
Ultimately, however, this is the boy's story and young Anakin is given a
chance to strut his Jedi fighter spirit in a prolonged set piece called a
`Podrace,' a no-holds-barred drag race through the desert vistas of Naboo.
The race predictably leads to Anakin's first combat mission (an accidental
one, actually). It is here where the `Star Wars' cosmology gives way to
adrenaline-soaked, video-game sensation that quickly becomes tedious and, I
suspect, a stand-in for any kind of grand design.
Then there's Jar Jar Binks who is clearly meant as the film's comic relief.
The character's braying pidgin English and exaggerated mugging never get
beyond annoying and the cast, as if sensing the thing is a flop, don't seem
to get anywhere near him.
Finally, I think, `The Phantom Menace' is hurt by lazy thinking. The reach
into religious allegory is more than a little ham-handed. Young Anakin is
not only tabbed the `Chosen One,' he's also the product of a virgin birth
(born as a slave in a dry desert landscape, no less).
What's more, the Lucas worldview seems tainted by, if not racism, at least
ethno-centrism. Is it a conscious decision that the `Chosen One' is a
tow-headed white boy with nice Americanized vowels? The boy's grotesque
owner, who speaks an Middle Eastern-sounding dialect, is a fat slob with a
lust for a good bet. Offensive to Arabs? The strange pidgin spoken by Jar
Jar and his fellow Gungan sound suspiciously like native Asians trying to
master English. Offensive to Asians?
George Lucas, the lord of Skywalker Ranch, clearly has a God complex and,
considering the astounding deference given him the last 20 years, who can
blame him? But George is as human as the rest of us with the same amount of
hours in his days. In the four-plus years since `Episode 1' has been in the
works, he has supervised the effects, controlled the marketing and
publicity as well as having written and directed what will be another
triology. Something had to give. `The Phantom Menace' shows the fruit of
his hard work and how he spent his energy. Unfortunately, it also shows
what he neglected. This time, the Force wasn't with him.

Title
Review for Henry Fool (1997)
Publish or perish
'Henry Fool' a charming epic about literary pretentions
You're not alone if you think the title of Hal Hartley's absorbing new film
`Henry Fool' sounds vaguely Shakespearean. It is, in fact, a title that
fits this raggedy, profane movie quite well, considering that Hartley's
themes here are ambition, vanity, morality and artistic vision. 
OK, Shakespeare it ain't. Still, Hartley -- the comic miniaturist who's
charmed thousands ... uh, hundreds with unorthodox, sometimes kinky little
dramas like `The Unbelievable Truth' and `Amateur' -- has created a
scruffy, immensely likable mini-allegory that should become his most
popular work. For the first time, Hartley has created a film that doesn't
feel like a sardonically diverting daydream. This one has charm and
substance.
Frustrated writers and unrecognized artists are likely to find a kindred
spirit in one of the two protagonists: a deadpan, withdrawn garbage man
named Simon Grim (James Urbaniak) and a chain-smoking, greasy-haired mooch
named Henry Fool (Thomas Jay Ryan).
As his surname suggests, young and tormented Simon leads a miserable kind
of life, living with his not-all-there mother and his haggard, sex-mad
sister Fay (indy film darling Parker Posey). Into this desperate household
walks Henry, a disheveled stranger, to rent the basement apartment. Henry
is a gabby Charles Bukowski wannabe who carries with him a grandiose
unpublished memoir he darkly calls his `confession,' a literary landmark
struggling to be born.
With Simon as his silent audience, Henry indulges in wild-eyed paranoia and
delusions of artistic importance. He uses a kind of reverse logic to state
his case: Since real artists are despised and isolated, then the despised
and isolated, a demographic in which both men count themselves, are the
world's artists and visionaries.
This inspires Simon to pick up the pen and begin writing his own opus. The
result is an epic poem that causes a visible reaction from anyone who reads
it. It becomes something of a sensation and, after a curt dismissal from a
vainglorious publisher, eventually propells Simon to the status of a young
lion of American poetry.
Curiously, in one of Hartley's more audacious artistic choices, we the
audience don't get even a taste of what is contained in Simon's poem or
Henry's memoir. We know these works only by the reactions they cause in
other people. In this way, we get to judge these `artists' by other means
than their creations.
Both lead actors are new to film and their freshness is intoxicating. As
Simon, James Urbaniak adopts a kind of stoic hostility to the world,
looking like a down-on-his-luck ex-member of Devo. It's a treat to see him
wrestle with the unfamiliar emotion of gratitude toward Henry, a reprobate
who clearly resents Simon's success.
Thomas Jay Ryan has the tastier role as the volcanic Henry and he clearly
dominates the movie from his first entrance. Ryan, an acclaimed
off-Broadway stage actor, gives Henry a rapacious alertness, a liar
convinced he is about to be exposed and the only way to save himself is to
build more lies. As the film progresses and Henry has to deal with Simon's
success, envy gives him an edge of unpredictability. The fact that we learn
Henry served time for having sex with a 13-year-old girl doesn't take an
edge off his charisma.
This super-charged relationship between these two losers, with the
complicating factor of Simon's sister Fay who literally brings Henry into
the family, moves the film forward whenever it threatens to sag. `Henry
Fool' is a comic epic about the power of the written word that doesn't
bother to show us a single written word. In the end, this film is more
about writers than about writing, about the fantasy of literary success
more than the reality of it. In that way, it's the unintentional biography
of literary pretenders everywhere from Shakespeare on down.

Title
Review for He Got Game (1998)
The main character's name is Jesus. The movie's tag line is `The father,
the son and the holy game.'
Allegories don't get more obvious than that, but despite the explicitness
-- or maybe even because of it -- Spike Lee's heartfelt `He Got Game'
transcends its sports-movie orientation to become a convincingly
unsentimental examination of a father's tough love of his gifted son. And
we're not talking about that Father or that son.
Lee's enthusiasm for basketball, specifically the New York Knicks, is in
fact more famous than any of his movies. `He Got Game' is easily one of the
most eloquent odes to hoops committed to film and if you figured Spike Lee
would be the last director on earth to fall for mytho-poetics, you
underestimate the depth of his love for this game. A picturesque opening
montage shuttles from farm boy to ghetto kid and several demographic shades
in between, all engaging in the primal slo-mo of the well-executed jump
shot. Lee's lovingly rendered shots of the ball's arc through the air
recalls the famous bone toss in `2001: A Space Odysessy.' Even the
bombastic opening score by John Williams is jarringly unlike Spike.
>From that aching beginning comes a penetrating story of dubious redemption
involving one Jake Shuttlesworth (Denzel Washington), an aging ex-hoopster
serving hard time in Attica for accidentally killing his wife in a domestic
dispute. On the outside, Jake's son Jesus (pronounced just like a certain
King of the Jews) has blossomed into the nation's most highly touted
high-school basketball player. A lanky forward with Jordan-like moves and a
killer instinct on the court, Jesus is struggling to stay real amidst the
swirl of attention from colleges, sports agents, the media and friends and
family of less-than-pure motives.
The warden of Attica offers Jake a deal. If he can convince his son to sign
with the governor's alma mater, a school called Big State, then Jake's
sentence will be shortened considerably. Problem is, Jesus has nursed a
murderous resentment against his father for the murder of his mother. With
one week left before the deadline to state his intentions for his future,
the last thing Jesus needs is to deal with a father he hasn't seen in six
years.
`He Got Game' is gimmicky. Spike Lee's celebrity in the world of big-time
basketball allows him to line up a number of heavyweights -- from college
coaches like Dean Smith and John Thompson to pro players like Reggie
Miller, Shaquille O'Neal and His Airness -- to sing the praises of Jesus in
a faux SportsCenter report. The young man's first name is exploited in any
number of hokey media puns (`Jesus Saves' trumpets Sports Illustrated).
Underneath the hokum, however, is a movie worth savoring. Holed up in a
foul, dingy hotel, Jake attempts to get the ear of his son while making
time with a battered white prostitute (Milla Jovovich) and keeping at bay
the two cantakerous parole officers assign to birddog him (one of whom is
the wonderfully gruff Jim Brown).
At some point, however, the story finds it teeth in the travails of Jesus,
played with understatement by real-life NBA star Ray Allen. Like his
namesake seeking righteousness in a cesspool of licentiousness, Jesus is
intent on playing by the rules even when he is surrounded by corrupted
people with their own agendas who see Jesus as a potential cash cow
including his coach, his girlfriend and even his uncle and legal guardian.
With only his kid sister and his loyal cousin Booger (wasn't that the
Apostle Paul's nickname?) to trust, Jesus navigates the money-changers,
keeping his intentions to himself. Jake's job is to convince his son that
he's not just trailing the golden goose like everyone else, which is going
to be tough since he's got his own agenda.
The difficult relationship between Jake and Jesus is revealed in fitful
flashback as we observe an unforgiving Jake pushing his son to exploit his
talents to the fullest. When the eventful showdown comes between father and
son, it comes on a basketball court. 
`He Got Game' certainly has it excesses and missteps, the chief among them
Jake's tryst with the hooker, a subplot that only adds length to the movie.
But Spike Lee's respect -- nay, worship -- of basketball is contagious and
his audacious metaphors give shape to a powerful story of a father's
efforts to save his son. And we all know a thing or two about that story.

Title
Review for Slums of Beverly Hills (1998)
'Slums' an endearing look at growing up in the 1970s
Another stereotype falls in writer/director Tamara Jenkins's coarsely funny
and surprisingly touching first feature `Slums of Beverly Hills.' Unlike a
certain tired TV show, this one features a handful of kids from the world's
most elite zip code who don't look like their first words as babies were
`Vidal Sassoon.' In fact, Jenkins points out in this autobiographical
coming-of-age comedy set in the summer of 1976, even Zsa Zsa's neighborhood
has its white trash.
Front and center is bug-eyed Vivian Abramowitz (Natasha Lyonne of `Everyone
Says I Love You'), a gawky teenager struggling to make her way through
adolescense in a barely functional family of males with no tact when it
comes to the special challenges of female puberty. It's bad enough that her
older brother is always making cracks about her rapidly expanding bust and
everyone mistakes her father for her grandfather. On top of that, Dad (Alan
Arkin) is constantly moving the family from one cheesy Beverly Hills
apartment building to another, skipping out on rent when necessary and
struggling to ride out a slump in his job as a car salesman (He trying to
sell giant American-made gas guzzlers during the oil crisis).
As if that weren't hard enough for a girl to whom dignity is denied every
day, here comes a new neighbor, a leering dope dealer with an alarming
admiration for Charles Manson and thirst to see Vivian naked. And then,
enter Rita (Marisa Tomei), the out-of-control cousin fresh from a stint in
drug rehab, who moves in as a kind of female role model for Vivian. Rita's
apparent reasons for living, however, seem limited to vibrators and
Seconals.
With her frizzled mop of red hair and her doofus bearing, Lyonne plays
Vivian as a girl not yet sure how to wield her sexual weapons (`It's just a
building thing,' she says to her neighbor trying to keep him from blabbing
after he fondles her suddenly womanly breasts). Vivian looks at the
wreckage of family neurosis around her and can't decide whether to rebel or
join in. Her role is primarily to play as foil to the weirdos around her
and when these prickly personalities bounce off each other, `Slums' finds
an entertaining sense of comic mania.
Jenkins's script, heavy on girl-centric themes such as sprouting breasts
and menstruation, nicely surfs that territory between pain and humor. In
nearly every scene, Vivian's self-image is assaulted by the mega-ton
embarrasments of adolescense. At one point, she is trapped with a `girl
problem' in the bathroom of her dad's post-menopausal lady friend (Jessica
Walter). The woman comes to the rescue, digging around for products she
hasn't used in years, finally producing a maxi-pad as large as tennis shoe
with an accompanying `menstrual belt' to keep everything in place. Vivian's
slack jaw and slumping eyes betrays an oceanic mortification.
Marisa Tomei is also stellar in her role as Rita, the daffy cousin who
can't seem to keep her clothes on. But this film's most endearing
performance comes from Alan Arkin who as divorced dad Murray Abramowitz
puts up with the indignities of poverty to keep his children in the highly
regarded Beverly Hills school district. He is the very picture of Dad-ness:
insisting Vivian wear a bra under her halter top or, dragging the whole
brood off to T-bones at the Sizzler ... for breakfast. But, ultimately, his
is a kind, warm portrayal and is the film's most convincing evidence that
director Jenkins harbors no bitterness about her unorthodox upbringing.
It's refreshing to see the '70s themes not played as obviously as other
similarly set films tend to do. The details, however, are impeccable from a
genuine delight for shag carpeting to the omnipresent flickers of `Let's
Make a Deal' on the TV. Jenkins presents the '70s in loving memory as a
benighted time when Trix cereal could happily co-exist with bong hits,
neither of which are often associated with Beverly Hills. There goes
another stereotype.
