Authors
C. Michael Bailey
Number of Reviews
2

Title
Review for L.A. Confidential (1997)
Starring:  Kevin Spacey, Russell Crowe, Guy Pearce, James Cromwell,  David
Strathairn, Kim Basinger, Danny DeVito.
Directed by:  Curtis Hanson
Screenplay by:  Brian Helgeland and Curtis Hanson
Warner Brothers 1997
130 minutes
I read James Ellroy's White Jazz first.  It was hard to read, the language
and rhythm was fast, improvised, and unpredictable.  Several years later I
read L.A. Confidential in anticipation of Curtis Hanson's (The River Wild,
The Hand That Rocks The Cradle) movie of the same name.  I found the book
much easier to read because of White Jazz.  Ellroy used the same techniques
he used in White Jazz:  Short, fast chapters devoted to stream of
conscience, police logs, and Los Angeles newspaper and tabloid articles. 
The fictional rag Hush, Hush, with its funky, hip 50s tabloidese appears in
both books.  It is with this urban patois that Danny DeVito's Hush, Hush
editor Sid Hudgens introduces the film by narrating his next by-line as he
pecks it out to the, "Accentuate the Positive."  Indeed, one of the cooler
movie intros of recent memory.
Briefly (as there have been several fine synopses published previously on
this newsgroup by Walter Frith, Timothy Scott, Travis Daub, James
Berardinelli,  and Michael Dequina) L.A. Confidential is a story focusing
primarily on three Los Angles detectives in the early 1950s.  These vastly
different men are the bookish and ambitious Edmund Exley (Guy Pearce), the
brutish Wendell "Bud" White (Russell Crowe, previously in Virtuosity), and
the cavalier Jack Vincennes (Kevin Spacey).  These three odd acquaintances
are brought together to investigate a mass murder in an urban coffee shop
called The Night Owl.  Into this main plot fabric is woven several
competing subplots that illuminates the true genius of this film--  its
screen writing.
James Ellroy's book was accurately described as "sprawling" by Joe
Morgenstern in The Wall Street Journal.  It is a very complex and involved
book that would be difficult (if not impossible) to adapt for the screen
with anything approaching perfect fidelity.  Brian Helgeland and Curtis
Hanson do a admirable job with this adaptation, compressing the book's less
than neat story lines into a tellable tale without sugarcoating it.  Of
note is their treatment of the two main characters, Exley and White, as
diametrically opposed and essential to one another as a one glove is to the
other.
The book portrays Exley as an educated, ambitious, and duplicitous
fledgling police officer who wants to present the appearance of being a
straight arrow while manipulating his way politically up the ladder.  In
the book he presents with a moral opacity not easily understood.  Exley's
persona in the movie tends more to the straight arrow, who while still
ruthless, is not as ruthless as in the book.  Where Exley has a moral
opacity, his counterpart Wendell White is portrayed in the book as not
having the intellect to act any other way than violently.  White has no
hidden agenda; what you see is what you get.  He is everything that Exley
is not (and vice versa).  In the film together they form a perfect whole. 
Helgeland and Hanson expertly take the images of Exley and White from the
book and with their screenplay focus their blurry print personas into ones
made for the cinema, and readily digestible by the viewing public, who
typically do not care for gray areas.
Happily, Kevin Spacey's Vincennes needed little fine tuning in his
translation from the book to the film.  Hanson captures his cheerfully
amoral character perfectly on film.
Hanson adds some nice period touches to Ellroy's already encyclopedic
treatment of 1950's Hollywood with nuggets like the Gerry Mulligan and Chet
Baker pianoless quartet playing a party and the insinuation of fiction in
fact by having had Jack Vincennes' be the cop who arrested actor Robert
Mitchum for his well publicized marijuana possession.
Aussies Pearce and Crowe speak perfectly accentless Californian without a
whiff of down under twang, no small feat (remember Kevin Costner's anemic
English Accent in Robinhood?) and are really the stars of the show,
overpowering Kevin Spacey's truly superb performance as the Hollywood
social animal Vincennes.  Danny DeVito is delightfully well cast as the
Hush, Hush editor, as James Cromwell is as police captain Dudley Smith. 
The only possible disappointment is a poorly cultivated Lynn Bracken
(White's Love interest) played by a stunning Kim Basinger.
L.A. Confidential is a fine film by any standard.  It is American noir
without being too noir.  It has a sensibility that does not cater to
today's delusional nostalgia for the 1950s.  I think it has been
presumptive of other critics to compare this film to Chinatown, The Two
Jakes (two masterpieces), or Mulholland Falls (a hack Chinatown wannabe). 
This film cannot be evaluated based on these earlier films.  It has no peer
in this genre of films that have been released in the past several years. 
A fine film and a fine book.  Treat yourself to both.

Title
Review for Game, The (1997)
Take This Is Your Life, A Christmas Carol, and Deathtrap, mix them together
and you get a potent thriller like The Game.  David Fincher, whose previous
outing Seven defined 1990s American noir, issues forth another
provocatively dark treat.
The premise:  Nicholas Van Orton (Michael Douglas) is a wealthy investment
banker in San Francisco who blandly and hard-heartedly goes through the
daily motions of a unhappy life.  Haunted by his father's suicide (recorded
as grainy 8 mm family footage from his childhood) and a failed marriage,
Van Orton manifests his fear and bitterness by coldly firing an old family
friend because of declining profits.  
Enter Conrad Van Orton (Sean Penn), Nicholas' brother.  Conrad, "Connie" to
Nicholas, meets his brother for lunch to wish him a happy birthday.  As a
present, Conrad gives Nicholas and gift certificate to CRS, Consumer
Recreation Services. CRS is a company that specializes in custom tailored
"games" for the participant.  Conrad tells him to call the number on the
card. "To make your life fun," Conrad says.  Fun is something Nicholas
desperately needs to have.
Nicholas is skeptical at first but makes the call to CRS after overhearing
a conversation between two men at his health club.  Curious now, he goes to
the CRS office and is asked to take several psychological and physical
tests that take the better part of a day.  He leaves CRS being told that
they will contact him.  He is contacted, interrupted during a business
meeting on his cellular phone, and is told that his application was
rejected.  He had not provided his cellular number to CRS, a mystery.  And
thus, Nicholas Van Orton's game begins.
After a slow start, The Game accelerates as Van Orton is bounced like a
pinball from one conspiratorial scenario to the next.  Beginning with
finding a wooden clown laying face down in his driveway to fleeing from
assassins to believing that this game is part of an elaborate con to steal
all of his money, Nicholas finds himself becoming more and more off center.
 His carefully controlled world begins to fray and unravel.  Originally
told that "the game" would be a life-changing experience, Nicholas finds
himself dirty and drugged in a Mexican crypt wondering what the experience
is and wondering if it can all be really be real.  As the movie spirals
unpredictably to its conclusion, the viewer, like Van Orton, is wondering
about the "fun" Conrad alluded to earlier in the film.
Michael Douglas is well cast as the financially successful, spiritually
bankrupt Van Orton.  Sean Penn has little more than a bit role in this
film, but is also effective playing Nicholas' dark sheep brother.  Deborah
Unger (most recently in David Cronenberg's Crash) plays a mysterious
waitress at Van Orton's favorite club who ultimately plays a pivotal role
in Nicholas' "game".  Fincher's San Francisco is a dark place though not as
dark as the mythic metropolis of Seven.  The Game proves to be a more
polished and ultimately predictable film than Seven.  Predictable, but not
too predictable. Fincher deftly takes the viewer along for the ride, not
really betraying what is coming next.  This effect is a much because of the
memory of his daring, anti-Hollywood conclusion of Seven as it is his
carefully crafted script.
With The Game, David Fincher emerges as an intriguing and vital force in
American film making.  During this rather fallow time when really fine and
provocative films are few and far between, Fincher and his fine directing
are greatly welcome.
