Authors
Lesley Abrams
Number of Reviews
2

Title
Review for Saving Grace (2000)
There's a new genre of film appearing at the ‘Plex these days. It's the
Quirky British Village That Comes Together genre. Think of THE FULL
MONTY, WAKING NED DEVINE and LOCAL HERO. They're all about how the folks
in the town support some ziggy plot that one of the locals has hatched.
They are contagiously genial and charming films -- the kind of movies
you watch with a little grin on your face the whole time.
Now comes SAVING GRACE, a sweet exploration of how the best things in
life are the things you don't necessarily plan for. Grace Trevethyn is a
rather proper, orchid-growing, middle-aged British lady. When her
husband dies suddenly, leaving her in debt, she decides to grow
marijuana in her greenhouse in a last ditch effort to save her home.
Using the same techniques she does with her pampered orchids, Grace
grows a crop of weed in her greenhouse that would bring Jerry Garcia
back from the Dead. When it's time to harvest and sell her crop,
everything goes wackily wrong, all at once. But the crusty lovable
townspeople save the day.
And there's the rub with SAVING GRACE. It's infectious and fun but it
doesn't really cover any new territory. It's not hard to see where it's
going. (Although the coda has a few undetected surprises) And everyone's
so predictably benign in their eccentricity.  Certainly there must be
one dullard or mutant or evildoer in the bunch. Maybe it's more of a
sub-genre than a full-fledged genre unto itself. Maybe it's an offshoot
of that big category I fondly call `British Humor' -- ranging from the
incomprehensibly successful Benny Hill to the sublime Monty Python to
those ladies-on-holiday films. It's all about the pluck and
determination of post-War Britain -- the Britain that remembers how
important it is to get along and just be nice.
Grace is played with spunk and kewpie-doll cuteness by Brenda Blethyn --
who deserves a lifetime supply of whatever vice she chooses for her
work. Each time this woman appears on screen, she is thoroughly someone
else. From SECRETS & LIES to LITTLE VOICE to A RIVER RUNS THROUGH IT, Ms
Blethyn offers up cinematic portraits of vulnerability and pluck.  Her
Grace glides seamlessly from grieving, frightened widow to giggly
co-conspirator to not-so-suave drug dealer to...well...that would just
spoil too much of the fun. Suffice to say, Ms Blethyn is convincing
every step of the way.
As in it's precursors, SAVING GRACE depends on its cast of small town
eccentrics to lift it above the ho-hum. There's the priest who loves
vampire movies and the doctor who reads Jackie Collins. The female love
interest is a fisherman and the male love interest  -- Grace's partner
in crime -- thinks being responsible is highly overrated. Two elderly
shopkeepers enjoy Grace's `tea'  quite a lot. A drug dealer has to pick
up his daughter after her flute lesson.
Inside these delightful characters are real-looking actors with spirit
and appeal. They work together like they've all lived in the same small
coastal town forever and ever and happily coexist with each other's
idiosyncrasies. They are the backbone of this new sub-genre. And they
make the two movie hours of your life perfectly satisfying. Even if you
have seen it all before.
People who inhale and people who don't need not fear: SAVING GRACE
appeals to anyone willing to go along for the high.  There's nothing
deviant or crude about marijuana in SAVING GRACE.  No evil pot-heads. No
lurking junkies. Just a bunch of really appealing folk from the
countryside of England, enjoying a romp. And a toke.

Title
Review for Tao of Steve, The (2000)
THE TAO OF STEVE is a rare treat of a film. Nothing blows up, no one is
killed, nothing dramatic happens and people talk about ideas. It's a
thoughtful film about philosophy and what women want and Steve McQueen.
In the hands of less capable actors and writers,  THE TAO OF STEVE might
have been downright insulting. As it is, it's a refreshing change of
pace with important ideas woven into a witty premise.
Dex is a pudgy kindergarten teacher, former philosophy major genius,
current slacker and babe magnet. He owes his irresistibleness to a
philosophy of `Steveness' -- that is, Steve Austin (THE SIX MILLION
DOLLAR MAN), Steve Garrett (HAWAII FIVE-O) and the Steviest of all --
Steve McQueen (GREAT ESCAPE). These Steves embody the essence of
maleness. Steve is a state of mind, a way of living. The opposite of
Steve is Stu.
There are rules to being a Steve Master: Eliminate your desire for a
woman (she will come begging), be excellent in her presence (prepare
that one mahi mahi recipe you've perfected) and retreat (if you're
attached to nothing, you lose nothing). Living in a mess of a house in
Santa Fe with like-minded men (really frat boys in their 30s) it‘s all
worked for Dex so far.
Until Syd reenters his life. Meeting at their tenth college reunion, Dex
is clearly smitten. And he cannot integrate his ideology with his
feelings. He does not retreat, he is most un-excellent in her presence
(with some genuinely amusing results) and he cannot eliminate his desire
for her. More importantly, he may be in love for the first time.
THE TAO OF STEVE is written by Jennipher Goodman (the director of the
film), her sister Greer (who plays Dex's love interest) and Duncan
North. It is credited as being North's life story, but it is clearly
shaped by the respectful hands of the Goodman women. It is a poignant
look at the battle of the sexes in Millennial America -- only it's not
much  of a battle anymore. Maybe a skirmish. Or a contest. Or a big
flirt dressed up to look like a battle. Dex and Syd's bumpy dance
towards each other is written with such truth and sweetness, both
characters remain likable throughout. Despite the frightening sexist
principles that guide Dex's life, we adore him.
As Dex, Donal Logue is a good-for-nothing charmer. He's always late,
mooches off his friends, smokes pot for breakfast and is philosophically
opposed to the idea of work. But early on, we get to see a glimpse past
the Steve exterior. Dex likens himself to Don Giovanni, who slept with
thousands of women because he was afraid he would never be loved by one.
Logue's performance is breezy and sure-footed. We certainly understand
all the women's attraction for this boy/man even while we enjoy it when
he gets his comeuppance.
THE TAO OF STEVE is very funny, very smart and very thoughtful. It's a
delicious opportunity to think in the movie theatre -- as opposed to the
normal flinch, gasp, gape, and marvel. It's a thinking person's film
about thinking people. They don't come along too often.
