Authors
Roger Crow
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Congo (1995)
Starring Laura Linney, Ernie Hudson and Tim Curry
Screenplay by John Patrick Shanley
Directed by Frank Marshall
     It seems Michael Crichton can't write a note to the milkman these
days without some Hollywood exec snapping up the rights to it.
However, while we'll have to wait a while for the hypothetical "Two
pints please" movie, Frank Marshall steps in to fill the breach with
his version of CONGO which has just been released in Britain.
     This is a film of possibilities and missed opportunity.  Not
having read the novel, I had no expectations so was pleasantly
surprised by the quest for diamonds by a big wig corporation; a super
smart gorilla's return to its home and, based on arachnophobia, the
chance for Marshall to show us whether he can recreate the sense of
white-knuckle panic only really attainable by throwing hundred of
deadly spiders at a wary audience.
     Some might say Marshall had a leg up with his first two films.
Many people are afraid of spiders (arachnophobia) and plane crashes as
in Alive, so the suspension of disbelief usually painstakingly achieved
in other genre entries, Alien and Aliens for example, is already there
in abundance.  Congo, surprisingly, lacks a primal undercurrent other
than "lets have a look round the jungle for some enigmatic monkeys and
a lost civilisation."  The inspiration is clearly evident but the final
message, if ever there is a message in such mainstream potential crowd
pullers, as quiet as a whimper.
     The plot finds hi-tech whiz kid Laura Linney traipsing deep into
the Congo to find her lover (Bruce Campbell).  She joins up with Steve
Guttenberg clone Dylan Walsh who's returning his pet gorilla Amy (a
Stan Winston animatronic creation that still liked like a guy in a
suit) to its home.  Throw in guide Ernie Hudson (hilarious); Romanian
nasty Tim Curry; heat and serve.
     The end result, for the undiscerning, is good fun.  A tightly
scripted ride with John Patrick Shanley's screenplay bristling with
enough hair-raising stunts, gags and frights to keep you hooked.
     Although the studio-based finale looked like, well, a studio based
finale, and the sight of the heroine slicing up loads of simians would
leave Dian Fossey turning in her grave, it's an old-fashioned, cut and
pasted blast.
