Authors
Andy Wright
Number of Reviews
14

Title
Review for Postman, The (1997)
Deserves Recognition for: Achieving the near-impossible task of making a 
grander monument to self-love than Steven Seagal's On Deadly Ground.
Capsule Review:
A question: After the floating Baby Ruth that was WATERWORLD, what in 
the @$&% were the Hollywood execs who gave Kevin Costner the money to 
make another post-apocalyptic movie thinking? In this 3 hour 
advertisement for his new hair weave, Costner plays a nameless drifter 
who dons a long dead Postal employee's uniform and gradually turns a 
nuked-out USA into an idealized hippy-dippy society. (Judging by the 
costuming at the end of the movie, the main accomplishment of this brave 
new world is in re-inventing polyester.) When he's not pointing the 
camera directly at himself, director Costner does have a nice visual 
sense, and it is undeniably fascinating to see such an unabashedly 
jingoistic film in the trust-no-one 90's; but by the time the second 
hour rolled around, I was reduced to sitting on my hands to keep from 
clawing out my own eyes. Mark this one "Return to Sender".
Copyright 1998 by The Critic formerly known as Andrew Wright
For more insanely biased reviews, check out http://www.seanet.com/~louk/
e-mail louk@seanet.com

Title
Review for Alien: Resurrection (1997)
Grade: B (Somewhat disappointing, but worthwhile for fans of the 
franchise and goop in general)
Directed by Jean-Pierre Jeunet
Written by Joss Whedon (Buffy the Vampire Slayer)
Starring: Sigourney Weaver, Winona Ryder, Dan Hedaya (Blood Simple), 
Michael Wincott (Strange Days), Brad Dourif (Exorcist 3)
Year of Release: 199720
Rating: R
Deserves Recognition for: Actress (Weaver), Cinematography (Darius 
Khondji)20
Capsule Review:
Warrant Officer Ellen Ripley's back from the dead and fighting more of 
the most Freudian bugs in the universe in a flick that, while nowhere 
near the quality of the installments helmed by Ridley Scott and James 
Cameron, is still a pretty fun ride. By far the shortest film in the 
series, this sacrifices some potentially intriguing ideas about genetic 
responsibility in favor of sheer balls-to-the-wall speed. (I became a 
little more disappointed with the film thinking about it on the way home 
after the rush had worn off.)
Director Jean-Pierre Jeunet (Delicatessen, The City of Lost Children) 
seemed like a good choice for reviving the franchise, but his 
ultra-quirky style mingles uneasily with the one-liner intensive script 
by Joss Whedon (significantly, the two best sequences - a kickass 
underwater chase and an encounter with some eerily resonant failed 
experiments - are both virtually dialog free), resulting in a film that 
wavers between the moods established by the first two installments, but 
never quite finds an distinct identity of its own. Still, the set design 
and lighting (by the great Darius Khondji, who also did Se7en) are 
fabulous, Sigourney Weaver scores some subtle variations on her usual 
persona, and most importantly, it's a far more entertaining movie than 
the misbegotten Alien 3. Bring on part 5.
Copyright 1998 by The Critic formerly known as Andrew Wright
For more insanely biased reviews, check out http://www.seanet.com/~louk/
e-mail louk@seanet.com

Title
Review for Sweet Hereafter, The (1997)
Directed by Atom Egoyan (Exotica, The Adjuster, Family Viewing)
Written for the screen by Egoyan, from the novel by Russell Banks
Starring: Ian Holm (Alien), Bruce Greenwood (Nowhere Man), Alberta =
Watson (Spanking the Monkey), Sarah Polley (Exotica)
Year of Release: 1997
Rating: R
Deserves Recognition for: Best Picture, Director, Actor (Holm), 
Supporting Actor (Greenwood), Supporting Actress (Polley), Screenplay, 
Production Design (Philip Barker), Music (Michael Danna) - geez, can 
you tell that I liked this one?
Capsule Review:
    To audiences used to movies that tell you how to feel, director Atom 
Egoyan's new film may seem like a cold, lifeless ordeal. The more 
discerning and patient viewer, however, will find this to be a mournful, 
absolutely shattering cinematic experience, possibly the best of the 
last year. Ian Holm gives a magnificent performance as an ambulance 
chasing attorney whose self-serving attempts to heal a small Canadian 
community's pain after a horrific accident only ends up ripping new 
wounds. Egoyan, previously best known for the dark puzzle EXOTICA, 
displays an astonishing mastery of the medium here, freely mixing 
timelines in order to view the tragedy from all sides. (He makes an 
especially resonant and inspired connection with the fable of The Pied 
Piper of Hamlin.) The result is a film that affects the watcher in a 
delayed, haunting fashion; you don't realize you've been hurt until 
you glance down and see the blood.
Copyright 1998 by The Critic formerly known as Andrew Wright
For more insanely biased reviews, check out http://www.seanet.com/~louk/
e-mail louk@seanet.com

Title
Review for City of Angels (1998)
Capsule Review:
A Memo to Hollywood; if you must persist in cranking out big-budget retreads
of classic foreign films, then this is the way to do it - as a subtle and
intelligent reimagining of the source material (in this case Wim Wenders'
ethereally lovely 1987 Wings of Desire) rather than a slavish frame-by-frame
duplication. It's hard to believe that Nicolas Cage hasn't used up all of
his different facets as an actor by now, but he delivers another inspired
performance here, comparable in its fumbling otherness to Jeff Bridges'
sublime work in Starman, as an Angel who falls in love with Meg Ryan. The
plot does come awfully close at times to shifting into Touched by an Angel
style hokum (the spirits interact with humanity much more here than in the
original film), but director Brad Silberling, displaying a talent that was
difficult to spot amid all the ILM effects of his debut Casper, does a
superb job of keeping the narrative grounded. (He also makes his L.A.
locations look almost as gorgeously fresh and new as Wenders' Berlin.) On
its own terms, City of Angels is an unusually resonant romantic drama; as a
remake that doesn't insult the original, it's borderline miraculous.
Copyright 1998 by The Critic formerly known as Andrew Wright
For more insanely biased reviews, check out http://www.seanet.com/~louk/
e-mail louk@seanet.com

Title
Review for Big Lebowski, The (1998)
Capsule Review:
    After a brief and somewhat disconcerting flirtation with the =
conventional, FARGO creators and supreme weisenheimers Joel & Ethan Coen =
have returned to the fringe big time with this, their loosest film to =
date. A radically disheveled Jeff Bridges headlines as the titular Dude, =
a hazy bowling obsessed slacker who gets reluctantly drawn into the =
Coens' favorite plot device - a haywire kidnapping scheme. It's a =
tantalizing setup - THE BIG SLEEP with Jeff Spicoli instead of Philip =
Marlowe - but the film never really builds on it, preferring instead to =
dance around the edges and introduce as many wacky characters (including =
ace performances by Coen mainstays John Goodman, John Turturro, and an =
underutilized Steve Buscemi) and absurd situations as it possibly can.
    Although there are plenty of laughs to be had, what ultimately makes =
this film feel like a minor effort is the lack of the tightly coiled =
(albeit noticeably bent) internal logic that governed the duo's previous =
efforts and which made even the goofiest scenes seem connected with the =
narrative as a whole; this is the first of their movies that feels like =
it was pretty much being made up as it went along.
    While longtime fans will find much to savor amid the mess =
(particularly Goodman's superb performance and an awesomely gonzo =
musical dance sequence), LEBOWSKI isn't likely to satisfy the mainstream =
audience that jumped aboard the bandwagon with FARGO - and that just =
might be the Coens' biggest and best joke of all.=20
Copyright 1998 by The Critic formerly known as Andrew Wright
For more insanely biased reviews, check out http://www.seanet.com/~louk/
e-mail louk@seanet.com

Title
Review for Flubber (1997)
Directed by Les Mayfield (Miracle on 34th street)
Written by John Hughes
Starring: Robin Williams, Marcia Gay Harden (Miller's Crossing), Ted 
Levine (The Silence of the Lambs), Clancy Brown (Blue Steel)
Year of Release: 1997
Rating: PG
Deserves Recognition for: Making this relatively youthful critic feel 
extremely old and crotchety20
Capsule Review:
    This is what feel-good family entertainment has morphed into in the 
90's: An hour-and-a-half commercial, disguised as an unnecessary 
remake, in which the defining image is that of a grown man launching a 
volume of green protoplasmic goo out of his ass. (Between this, 
Rocketman, and George of the Jungle, Disney has recently eclipsed 
longtime champion Troma as the studio most likely to include a fart joke 
in a film.) As the absent-minded professor who invents the titular 
computer-generated goop, a listless Robin Williams manages the difficult 
task of making original lead Fred MacMurray seem sprightly.
    The only thing that made this film borderline tolerable for me is my 
newly-founded but firm belief that writer/producer John Hughes is going 
to spend his eternal afterlife being conked in the noggin by all of the 
different blunt instruments he's used for comedic effect in films like 
this and the odious Home Alone series. Take your kids to see Boogie 
Nights instead.
Copyright 1998 by The Critic formerly known as Andrew Wright
For more insanely biased reviews, check out http://www.seanet.com/~louk/
e-mail louk@seanet.com

Title
Review for Breaking the Waves (1996)
For all of my admiration of the work of director Lars Von Trier
(particularly ZENTROPA, in my opinion one of the most visually
enveloping films of the last decade), I've always been left with a
slightly chilly feeling, as if the director had expended so much care
and energy on the look and texture of his films that he forgot to
include emotional content. After seeing Von Trier's new masterpiece,
I'm pleased to report that my worries have been put to rest; in every
regard, this was the most deeply felt film of 1996, with an
astonishing performance by Oscar-nominated newcomer Emily Watson. (I
wasn't all that surprised when Watson failed to win the award; her
performance was entirely too bold and uncompromising for the Academy
to feel comfortable with.)  Visually, Von Trier is still up to his old
tricks (using a technique that he pioneered in his epic haunted
hospital miniseries THE KINGDOM, the image was transferred through
several different formats of film stock and video, resulting in a
picture that is constantly shifting in quality - sometimes
intriguingly washed-out, sometimes painfully clear), but rather than
distracting the viewer, the results serve to instead blur the
boundaries between reality and fiction, further drawing the audience
into the events on screen.  This is a film that should probably be
experienced without knowing too much in advance, so just let me say
that, much like the long-suffering heroine, it is necessary to get
through some excruciating scenes before reaching the transcendent
finale (this is rated `R' for a reason, folks!) but stick with it if
you can, you won't soon forget it.
Copyright 1997: The Critic Formerly known as Andrew Wright
http://www.seanet.com/~louk/
e-mail louk@seanet.com

Title
Review for Deconstructing Harry (1997)
Deserves Recognition for: Making me laugh hard enough to almost 
completely obliterate all memories of Shadows and Fog.
Capsule Review:
    I'm going to go out on a limb here and call this consistently 
hilarious, and surprisingly raw (Has Soon-Yi been bringing home Kevin 
Smith videos or something?) look at the thin line between fiction and 
plagiarism Woody Allen's most satisfying film since Annie Hall. Allen, 
even more neurotic and self-loathing than usual, plays a successful 
author catching hell from both the people around him and their thinly 
veiled fictional counterparts. (The all-too-brief vignettes that we get 
to see of his writing contains some of Allen's finest absurdist humor 
since Bananas, including a Star Wars themed bar mitzvah that made me 
briefly consider changing my religion.)
    As usual, Woody is backed by some stellar talent, including 
Julia-Louise Dreyfuss, Mariel Hemmingway in a sly reversal of her 
Manhattan role, a surprisingly capable Demi Moore, and the wondrous Judi 
Davis, who once again proves that no other actor can make a 10-or-12 
letter obscenity detonate off the screen quite the way she can. Harry 
may shock some long-time Allen viewers by its sheer mean-spiritedness, 
but it's a quality that seems to have sprung the director from the 
stale complacency that's marred much of his recent work. As long as he 
can stay away from the Bergman influence for a while, this bodes well 
for The Woodman's cinematic future.
Copyright 1998 by The Critic formerly known as Andrew Wright
For more insanely biased reviews, check out http://www.seanet.com/~louk/
e-mail louk@seanet.com

Title
Review for Palmetto (1998)
Grade: B- (Nothing spectacular, but worth a look on a rainy day)
    After the embarrassingly inept obscenity charge leveled against his 
1979 masterpiece The Tin Drum last year in Oklahoma City, Director 
Volker Schlondorff understandably has some mixed feelings about all 
things Americana, and this at times hilariously smutty flick, in which 
an entire town is seemingly populated by nothing but opportunistic 
sex-crazed weasels, lets him exploit that to the max. (Virtually every 
character in this film has an aura of 30-weight Valvoline). Woody 
Harrelson headlines as a none-too-bright journalist just released from 
prison who gets immediately drawn into an ill-fated kidnapping scheme. 
It's a plot that's been done countless times before, but 
Schlondorff's sardonic affection for the cliches and a game cast 
(particularly Chloe Sevigny who, as the Lolitaish center of the plot, 
more than fulfills the promise she showed in Kids and Trees Lounge) 
makes it all seem relatively fresh. The true ace in the hole here proves 
to be Something Wild scripter E. Max Fry, whose screenplay contains 
enough unpredictably weird elements to keep even the most jaded noirist 
interested.
    Palmetto is nowhere near great - it's a little too hamstrung by 
the iron-clad conventions of the genre that it's riffing on - but 
it's not half-bad, either. I have a feeling Jim Thompson would 
grudgingly approve.
Copyright 1998 by The Critic formerly known as Andrew Wright
For more insanely biased reviews, check out http://www.seanet.com/~louk/
e-mail louk@seanet.com

Title
Review for Lost in Space (1998)
Capsule Review:
The ongoing quest to adapt every single television series ever made to =
the big screen (soon, only Manimal and She=92s the Sheriff will remain =
untouched) continues with this disappointing attempt at a franchise, in =
which a clan of eggheads roam the universe looking for a damned map. =
While there are some fun moments in the first half of the film =
(including some neat special effects and a nifty attack by some cool =
little spider monsters) they soon get swallowed up in a morass of creaky =
moralizing and ill-conceived cutesy elements - particularly the =
appearance of a badly animated galactic space monkey that=92s so =
blatantly designed for future merchandising profits it=92d make an Ewok =
hurl. The bulk of the blame for this movie=92s faults can be placed on =
the pointed head of screenwriter Akiva Goldsman (inexplicably able to =
remain employed after the horrendous Batman & Robin) whose one-liner =
intensive script seems to be hastily cobbled together out of old Laffy =
Taffy wrappers. Although Lost in Space has its surface pleasures (mostly =
supplied by a campily subdued Gary Oldman) and will probably be enjoyed =
by kids, it may leave the viewer with some dark and unlovely thoughts =
about just how calculated the whole Hollywood blockbuster process has =
become - if this is any indication, it could be a long summer at the =
movies, folks.
Copyright 1998 by The Critic formerly known as Andrew Wright
For more insanely biased reviews, check out http://www.seanet.com/~louk/
e-mail louk@seanet.com

Title
Review for Wag the Dog (1997)
Directed by Barry Levinson (Rain Man, Toys, Avalon)
Written for the screen by Hillary Henkin and David Mamet (Oleanna, 
Homicide) from the novel American Hero by Larry Beinhart
Starring: Dustin Hoffman, Robert Deniro, Willie Nelson, Denis Leary
Year of Release: 1997
Rating: R
Deserves Recognition for: Actor (Hoffman), and an almost Criswell-like 
ability to anticipate a certain current scandal
Capsule Review:
    This ultra-satirical comedy has a great writer (David Mamet), an 
exemplary cast (Hoffman, Deniro, Anne Heche, and Woody Harrelson to name 
a few), and a killer, eerily prescient, hook (in order to get a 
struggling President reelected , Hollywood & Washington team up to 
declare war on an unsuspecting Albania), - so why isn't it funnier, 
dammit? Director Barry Levinson, whose comedic sense has drastically 
slipped since the days of DINER and TIN MEN, struggles to find the right 
tone here, resulting in a film that, for every scene of genuine 
hilarity, all too often just lies there smirking at itself about how 
darn clever it is. Still, there are some truly inspired bits, and 
Hoffman does his best work in years as a thinly-veiled caricature of the 
legendarily egomaniacal producer Robert Evans. If for no other reason, 
watch it sometime for William H. Macy's cameo as a secret agent with 
some definite views on Mexican Desserts.
Copyright 1998 by The Critic formerly known as Andrew Wright
For more insanely biased reviews, check out http://www.seanet.com/~louk/
e-mail louk@seanet.com

Title
Review for Chongqing senlin (1994)
Directed by Wong Kar-Wei (Happy Together, Ashes Of Time)
Written by Wong Kar-Wei
Starring: Tony Leung (Hard-Boiled), Brigitte Lin (Peking Opera Blues)
Year of Release: 1994
Capsule Review:
One of the dangers of being a hard-core movie freak, besides a 
diminished social life and the threat of accidentally seeing something 
starring Pauly Shore, is the possibility of burnout. I was in an 
extremely ashen phase when I stumbled across the low-budget Hong Kong 
flick. Things haven't been quite the same since. Watching director Wong 
Kar-Wei's goofy ode to dysfunctional relationships is the most fun I've 
had with a movie since John Woo's legendary THE KILLER. A barely 
connected pair of stories filmed in kamikaze fashion (Kar-Wei would 
write scenes in the afternoon and shoot them that same night), this 
borders on complete incoherence at times, but always manages to recover 
to spectacular effect. The first story involves a lovesick cop, a 
blonde-wigged female smuggler who can blow away a roomful of bad guys in 
the time that it takes Stallone to remember a line, and 31 cans of 
pineapple. The second, and infinitely more amusing, story features 
another cop (Woo regular Tony Leung, who picked up a Chinese Oscar for 
his great work here) and his wacked-out relationship with a waitress who 
constantly breaks into his apartment to redecorate. To say anything more 
would be to spoil the fun.
At its best moments, this movie delivers a sustained jolt of pure 
cinema; it'll get you high.
Copyright 1998 by The Critic formerly known as Andrew Wright
For more insanely biased reviews, check out http://www.seanet.com/~louk/
e-mail louk@seanet.com

Title
Review for People vs. Larry Flynt, The (1996)
Traditionally, the big-budget bio-pic has generally been reserved for 
historical figures of great nobility or significance (Mozart, Malcolm X, 
Gandhi, Oscar Schindler, etc.), so it's somewhat jarring at first to 
see unredeemed '70s smut-meister Larry Flynt get the same treatment. The 
fact that it turned out to be one of the best pictures of 1996 is 
equally surprising, until you realize the amount of talent involved. As 
his previous films ONE FLEW OVER THE CUCKOO'S NEST and AMADEUS have 
shown, director Miles Forman has a knack for humanizing even the most 
potentially unredeemable characters, of which this film gives you a wide 
assortment. (The scriptwriters, Scott Alexander & Larry Karaszewksi, 
seem to be making a career out of stories about the historically 
unsavory; they also wrote ED WOOD, and are presently working on a 
screenplay about the late, great, and totally freakin' nuts comedian 
Andy Kaufman.)
The cast is up for the challenge as well. In the lead role, Woody 
Harrelson does a wonderful job playing a man whose very outrageousness 
and outward loathsomeness make him strangely appealing: his best scenes 
occur late in the film, after Flynt has been paralyzed from the waist 
down and starts taking his war against censorship to a new level in the 
courts. Courtney Love, no stranger to controversy in her own life, gives 
a jawdroppingly good performance as Althea, Flynt's drug addicted, 
ex-stripper wife; the role might not be much of a stretch for her, but 
the amount of feeling she invests into it is amazing. The standout, 
though, is Edward Norton as Flynt's long suffering lawyer. After only 
two movies (PRIMAL FEAR and this one) he's already at the top of his 
field. His wonderfully naturalistic final summation in front of the 
Supreme Court is the best scene in the film.
This movie isn't perfect; there are a few too many times when the 
heavy-handed moralizing of Executive Producer Oliver Stone can be caught 
peeking out from behind the curtain, but what it accomplishes is 
remarkable. I never thought that a movie about pornography could make 
you feel proud to be an American, but this one somehow does: by the end, 
I was ready to buy a flag.
Copyright 1997 The Critic Formerly known as Andrew Wright
For more Reviews check out http://www.seanet.com/~louk/
email louk@seanet.com

Title
Review for Mars Attacks! (1996)
Let's not mince words here; Director Tim Burton's big budget sci-fi
spoof is, at first glance, a real mess.  After an awesome credit
sequence, the first half of the movie wobbles along like one of Ed
Wood's spaceships, with an all-star cast (including Jack Nicholson in
2 roles, Glenn Close, Michael J. Fox and a multitude of others)
seemingly unsure of what exactly is expected of them. (Only Pierce
Brosnan, as a perfect distillation of every stiffly handsome eggheaded
scientist from the great `50s monster movies, really seems to be in on
the joke.) Not that this narrative sloppiness is exactly out of
character for this director (Let's face it, based on prior evidence
like BATMAN RETURNS and EDWARD SCISSORHANDS, the odds of Tim Burton
ever turning out a film with a completely coherent storyline are about
as likely as Stanley Kubrick making a movie about kickboxing), but
it's still disappointing, considering all the talent involved.  But
just when you're about to give up hope, suddenly the aliens land, the
gags start flying faster and faster, and the movie gets great in a
hurry. Whenever the bubble-domed, big-brained Martians are on screen,
this movie achieves the kind of surreal, anything goes quality
previously found only in the classic Warner Brothers cartoons or the
best issues of MAD magazine, as Burton and co.  tweak virtually every
invasion flick ever made. (One of the best gags - involving the
Washington Monument, a malevolent UFO, and a slow moving Boy Scout
troop - is lifted directly from the Ray Harryhausen classic EARTH vs
THE FLYING SAUCERS.) Not all of the jokes work, but the ones that do
make it more than worth your while (the Martians' um - unique method
of dealing with a nuclear missile is far and away my favorite movie
moment of '96).  By the time that Tom Jones and Jim Brown have joined
forces to stomp some alien butt, this movie has attained a giggly type
of weirdness that's impossible to resist; it left me ack-ing for days.
Copyright 1997: The Critic formerly known as Andrew Wright
http://www.seanet.com/~louk/
e-mail louk@seanet.com
