Authors
Wendy Lin
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Godzilla (1998)
It's an amusing movie, filled with uncreative clichés and dry dialogues.
Fortunately for the movie maker, lost of us do not go see Godzilla for
the interesting plot or engaging character and conversation.  We go for
the monster, and what a fine monster it is.  Not a monster with
personality as King Kong did, mind you, but its (or his) character was
more fully developed than other human characters in the movie.
The movie started with nuclear testing that has changed a lizard's life
forever. Then Godzilla starts his journey to New York, New York,
destroying a few fish boats along the way.  Nick Tatopoulos (Matthew
Broderick), a biologist, who at the time was studying nuclear test's
effect on earth worm's physical size (makes them 17% bigger), was picked
up to study the anomaly. Meanwhile, his ex-girlfriend Audrey (Maria
Pitillo), who is desperately trying to move her journalism career
forward, sees Nick as her big break. Audrey is a knock-out, but it
wasn't hard to see why her career was not going anywhere -- she neither
dresses professionally like Lois Lane, nor converses intelligently which
is probably the fault of the script. Accompanying Audrey is the TV
photographer Animal (Hank Azaria), who gives a fine performance despite
the role limitation. Then there is the self-claimed insurance guy (Jean
Reno) from France (where Godzilla was first sighted), who was the only
character that is more interesting than Godzilla. 
The rest of the movie is predictable but entertaining. The main theme is
to kill the monster. So there is a helicopter scene that wasn't original
(reminded me of Star War), but fun; there is mass destruction of New
York City both by Godzilla and its hunters; there is the submarine
fight; and there is the Madison Square Garden full of Godzilla eggs and
baby Godzillas. There is nothing original about any of these, but the
whole movie was paced well and it keeps you interested. Anytime when the
characters are not chasing or looking for Godzilla, meaning when they
are trying to have meaningful human interactions, you can go for a
restroom break.
I went to see it thinking it will just be like Jurassic Park, the Lost
World, and it was better than that. It was funny throughout and
occasionally silly. Overall, it's an amusing movie that will surely
entertain you if you don't go in with high expectations.
