Authors
William Tsun-Yuk Hsu
Number of Reviews
4

Title
Review for Angelic Conversation, The (1985)
     Music by Ennio Morricone.  This was supposed banned (somewhere) for many
years.  This early Algerian production is a gritty drama about the liberation
of Algiers from the French.  It's a fairly straightforward political thriller,
and it's hard to tell why it was banned (perhaps for political reasons?).  The
only "objectionable" scenes are one or two depicting the torture of Algerian
revolutionaries.
     Directed by Derek Jarman, with music by Coil.  At this stage (way before
Caravaggio), Jarman seems to be more interested in the interplay of light,
color and sound than in creating any type of narrative structure.  His human
figures move through abstract and (treated) real landscapes, but their movement
is usually "clipped," as if seen through strobe lights.  Some interesting
light/color textures reminiscent of Brakhage, but on the whole I found this to
be much less interesting than Caravaggio.
     If this is representative of the Taiwan "New Wave," than the movement
still needs at least a few years to mature.  There are some definite breaks
with the traditional Taiwanese melodrama but old values (both cinematic and
philosophical) still retain a stranglehold.  This "realist" depiction of rural
farm life and harsh economic realities is smothered  by stock characters and
situations and cloying sentimentality.  

Title
Review for Fruits de la passion, Les (1981)
     After complaining for months that it's impossible to find Shuji Terayama's
films on video, by chance a friend spotted Klaus Kinski on the box of FLOWERS
OF PASSION and called my attention to it.  (If anyone has information on the
availability of Terayama's other films, I would love to hear from him.)
     FLOWERS OF PASSION is based on a story by Pauline Reage (who wrote THE
STORY OF O).  It is set in a mythical Robbe-Grillet-esque Hong Kong in the
1920's.  In fact the atmosphere and imagery in FLOWERS OF PASSION is very
similar to some of Robbe-Grillet's later novels, for example LA MAISON DE
RENDEZVOUS, with its surreal events, dream-like images, and themes of mental
and sexual bondage.  FLOWERS OF PASSION is (appropriately?)  produced by the
producer for Oshima's Bataille-esque IN THE REALM OF THE SENSES, and Peter, the
female impersonator who appears in many Kurosawa films, plays the madam of a
brothel.
     FLOWERS OF PASSION is beautifully photographed, and has many unforgettable
images (the elaborate toys in the brothel, "O" tied to a bed perching
precariously on a sloping roof with a bird on her torso, a prostitute drowns
herself in a river, and a piano floats up from the bottom of the river to prop
up her body).  There are many well-constructed scenes and lighting effects.
However, Terayama seems to have little to say beyond the cliches of French
decadent sexual philosophy (think of Bataille or de Sade; the film opens with a
Baudelaire quote).  He comes very close to capturing the atmosphere of books
like Robbe-Grillet's LA MAISON DE RENDEZVOUS, but without explicitly
challenging the preconceptions of viewer.

Title
Review for Vaivegli but jaunam? (1987)
     IS IT EASY TO BE YOUNG? is a documentary on Latvian youth made in the
mid-1980s.  Unfortunately, the entire film is horribly dubbed, with one droning
narrator handling all the voices.  
     The documentary is in several independent sections, spliced together with
little thought for organization or transition.  The first and longest section
contains numerous clips from an open-air rock concert somewhere in Latvia.
Most of the footage is of the largely youthful audience, who could easily be a
group of middle American suburban teenagers with colorful T-shirts and jackets,
some sporting funky sunglasses.  There was a near-riot after the concert.
Teenagers trashed the interior of a train, and seven or eight of them were
arrested as scapegoats.  There is extensive footage of the trial (with some
hilarious shots of jurors looking very bored), interleaved with interviews with
some of the teenagers involved in the trial.  Some of the other sections
featured a young man who worked in a morgue (with a one-second shot of an
autopsy), a group of Latvian punks complete with studded leather jackets and
painted hair (the most anti-social thing they're shown doing is spraying
graffiti on an old building), youths helping to renovate an old building, and a
film-maker in his late 20s or early 30s.
     The last section was (surprisingly) on the war in Afghanistan.  The
narrative had (understandably) few political undertones, focusing instead on
two veterans and their impressions of the war.  We are shown clips from a film
(made by the young director interviewed earlier).  The visual style, imagery
and treatments are remarkably similar to music videos on MTV (there is no
dialog, only an electronic soundtrack): the same heavy-handed delivery,
overblown fantasy images and lighting effects that you'd expect to see from,
say, a video by Kansas.  (Maybe this has something to do with video pioneer
Rybczinski, who made several interesting films in Poland before moving to the
US and making MTV videos for Art of Noise and Yoko Ono.)
     Overall, the youths interviewed in the documentary seemed to feel that
they have all they need, and there is nothing left to work for.  Most of all,
they seem terminally *bored*.  In other words, they are not much different from
suburban teenagers in the US.  It's amazing how two societies that profess to
be so different have produced generations that are so alike in their
materialism and apathy.

Title
Review for Empire of the Sun (1987)
     Much has been said in this newsgroup about Steven Spielberg and  EMPIRE OF
THE SUN, the film his admirers point to as his masterpiece.  I was not a
Spielberg hater before I saw EMPIRE OF THE SUN (but then I had not seen a
Spielberg movie since E.T., when I was a much more naive movie watcher.)  I
came out of EMPIRE OF THE SUN really detesting Spielberg's idiosyncracies and
excesses.
     I'll only touch on the essentials.  As usual I'll try to steer clear of
politics ("It's a travesty of the word ideologue to call Spielberg one."--
John R.)  I won't make any comparisons with the book, as I have not read it
(though I'm familiar with Ballard's earlier work, which I've been told is quite
different from EMPIRE OF THE SUN).
     There are several scenes in EMPIRE OF THE SUN that I really liked.  The
crowd scenes in the beginning were very effective.  The scene in the junk yard
with the furniture and piano was brilliant.  
     But as a whole, EMPIRE OF THE SUN is a small-minded, blatantly
manipulative movie.  It drips with sentimentality and stock Spielberg/Hollywood
images and situations, and clumsily tramples over its interesting moments with
contrived histrionics.  Several scenes have effective sound devices, but the
movie drowns under a sea of saccharine strings and "transcendental" female
choral music.
     The beginning of the scene with the kamikaze pilots was handled skillfully,
but Spielberg the arch-audience-manipulator takes over when the kid (Jim)
salutes them and starts singing.  Not only does he sing, but the song echoes
through the POW camp, and by the time it becomes a female vocalist I suppose
we're all supposed to be crying.  (And of course Jim has to look like an E.T.
kid, and have a Vienna Boys Choir-type voice.  But that's a matter of taste.)
     Spielberg even sabotages his own clumsy attempt at structure near the end.
Jim is riding his bicycle in the abandoned camp (obvious reflection of an
earlier scene where he was riding his bicycle in an abandoned house.)  Of
course Spielberg cannot resist another typically Spielberg-esque miracle when a
canister of food falls through the roof, and we are treated to the typical
Hollywood radiant "sense of wonder" shot of Jim's face.
     Finally, there is no excuse for this movie to last 2-1/2 hours.  Much of
what happened in the last hour were non-essential action sequences or overlong,
rapt contemplations of not very interesting images.
     Obviously Spielberg is not an inept film maker.  Some scenes in EMPIRE OF
THE SUN are really effective (recall, for example, the scene where Jim tries to
stop his former servants from plundering his house, and one of them
nonchalantly walks over and slaps him).  But it seems Spielberg will never pass
up on the smallest opportunity to tweak at the collective heartstrings of his
audience.  And he doesn't seem willing to break free of the Hollywood
vocabulary of stock images and characters (some of which he has created, it is
true).  Only the memory of several well-executed scenes kept me from walking
out on this movie.
