Authors
Amanda Tuttle
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Wolf (1994)
Starring: Jack Nicholson, Michelle Pfeiffer, Kate Nelligan,
          James Spader, and Christopher Plummer
Directed by: Mike Nichols
     Okay, anybody ever see I WAS A TEENAGE WEREWOLF?  How about AN
AMERICAN WEREWOLF IN LONDON?  Horror fan staples, right? Well, if you
thought those special effects were cheesy, or just not up to Hollywood
par, you might want to wait until WOLF comes out on video.  However, if
you're a die-hard Jack fan (as I am) don't wait ...  *perfect* casting
with Jack as publishing house editor-in-chief dealing with human wolves
in the concrete jungle.  Says something about civilization, although at
times, I felt it said it just a little too loud to be profound.  The
evil but dashing James Spader fulfills the "bad guy" role pretty well,
although his bad guy is like Alex Keaton from FAMILY TIES without the
Nixon worship.  Michelle is beautiful as ever, although the plot seemed
to find her switching from a "naughty-poor-little-rich-girl" character,
to a sentimental and confused "you're-the-first-good-man-I've-ever-known"
weeper.  Hmmmmmm ....
     However, overall, the movie was more comedy and a bit of suspense
than any *real* horror.  There were no real murder scenes, although
there's a bit of gore under the fingernails of the plot, and the action
is riveting, but those scenes were few and far between.  As for the
actual cinematography, some of the shots were interesting (see Jack
jump. see Jack pounce.), but the slow-motion sequences are a bit too
exaggerated (translated: cheesy) for my taste.  The music was a bit too
melodramatic at times, and some of the lighting was ... shall we
say ... cliche??  The special effects were also a little tame compared to
most "metamorph" films and was sort of disappointing.  But overall, it
was fun to watch, and the effect was one of a human in an animal city
who finds the better part of his nature coming out in the
"beast" ... deja vu?  Yeah, but slightly different angles and even a
little sad at times, although most of it is great humor.  Watch for a
great scene in the men's restroom with Jack and James.
     The great thing about this movie is that there's actually some
(gasp!) character development that made it very fulfilling to watch, in
the sense that you could feel for Jack's character from almost the very
beginning.  A movie for romantics, for people who like thrillers and
dry humor, for people who love Jack, but *not* for people who are
expecting a nice Fangoria treat.  Don't believe the
trailers ... sorry ....
P.S.  In case you've heard the rumors and are wondering about them, there
      is *no* computer animation with the wolves.  They used puppets, 
      though, and I think real footage of wolves superimposed ....
