Authors
Han Kuo
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Anna Karenina (1997)
If you haven't read the 800-plus-page novel, this is the 
movie that will compel you to do so. And you will be 
grateful for it afterwards. It is the best movie adaptation 
of Leo Tolstoy's timeless tragic love story "Anna Karenina" 
thus far. Beware of that reading a novel and watching a 
movie are never meant to be the same experience. They are 
functionally different and a head-to-head comparison is 
seldom fair or meaningful. Bear that in mind and watch this 
movie for its own sake, you will find yourself immersed in 
this beautiful film.
The cast is brilliant. Sophie Marceau (as Anna) had a 
splendid performance. Besides her ineffable beauty and 
exquisite elegance reflected on the screen as Anna is meant 
to be, it is remarkable to watch how her facial expressions 
convey those most subtle emotions Anna possess, joy, 
happiness, shame, sorrow and despair. More amazingly, the 
sentiments are communicated not only through her tender eyes 
but also from those sensational lips. In addition her French 
accent adds the intoxicating foreign flavor to the 
character, which makes you wonder what it would be like if 
they all speak French instead (in that period, the Russian 
aristocrats often spoke French).
Sean Bean  (as Vronsky) did a wonderful job in protraying 
Vronksy who had the crushing love and  desire for Anna 
except the lack of dashing look is less persuasive. All the 
other supporting cast had a first-rate performance which 
makes the movie so enjoyable.
The breathtaking cinematography (which was all shot in 
Russia), the sumptuous  19th century aristocratic costumes 
and the absorbing Tchaikovsky music provides an magnificent 
and realistic ensemble for the story. The grand ball, the 
subsequent train station encounter, the horse racing and the 
tragic finale are the several memorable scenes.
Understanding the difference between the expressive means of 
the literature and those of the cinema, the director/writer 
Bernard Rose made a great effort in extracting the essence 
of this great novel with some modification, and he did a 
respectable job.  The exact dialogues excerpt from Telstoy's 
masterpiece exhibit some of the most powerful and 
unforgettable words rarely seen on screens.  The only 
unfullfillment is that the showing version was cut into less 
than 2 hours. It is too short to include some integral 
scenes to make the film more complete. Hopefully, this will 
be mended on vedio version.
The experience of watching this movie is definetely a 
rewarding one not only because it is a great film but also 
it stirs up some deep thoughts about love and life. It sure 
will linger in my mind for quite some time.
