Authors
M Isaacs
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Clockers (1995)
     Spike Lee's CLOCKERS is another mixed bag from the director and
considering the powerful novel from which he had to work, it must be
considered somewhat of a disappointment.
     It was impossible to read Price's novel without thinking of Martin
Scorsese directing it even long before he became affiliated with the
project.  Scorsese has been brilliant in not only painting the decay of
urban landscapes but in getting under the skin of the people who occupy
them.  It is a literary accomplishment that Price achieved the same
feat with flying colors.
     Like JUNGLE FEVER and other recent Lee films, there are scenes in
this movie that work well but they exist in a vacuum.  The credit
sequence is powerful and unforgettable; the initial on-the-scene
investigation of the dead body is unblinking and preserves the
unsentimental tone of the Price novel; the documentary-style of how the
clocking process works is exceptional; the few scenes centered on the
mini-drug king, Rodney, are staggering; and the young and largely
unknown cast makes a convincing ensemble.
     But the movie never quite pulls together as it should because like
usual of late, Lee keeps getting in the way of his own movie.  In
scenes throughout, the editing tries to artificially jack up the tension
when the material is more than enough to develop that tension;
characters are shot in extreme close-up when there is no justifiable
artistic reason to do so so often; and some art-school devices such as
Rocco reflected in Strike's eye and Rocco running beside a kid on a
bicycle are pointless exercises in flamboyance.  Furthermore, the
entire movie is over-scored.
     Lee's two cameo appearances may strike some as a small quibble but
I think they indicate Lee's narcissism and willingness to dwarf his own
material.  He made the right decision to cast some unknown actors in
the film to give his world more authenticity and remove from it a safe
Hollywood flavor.  But in both scenes where Lee appears--critical
scenes to the movie may I add--he immediately pulls us from the grit
of the movie he has created.  This isn't an Alfred Hitchcock movie
where the tone is devilish and playful.  Hitchcock's appearances only
supported the tone of his movies; Lee's appearances simply crash the
tone he has worked hard to establish.
     I've read a plethora of reviews of high praise for CLOCKERS.  Many
have said it is Lee's best film to date and certainly better than DO
THE RIGHT THING.  I disagree.  In the latter, Lee was able to carve out
three-dimensional characters and include important development that
just isn't in CLOCKERS.  The Danny Aiello character in DO THE RIGHT
THING emerges through the relationship to his sons and the community.
He ultimately is a complex character and what is so special about the
film is the way we see how his racism has formed and how his sons have
reacted to that.  Lee is dealing with a tapestry of characters in that
movie, too, but we still get small and informative insights about them
along the way.  The Ozzie Davis character and Lee's own "Mookie" are
just two characters who emerge more three-dimensional than any of the
people who populate CLOCKERS.
     Think about the scenes where Aiello talks to his son about how
hard he has worked to create his pizza business; or Lee reacting to his
lover and son; or a lonely Davis trying to court "Sister Sister." We
need that kind of insight in CLOCKERS--especially more dimension to
Keitel's character and more insight into Strike as well.
     Lee is certainly a gifted director and creates a world that closes
in on Strike with some passion and urgency.  But he is unwilling to
stay out of the way of his own material.  Too often, we want to see
more Rocco and Strike and less of the wizardry that Spike Lee is way
too eager to serve up these days.
