Authors
Mr. Brundage
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Rugrats Movie, The (1998)
Directed by Igor Kovalyov and Norton Virgien
Written by David Weiss and J. David Stem
Featuring the voices of: Elizabeth Daily, Christine Cavanaugh, Katie Soucie,
Cheryl Chase
    So I'm a little late in writing this review. I really don't care.
Neither do Tommy or Dill or Angelica or Chucky, who have pretty much been
chased out of their playpen box-office by the funny but unintelligent A
Bug's Life. But this movie succeeds where both A Bug's Life and its
competitor Antz failed: in creating a kids-love/adults-love movie. Kids love
A Bug's Life, Adults love Antz. Both of them love Rugrats.
    The most intelligent cartoon since "The Simpsons" (which the same
animation team behind Rugrats worked on) has come to the big screen. It's a
look at the babies of the new all-American parents: both at work, both armed
with cell phones and faxes. They're raised by their sleeping grandfather and
are intelligent beyond their single year.
    In this adventure of theirs, the ultimate kid's toy (NOT THE FURBIE), a
Reptar, takes Tommy, Tommy's new brother, Dill Pickles, Chucky, and a pair
of smart-mouthed twins into the forest for a great adventure. Having
accidentally taken Angelica's doll Cynthia, the junior sultan of sarcasm
tags along for the ride.
    The movie, with all of its slapstick comedy, will be riotously funny for
little kids, while at the same time letting "olders" like us sit back and
get the parodies of Indiana Jones and The Fugitive. It let's us get
malapropisms like "custardy" for "custody" while our youngers get singing
babies simultaneously peeing.
    The artwork is crude but, in my opinion, a representation of what a kid
would draw like (another intelligent touch). The lines, as said, are
intelligent, the storyline sensible. The only thing that I couldn't stand
were the musical numbers, which are paled by the ones in an average Disney
musical.
    But, that withstanding, it's a great film. Go see it. Go enjoy it. Don't
forget the kids.
