Authors
Sarah Elkins
Number of Reviews
2

Title
Review for Wings (1927)
Plot kick-off:  Mary loves Jack, who loves Silvia, who loves David.  David and 
Jack train to become fighter pilots and Mary joins the Women's Army Motor Corps.
Characters/acting:  Clara Bowe is engaging as Mary, the girl next door 
(literally, to Jack).  As in so many silents, some of the actors seemed (to me) 
to be overdoing it a bit more than necessary, but not her.  Gary Cooper has a 
small part.  
Cinematography:  One of the best reasons for seeing this film.  The biplanes 
seemed more like strange birds swooping and wheeling than machines, except 
during the battle close-ups.  There was an amazing shot of about ten planes 
trying to position themselves to fight each other.  It reminded me of Richard 
Bach's essay, "I shot down the Red Baron" about being a pilot for a film shoot, 
but it all looked pretty real to me.  I also liked the infantry marching 
scenes, which had battles greyed-out beyond the horizon.
Score:  I saw this at this the Kennedy Center's screening theater for the 
American Film Institute, and we were lucky to have a wonderful pianist playing 
for us.  I loved the score, which underscored and enhanced the moods of the 
film.  The sprightly plinkings during the funny bits, the furious agitato 
during the fight scenes, war songs, and other songs of the era (e.g. "It's a 
long way to Tipperary") were all woven together; I'd love to have a tape of the 
performance.
Violence/gore/language:  some may be puzzled/offended by the slang "Heinie(s)" 
for German(s).
Skin/situations:  a kiss, a brief flash (clothes-changing) of partial nudity.
Analysis:  I liked this film, though some parts (over-long scenes of a drunken 
Jack celebrating in Paris, the fourth or so shot of a plane's shadow passing 
over the training camp, the seventh or so shot of a plane trailing smoke as it 
plummets to the ground) could have used a sterner editor.  Though some of it 
was dated, the plot was enjoyable enough (sometimes cliched, but given life 
whenever Clara Bowe was in it), and the flight scenes were magical.  
Sarah Elkins (selkins@freenet.vcu.edu,
http://www.maxm.com/users/selkins/review.html)

Title
Review for Devil in a Blue Dress (1995)
DEVIL IN A BLUE DRESS:  Detective thriller in 1948 LA, based on a
book I haven't read.
Plot Kickoff:  Easy Rollins takes a job to find a white woman who's
gone missing.
Characters/Acting:  Denzel Washington is convincing as Easy; his
transition from a mild-mannered guy through anger and frustration make
his later actions convincing.  He also does a great job playing the
humor, and there is a lot of humor in this movie, straight so it shines
through.  Jennifer Beals (FLASHDANCE, THE BRIDE (opposite Sting as
Victor Frankenstein)) is fine as the woman on the run.  Mouse, Easy's
dangerous friend, is played by whoever plays the district attorney on
PICKET FENCES.  If they make a sequel I hope he's in it too.
Cinematography:  I liked the title sequence a lot, shot against a
painting (moving over the different scenes of the neighborhood in the
painting).  Still, as far as the picture goes, I think the big screen
isn't a must, if you want to wait to rent.
Sound/Score:  On the other hand, the great jazz soundtrack would lose
out unless you have a really good sound system attached to your TV.
Skin/situations:  Actually not that much skin per se, but there is an
earthy (and funny) sex scene.
Violence:  Yep.  Certainly not the most violent or gory I've seen in
the past few months, though.
Language:  Racial slurs, other profanity.
Analysis:  I really liked this movie.  The main character was smart
enough to put the puzzle pieces together (most of 'em, anyway), and I
liked the themes of loyalty, friendship, and community that kept coming
up.  There was more to this thriller than just the surface plot, and
yet it wasn't burdened by a lot of heavy-handed social commentary
either.
