Authors
Michael Dare
Number of Reviews
2

Title
Review for Amistad (1997)
        Amistad is a masterpiece that will shake your foundations.
Since he's Jewish, it was easy to understand how Steven Spielberg
could have found the emotional power he displayed in Schindler's List.
But he's definitely not black. Amistad shows that the depth of his
talent and perception knows no bounds. It does everything for the
black experience that Schindler's List did for the Jews, and with just
as much passion. He understands the power of pain that crosses all
boundaries. It's a film about integrity and the inescapable power and
attraction of freedom. It's classic cinema that takes risks, full of
the type of graphic realism Spielberg has always avoided. For the
first time, he doesn't blink at violence, but forces you to confront
your darkest fears about man's inhumanity.
It's an epic about the slave trade, and I admit I expected the
film to start in Africa with the rounding up of the slaves, but it
starts on the ship. Halfway through the film, there's a flashback that
is the single most harrowing and intense scene I have ever witnessed.
For ten minutes tears poured down my face while watching the graphic
truth of the slave ships. It's so powerful it's almost unbearable. I
can't believe people were ever treated like this. Schindler's List was
just practice for Amistad. With this film, Spielberg becomes not only
America's premiere filmmaker but our premiere educator. I can't
believe I wasn't taught about this in school. This is the incident
that made the civil war inevitable. It resonates with compassion, full
of brilliant performances, an amazing score, and incredible writing.
Spielberg is at the absolute peak of his powers. Don't miss it.

Title
Review for Flubber (1997)
You can stop trying to figure out the worst film of the year right
now. This is one of the most embarassing pieces of crap ever to emerge
from the tired brain of John Hughes. It is simply the laziest script
ever written, full of things that make absolutely no sense, refusing
to even adhere to it's own sense of idiotic logic. It's the story of a
professor who is trying to invent an anti-gravity polymer. He's so
absent minded that he has missed his own wedding three times. His best
pal is a little floating mechanical device with a video screen that
flies around the house helping him out and giving him advice. Did you
hear that? He has ALREADY INVENTED a device that can fly around of
it's own accord, yet we're supposed to go EUREKA when he gets his car
to fly. Are you insulted yet? Can you believe we're supposed to get
involved with a man who is desperately trying to create something he
has already created? John Hughes thinks we're idiots. 
Once flubber is invented, the film continues to violate every single
rule of decent screenwriting. The flubber does all kinds of crazy
things that have absolutlely nothing to do with the plot of the film.
At one point, when no one is looking, the flubber breaks itself into
hundreds of pieces and does an enormous Carmen Miranda musical number.
How does a piece of FLying rUBBER know how to do this? WHY would a
piece of FLying rUBBER do this? Who cares? The scene is there because
it is there. Cut it out and the film doesn't change at all. Cut out
just about every single scene where the flubber does something
supposedly funny and it doesn't effect the plot at all. 
The first thing that the professor does with the flubber is put it on
a golf ball. It bounces around his laboratory destroying everything in
its path. What's the next thing the professor does? He puts the
flubber on a bowling ball. We laugh in anticipation of the havoc it
will wreak. We also learn that the professor isn't just absent minded,
he's a moron. Who gives a damn what happens to this idiot?
Later, his little floating mechanical pal gets smashed. What does he
do? He cries. This is the single most embarrassing moment of Robin
Williams carreer. He doesn't cry when his bride abandons him. He cries
when his little toy breaks. A toy he built. A toy he can easily
rebuild. 
I could go on and on but I won't. The film doesn't deserve analysis.
It deserves immolation.
