Authors
Maoist Internationalist Movement
Number of Reviews
3

Title
Review for Ba wang bie ji (1993)
     This film chronicles the lives of two young boys (who become men)
from 1925-1977.  As children, the boys are forced to become theater
actors in a boarding school which resembles a boot camp.  They are in
training to join the so-called high culture of the Peking opera, which
the film lauds as beautiful.
     There is a current of homosexual tension in the relationship
between the two men.  Douzi, the man who plays the female role in their
rendition of "Concubine," falls in love with his partner, Shitou.
Shitou does not return his feelings, and later marries a prostitute
(played by Gong Li from RAISE THE RED LANTERN) whom Douzi deeply
resents.  It is in part because of the gay love that this movie was
initially banned in China. (1)
     Further reasons for the initial (and current) censorship of
FAREWELL MY CONCUBINE include the portrayals of suicide and political
dissent. (2)  But the most interesting part of the movie is its
portrayal of gender--exploring the way that gender is constructed and
privileged.  Douzi is not simply a man in love with another man.  As
the line between his opera character and his real life is blurred, he
is also at the same time a woman (the concubine) in love with a man
(the king).
     On the more reactionary side, the movie includes scenes from the
Cultural Revolution, in which the masses randomly denounce their
friends, wives, and family, but do not engage in political struggle to
try to reform the rich actors or ex-prostitutes.  The only scenes of
the Cultural Revolution are chaotic and destructive.  There is no
indication that any positive change occurred during that time period at
all.
     The director, Chen Kaige, was 14 in 1966 when he "wrongly"
denounced his father.  He later regretted his "betrayal" and when he
became a big movie director, he let his father work for him on the
movie sets. (3)
     Director Chen Kaige, on his American tour promoting the movie,
denounces Communism and the Cultural Revolution as evil. (3)   "When I
was a junior in high school, we believed in a very beautiful world ...
we heard a lot of good things about communism...  I didn't realize that
was the wrong thing to do." (3)
     While MIM has publicly accepted responsibility for its support of
Mao and the Chinese Communist Party, even with what did go wrong during
the Cultural Revolution, FAREWELL MY CONCUBINE does no justice to the
positive steps taken at that time, including the steps taken to erase
the distinction between high and low culture.  Chen Kaige's
self-interest in promoting his movie, as well as passing it by the
reactionary Deng-regime censors, means that he "forgets" to show his
viewers the real political struggle of the Cultural Revolution.
MIM Distributors, PO Box 3576, Ann Arbor MI 48106-3576.
E-mail: mim@blythe.org

Title
Review for Tales from the Hood (1995)
     TALES FROM THE HOOD is much better than your average Hollywood
flick.  It skillfully co-opts the trademarks of the goofier horror
movies--action, violence, gore and humor--to make some harsh political
points against patriarchy and national oppression.  More so than in
1995 Amerikkka, the oppressors tend to get what's coming to them, just
as they will in real life in the long run.  The audiences' cheers for
vengeance are one sign that life will imitate art in this regard.  By
using the horror medium, Cundieff is able to keep his audience's
attention and avoid being accused of being "preachy" as are more sober
political directors.
     TALES FROM THE HOOD is composed of four stories, each with a
strong component of reality.  What could make for better horror than
the real-life monsters created by imperialism, capitalism and
patriarchy? In the first story, a nasty, dope-pushing pig earns his
vengeance by killing a progressive community activist.  Happily, the
Uncle Tom pig is not spared.
     The monster in the second story is an abusive patriarch.  Cundieff
deals well with gender, particularly by the inclusion of several strong
women characters.
     The third story centers on a fascist cracker politician named Duke
Metzger.  Once again, the bad guy gets his, as does his Uncle Tom
advisor.  The protagonists here are symbols of slavery who call for
reparations--or else.
     The last story brings it all home to the young audience TALES FROM
THE HOOD is made for.  Cundieff makes it clear that these stories add
up to genocide, and that fratricidal gang violence is part of this big
problem.  This bit suffers from a line of dialogue that seems out of
place in this otherwise excellent movie.  The awkward line says that
the government funded a genuine anti-fratricide program, suggesting
that the government behind genocide has its sweet side.
     Overall though, TALES FROM THE HOOD is a great film in that it
advances a lot of heavy--and correct--political points, while staying
faithful to the traditions of a playful genre.
     MIM Notes is not copyrighted.  Please credit MIM when
redistributing or referring to this material.
MIM Distributors, PO Box 3576, Ann Arbor MI 48106-3576.
E-mail: mim@nyxfer.blythe.org.

Title
Review for Lan feng zheng (1993)
     This movie about the Great Leap Forward and the Cultural
Revolution in China was meant to be reactionary and in that context,
it's a pretty good film.  It's a good film not because it portrays the
important advances made in the Cultural Revolution in a way that makes
clear to the uneducated audience why the revolution was such an advance
(it doesn't even try to do this).  It is a good film because it
basically tells the truth.
     The movie focuses on a family that faces a lot of hard times
through the Cultural Revolution.  Out of context, to an Amerikan
audience, these hard times could seem like the fault of a failed
revolution.  This is a big problem with the movie.  When one man dies
of liver trouble, if the audience does not know how much medicine has
advanced during the revolution they would think this is the fault of
backward medical care that came from a failed revolution.  When another
man is going blind due to eye problems, the audience is again left
thinking it is just the failure of medicine under Mao that left the
doctor with only the option of suggesting that he not put too much
stress on his eyes.
     On the positive side, the movie lets all of it's characters
survive the Great Leap Forward with collective kitchens and enough
(though scarce) food.  One of the brothers in the family is clearly a
Rightist by all that he says and does, and he is sent off to a
rectification camp where he seems to learn some things.  The main
character admits that he was a Rightist all along.  The husband of the
main character is also sent off to rectification camp and the movie
does not try to lie and make these camps out to be evil.  The husband
is about to return when he is killed in an accident by a falling tree.
Again, some audiences will take this to mean that the revolution killed
him, but we later learn that the husband did not view the rectification
bitterly and was not angry that people had denounced his liberal
political views.
     Later in the movie the main character marries an older party
member: she says she is doing it to provide some structure for her
son.  As soon as they move in with him the audience is struck with the
size of his house and the amount of his wealth.  Compared to the
situation of the average Chinese, this man is really well off.  After a
while he tells his wife and son that he is being criticized and that he
will be arrested soon.  As he tells them this we see him burning
papers.  The thinking viewer of this movie should take this as an
example of correct criticism during the Cultural Revolution.  This man
had used his position in the party to gain wealth and a bourgeois
life.  He even used his wife as a servant, contrary to the situation
she had enjoyed in her previous marriages to poorer men.
     There are examples in this movie of the Cultural Revolution going
too far.  In fact, Mao criticized the ultraleftists in the Cultural
Revolution for their line of "criticize all, overthrow all."  He said
that they went too far and were too violent when struggle should have
been carried out without violence and when people should have been
rectified rather than punished.  There were clearly people who were
wrongly criticized, but there was only one example of serious
punishment for a non- existent crime.
     One revolutionary young woman quits her job in the army because of
what is hinted at as gender discrimination.  She is later put in prison
during the Hundred Flowers campaign of 1957.  This is probably a
realistic example of one of the errors of the revolution.  Some people
who were not politically enemies were punished because of appearances
of their actions or because of overzealous cadre.  She is released
during the Cultural Revolution.  And the prisons were not portrayed as
evil institutions of torture.  Again a mark in favor of the movie.
     The movie also tries to portray an atmosphere of fear in which
people had to watch every word they spoke for fear that they would be
punished.  The reality of this is that incorrect ideas should be
criticized whenever and wherever they are found.  It is a good example
of liberalism that the main characters of the movie let friends and
relatives slip by saying reactionary things without struggling with
them over these things.  Of course the movie did not try to explain why
it is that people would want to struggle against incorrect ideas
because that was not it's purpose.  Wait until MIM produces some
films.
     This movie is good for Maoists to see.  It is important that
people realize that the Cultural Revolution was not perfect, but that
it did a lot to advance the struggle against liberalism.  In the
context of study about Chinese history and what really happened, this
film could be informative.  But if you have not studied up on the
Cultural Revolution and do not yet know why the people were encouraged
to criticize their leaders, you would be better off sending $8 to MIM
for a copy of Jean Daubier's book, THE HISTORY OF THE CHINESE CULTURAL
REVOLUTION, rather than seeing this misleading movie.
