Authors
bob bloom
Number of Reviews
6

Title
Review for Return to Me (2000)
Return to Me (2000) 2 1/2 stars out of 4. Starring David Duchovny,
Minnie Driver, Carroll O'Connor, Robert Loggia, David Alan Grier, Bonnie
Hunt, James Belushi and Joely Richardson. Written by Hunt and Don Lake.
Directed by Hunt
 He's a successful young architect madly in love with his wife.
 She's a waitress, lying in a hospital bed awaiting the heart that will
give her a second chance at life.
 This is the setup for 'Return to Me,' a romantic feather in which you
know everything that is going to happen within the first five minutes.
There are no surprises, no sudden twists or deviations.
 Yet, like dining at your favorite restaurant, you still enjoy the
experience even though you've done it hundreds of times.
 I must confess that under this cynical exterior beats the heart of a
romantic, thus "Return to Me" was most appealing.
 It has a quaint, old-fashioned quality to it. The characters are good
people, even though they are recognizable types. Nevertheless, you root
for these vulnerable protagonists  as they overcome their misfortunes
and rediscover happiness.
 He's the still-in-mourning husband driven by work to battle the pain of
loss.
 She's the chipper, warm-hearted young woman thankful for her good
fortune.
 They meet cute when she serves him, his obnoxious and rude blind date
and some friends at her grandfather's tavern - O'Reilly's Italian
Restaurant.
 They are attracted to each other and begin dating. Bob (David Duchovny)
begins to smile again. Grace (Minnie Driver) finds what she never
thought she would experience - love.
 Together they make a handsome couple.
 The only drawback is her reluctance to tell him about her transplant,
especially after she learns about the donor.
 I don't believe I am giving anything away. Anyone with a rudimentary
knowledge of the genre can forecast what is going to happen with more
accuracy than a meteorologist predicting rain in April.
 Duchovny and Driver make a sweet pair. You want to see their
relationship succeed. Both are charming, and both perform admirably.
Driver, especially, is a lovely actress, easy on the eyes.
 Duchovny easily fits into the leading man persona, showing flashes of
wit, determination, pain and vulnerability.
 The real star of "Return to Me" is Bonnie Hunt, who co-wrote the script
and directs, as well as plays a supporting role as Driver's best friend.
 Her dry wit and observations are punctuated throughout the film.
 An enticing supporting cast, including Carroll O'Connor, Robert Loggia,
Joely Richardson, David Alan Grier and James Belushi, add to the
enjoyment.
"Return to Me" is not a ground-breaking movie. It is a formulaic, but
its charm compensates for its minor flaws.
 At about 115 minutes, "Return to Me" is a fine date movie.
 Bob Bloom is the film critic at the Journal and Courier in Lafayette,
IN. A member of the Online Film Critics Society, he can be reached at
bloom@journal-courier.com or at bobbloom@iquest.net. 
For more reviews by Bob Bloom, go to www.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Bob+Bloom

Title
Review for Erin Brockovich (2000)
Erin Brockovich (2000) 2 1/2 stars out of 4. Starring Julia Roberts and
Albert Finney. Written by Susannah Grant. Directed by Steven Soderbergh.
 "Erin Brockovich" is like watching a master magician perform: You know
you're being hoodwinked, nevertheless, you find it entertaining.
 Erin Brockovich is a free spirit. How do you know? She wears halter
tops and mini skirts, curses like a sailor and elicits disapproving
glances from the uptight people around her.
 How do we know these people are uptight. Because they wear starchy
clothes, they're not perfectly built and they work in a law office.
 Catch my drift. "Erin Brockovich" is an enjoyable David vs. Goliath
story, only this David is a twice-divorced mother with three little
kids. But beneath its glossy veneer, this based-on-a-true-story feature
appears smug, sanctimonious, self-righteous and pandering.
 I'm not saying that's all bad. All movies try to manipulate your
emotions, that's what good films are supposed to do. But "Erin
Brockovich" does it in such a contemptuous style. It's like the magician
daring the audience to guess the secret of the trick.
 You may still feel you are being entertained, but at the same time you
almost feel as if you were being held in contempt.
 Julia Roberts' Erin Brockovich is a kindred spirit to Sally Field's
Norma Rae and Meryl Streep's Karen Silkwood - with a bit of Cher's biker
mom from "Mask "tossed in.
 That is she's not an educated person in the classical sense, but she is
a smart woman who knows right from wrong and has a built-in b.s.
detector. Roberts' Erin usually fails to see any gray area. Things are
either yes or no, black or white.
Lawyers and the legal system in general merely complicate the world and 
muddle clear-cut issues of morality. Thus, Erin Brockovich is a very
proletarian movie.
 Yet Roberts cuts through all this baggage. She is the movie, a true
film star whom the camera loves, a young woman who holds the screen and
draws you to her.
There's a cliché about someone being good enough to sell ice to eskimos.
That's Roberts, especially when she flashes that multimillion dollar
smile. You forget all the movie's manipulations, everything that is
bogus about "Erin Brockovich" and just melt in her personality.
 The rest of the cast? Well, there basically props, furniture off which
Roberts plays. Even Albert Finney as the gruff, pragmatic Ed Masry, the
head of the law firm at which Erin works as a filing clerk, is putty
when up against this human dynamo.
 The story, oh yea, I almost forgot. Erin, when filing some papers for
her boss, uncovers a cover-up by massive Pacific Gas & Electric
involving contaminated water in a nearby community.
 She rallies and bands together those affected by PG&E's actions and
through her tenacity and dedication - and some legal expertise from her
boss - wins them a massive settlement.
 If only screenwriter Susannah Grant and director Steven Soderbergh had
had the same determination as Erin to let the story tell itself without
resorting to smoke and mirrors.
 Bob Bloom is the film critic at the Journal and Courier in Lafayette,
IN. He can be reached by e-mail at bloom@journal-courier.com or at
bobbloom@iquest.net

Title
Review for Rules of Engagement (2000)

 Rules of Engagement (2000) 2 stars out of 4. Starring Tommy Lee Jones,
Samuel L. Jackson, Guy Pearce, Bruce Greenwood and Ben Kingsley.
Directed by William Friedkin
 With debate continuing about the role of American troops in overseas
situations such as Kosovo, the new film, "Rules of Engagement," has a
current events timeliness to it.
 This court-martial drama, directed by William Friedkin, is a movie in
which ambiguity would have been an asset.
 Samuel L. Jackson plays Col. Terry Childers a Marine veteran sent with
a detachment of men to the U.S. Embassy in Yemen to evacuate its
personnel.
 The embassy is under siege with crowds throwing rocks and Molotov
cocktails at the compound, while snipers are firing into the buildings.
 After three of Childers' men are killed, he orders his men to fire -
not at the snipers - but into the crowd because he claims he sees them
brandishing weapons and firing up at his men. In the ensuing action, 83
civilians, including old men, women and children, are killed by the
Marines and more than 100 people are wounded.
 Public outcry calls for Childers' head and the U.S. government decides
to make him the sacrificial lamb and court-martial him.
 Childers chooses as his counsel Col. Hays Hodges (Tommy Lee Jones), a
longtime friend. The two served together in Vietnam and Childers saved
Hodges life.
 Hodges, who has had drinking problems as well as other personal woes,
admits he is not a very good lawyer and urges his friend to get someone
else to defend him.
 But Childers is adamant, and Hodges accepts the assignment.
 The interplay between the two veterans makes for compelling drama.
 Where "Rules of Engagement" fails is in the script, which employs the
tired device of a smarmy government official - the head of the National
Security Council played by Bruce Greenwood - who has a tape showing the
demonstrators with weapons. It's the old government coverup scam, which
has become a tired cliche.
 The tape would exonerate Childers, but not help the United States in
the world court of public opinion, so he has it destroyed.
 "Rules of Engagement" would have been a much better and more thoughtful
drama if the entire tape subplot had been eliminated or if we were not
shown scenes of the protesters firing their weapons.
 This is one movie that would have benefited from making the audience
decide if Childers took the correct course of action.
 The outcome of the court-martial is diluted because of the tape plot
device.
 However, the strong performances by Jackson and Jones are the movie's
main asset. The two actors exude charisma and are fun to watch.
 Jackson, ramrod straight, his eyes blazing is all semper fi, while
Jones is more subdued and vulnerable as the physically and mentally
wounded veteran.
 Guy Pearce, best remembered from "L.A. Confidential," is the firebrand
Marine prosecutor out to convict Childers. The Australian Pearce has
adopted an accent that makes him sound a bit like Matt Damon.
 "Rules of Engagement" is a flawed picture. There are a few slow spots;
it could have used some tighter editing.
 At a little over two hours, the movie drags a bit. Among the film's
other shortcomings is Friedkin's obsession with squibs.
 Mostly everyone who takes a bullet does so in slow-mo as blood erupts
in a cascade of spurting red.
 It's an unnecessary cliché from the 1970s.
 The movie, though, is entertaining and thoughtful. It could have used a
bit more backbone, which would have made it an even better drama.
 Bob Bloom is the film critic at the Journal and Courier in Lafayette,
IN. A member of the Online Film Critics Society, he can be reached at
bloom@journal-courier.com or at bobbloom@iquest.net. 
For more reviews by Bob Bloom, go to www.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Bob+Bloom

Title
Review for Play It to the Bone (1999)
Play It to the Bone (1999) 2 1/2 stars out of 4. Starring Woody
Harrelson, Antonio Banderas, Lolita Davidovich, Lisa Liu. Written and
directed by Ron Shelton.
 On the boxing food chain Vince Boudreau (Woody Harrelson) and Cesar
Dominguez (Antonio Banderas) are closer to the bottom than the top.
 Neither is what you would call a contender. They're merely card fillers
- bodies to fill out a program, to whet the mob's appetite before the
main bout.
 Vince and Cesar also happen to be best friends. So when providence
strikes, it smites them both in the solar plexus.
 A series of accidents has opened a spot on a championship bout card.
The only hitch, Vince and Cesar have to fight each other.
 Thus is the premise of director-writer Ron Shelton's "Play It to the
Bone."
 And  I wish I could report that Shelton's movie delivers a knock-out
punch. 
 Unfortunately, it lands a few solid blows and several jabs, but never
can connect that emotional wallop needed to carry off the decision.
 Shelton has created some likable characters, yet it seems he had
trouble deciding what he wants to do with them.
 "Play It to the Bone" almost plays like two films: the first, a road
movie as Vince, Cesar and their girlfriend, Grace Pasic (Lolita
Davidovich) drive from Los Angeles to Las Vegas for the bout.
 The second, and much better half of the movie, is the battle in the
ring between Vince and Cesar.
 "Play It to the Bone" is gritty, hard-punching fun. But Shelton takes
too long setting things up for the big fight. He spends too much time on
the road. His idea, of course, was to allow us time to get to know these
characters.
 But Vince and Cesar start to wear out their welcome as their
alternately bond, bicker and recall past days of near-glory.
 The fight sequences are superb. And Shelton's dialogue is crisp and
clever.
 Harrelson and Banderas gives solid performances. They have the walk and
talk down pat and have that down-and-out, almost-made-it-to-the-top
look.
 Davidovich is sexy and charming as the woman who can't decide between
the two loves of her life, while Lucy Liu (best known as one of the
lawyers on TV's "Ally McBeal") is sharp is a small, supporting role as a
gold-digging hanger-on.
 Ultimately, though, something is missing. An ingredient is lacking that
would raise "Play It to the Bone" to level of Shelton's "Bull Durham,"
for example.
 It's that little spark that separates a champion from an also-ran.
"Play It to the Bone" had championship potential, but it just could not
climb to that next level.
 Bob Bloom is the film critic at the Journal and Courier in Lafayette,
IN. He can be reached by e-mail at bloom@journal-courier.com or at
bobbloom@iquest.net

Title
Review for What Planet Are You From? (2000)
  What Planet Are You From? (2000) 1/2 star out of 4. Starring Gary
Shandling, Annette Bening, Ben Kingsley, John Goodman, Greg Kinnear and
Linda Fiorentino. Directed by Mike Nichols.
 "What Planet Are You From?" follows a long line of science fiction
films in which male aliens come to Earth for the sole purpose of mating
with human females.
But the question is, why? What makes Earth women so special that male
ETs would travel thousands of light years merely to get ‘em in the sack?
I mean with all the millions of planets out there, you're telling me
that Earth has the most desirable women in the universe? There's not
some hot, green-skinned number on a planet revolving Alpha Centuri who
makes the "Sports Illustrated" swimsuit models look like Janet Reno?
 No offense, ladies, but I don't buy it. As a species, women are for the
most part too complicated - and have too many issues - for human males,
so how can alien males who know nothing of our culture hope to succeed
where the majority of us fall on our butts - and most times more than
once.
 And that's the beauty of movies such as "What Planet Are You From?"
 Unfortunately, the latest member of this small genre is a stinker.
 My first clue that something was amiss with "What Planet Are You From?"
was found in the writing credits.
 While the story is credited to star Garry Shandling and Michael Leeson,
the screenplay credit contains four names, including those of Shandling
and Leeson.
Comedy, like brain surgery, is a delicate procedure and the cliché about
too many cooks rightly applies.
 "What Planet Are You From?" is listless, lame and limpid. It cannot
decide if it wants to be a low-comedy sex farce or a satiric look at
male-female relationships and marriage.
 Either way, the movie fails. It is neither meat nor fowl. It's an
overcooked goulash not fit for cinematic consumption.
 The story is simple. A technologically advanced planet consisting of an
all-male population, decides to expand by conquering the Earth. How?
Easy. They send one of their own to the planet to impregnate a female,
which would be the first step.
 How that leads to world domination is never explained, and neither is a
lot of other aspects of this woeful exercise.
 Suffice it to say that when a prop male organ that hums has more
charisma than the star to which it is attached, the movie has big
problems.
 As you watch "What Planet Are You From?", you feel embarrassment for
many of the cast members. 
 Annette Bening, for instance, tries so darn hard to be cute, bubbly and
perky that you can almost see the sweat break out on her forehead. And
God only knows what Ben Kingsley was thinking as he continually exits
airplanes by being flushed down the commode.
 Actually, he could have done all of us a favor if had taken all copies
of the script with him.
 Shandling's laid back, ironic and wry comedy stylings are unsuitable to
carry a film. His type of humor is more observational. On the screen, he
makes a better second banana, commenting on the foibles of others, than
a leading man. What he needed was a Garry Shandling of his own.
 "What Planet Are You From?" was directed by Mike Nichols, who is no
comedy slouch. And it is understandable what attracted him to the
project. The topical humor is a bit reminiscent of the riffs he and
Elaine May did 30 or 40 years ago. Well, she had her "Ishtar" and now he
has his.
 It would be more fun to kick back and watch a guilty pleasure such as
"I Married a Monster from Outer Space" or even "Mars Needs Women" than
to suffer through "What Planet Are You From?"
 One final thought: Why aren't there movies in which beautiful,
big-breasted female aliens come to Earth to mate with human males in
order to save their planet?
Id. volunteer. Oh well, I can dream. And those ramblings will be more
enjoyable than sitting through "What Planet Are You From?"
 Bob Bloom is the film critic at the Journal and Courier in Lafayette,
IN. He can be reached by e-mail at bloom@journal-courier.com or at
bobbloom@iquest.net

Title
Review for Wonder Boys (2000)
Wonder Boys (2000) 3 1/2 stars out of 4. Starring Michael Douglas,
Tobey Maguire, Frances McDormand and Robert Downey Jr. Written by Steven
Kloves. Directed by Curtis Hanson.
 It's the weekend from hell for Grady Tripp.
 The English professor, who teaches a writing workshop, begins his day
with the knowledge that his wife has left him.
 His book editor is flying in from New York for the weekend to check on
the progress of Grade's novel, one on which he has been working for
nearly seven years and - at 1,262 pages - is not yet complete.
 He is informed by his lover, Sara, the chancellor of the university,
that she is pregnant.
 And his best student, James Leer, shoots and kills the pet dog
belonging to Sara's husband, Walter. On top of that James steals
Walter's most prized possession, the jacket worn by Marilyn Monroe the
day she married Joe DiMaggio.
 Plus, some nut case is stalking Grady, claiming that the professor's
car - given to him in lieu of money owed - is actually a stolen vehicle.
 If all this sounds like the makings of some depressing melodrama, you
couldn't be more wrong.
 "The Wonder Boys" is a intelligent, witty, adult comedy, the first
really memorable movie of the year.
 It features fine acting, interesting characters and a literate script.
 The cast is headed by Michael Douglas as Grady Tripp. He's a sort of
throwback to the ‘60s, a disheveled, pot-smoking professor,
self-centered, to some extent unfeeling and uncaring about how he treats
others.
 Douglas smoothly captures the writer's knack for self-involvement.
While Grady is an intelligent man, he is seems to blithely go through
life unaware of how his actions, intentionally or unintentionally, hurt
others.
 It is Douglas' best performance in years.
 Tobey Maguire plays James Leer, Grady's prize student, a young man
living in a continuous state of depression who turns out to be a
brilliant writer and whose outward appearance and mannerisms hide a
sensitive soul.
 Maguire's James seems to be a pathological liar, but in reality is a
young man who has created his own fantasy world in order to cope.
 Maguire, as he did in "The Cider House Rules" and "Pleasantville,"
demonstrates why he is one of the best young actors to emerge on the
screen in the past couple of years.
 Oscar-winner Frances McDormand is vulnerable, yet determined as Sara,
who - though she loves Grady - decides to forge her own future with or
without him.
 Robert Downey Jr. gives a sly, charming performance as Terry Crabtree,
Grady's exasperated book editor. Terry had made his reputation by
bringing Grady's first novel, which was eventually an award-winning
work, to his publishing house, and is desperate for his friend's
follow-up in order to restore his reputation and retain his position.
 The script by Steven Kloves ("The Fabulous Baker Boys") is
sophisticated and deftly captures the cadence of milieu of academia and
the book world.
 The wit is clever, the situations - though exaggerated - seem true to
life.
 Director Curtis Hanson, in his first outing since his critically
acclaimed "L.A. Confidential," keeps the proceedings moving at a steady
pace. There is no dead space in "Wonder Boys," as Grady jerkily
progresses from one crisis to another without missing a beat.
 Life is messy, appears to be the movie's message, and we do what we can
to sort through the clutter and make the best of what we have and what
is offered to us.
 "Wonder Boys," though, is no messy movie. It is a heartfelt, somewhat
dark, but ultimately uplifting character study of one man trying to
rediscover his true self.
 Bob Bloom is the film critic at the Journal and Courier in Lafayette,
IN. He can be reached by e-mail at bloom@journal-courier.com or at
bobbloom@iquest.net
