Authors
Jesse Kopelman
Number of Reviews
4

Title
Review for South Park: Bigger, Longer and Uncut (1999)
South Park: Bigger, Longer, and Uncut
This movie is based on the television show _South Park_ and some knowledge
of the show would enhance one's viewing enjoyment of the movie. Rarely have
I seen a movie so single-mindedly obscene. If you cannot find anything in
this movie that offends you, I suggest a career in proctology. As long as
you have a strong stomach, don't let the obscenity scare you away. It is the
way this movie revels in filth that makes it entertaining. The story is as
follows: the boys see a movie by the Canadian duo Terrance and Phillip,
which warps their fragile little minds, which leads to America going to war
with Canada and a bunch of other stuff. _South Park BL&U_ sets out to be a
parody of a Disney movie, including the irrelevant music numbers. These
songs are probably the movie's best feature. The song from the Terrance and
Phillip movie is the best, but don't go singing it in public. Also, Cartman
sings his famous song, "Kyle's Mom is a Bitch." Despite being highly
enjoyable and quite quotable, this movie has two major flaws. First, Chef
does not sing. Chef's songs are always the highlight of the _South Park_ tv
show episodes. Second, and more importantly, the movie needed more of a
plot. Basically, the story served as a vehicle to lampoon popular culture,
especially Disney movies and censorship. While that would have been fine for
a 30 minute tv episode, it wears thin over the course of 90 minutes.
However, the movie has the grace to end on a strong note. The Cartman vs.
Saddam Hussien fight is both hysterical in its own right and an excellent
parody of an anime battle.
Ratings go like this: Abominable, Bad, Fair, Good, Very Good, Great, and
Perfect. As you might guess, most movies are Fair to Good. Very few movies
are either Abominable or Perfect.
--
Jesse Kopelman - thebruce@paonline.com
"It's not worth leaving, until you've worn out your welcome."

Title
Review for American Pie (1999)
This movie is pretty much an updating of _Fast Times at Ridgemont High_. If
you haven't seen _Fast Times_, the plot goes something like this: teenagers
think about having and sometimes have sex. Just as today's world is faster
paced than that of the dawn of the 80's, so is _American Pie_ faster than
_Fast Times_. While the latter covers several months time, _American Pie_
covers less than one month. Still, it is a very busy month, packed with
pathetic teenage behavior the likes of which I have never seen. That is the
problem with most teenage movies; the characters are either unbelievably
slick (_10 Things I Hate About You_) or unbelievably pathetic. I can think
of only two movies that have really got it right and been great movies:
_Fast Times_ and _Dazed and Confused_. Still, if you take this movie for
what it is, a pleasant sex comedy with an attractive young cast. I am happy
to report that this movie contains some excellent nudity, although I am sad
to say that it was of the designated nudist type (one actress was singled
out to be naked). Something tells me that the sale of those little video
cameras that hook up to your computer is about to go through the roof. By
the way, while the movie bills itself as having outrageous humor, it falls
short. The movie is generally funny and some scenes are down right
hilarious, but, compared to _There's Something About Mary_, there is nothing
outrageous. Don't let that discourage you. There is plenty of raunchy humor,
just don't expect it to warp your fragile little mind.
Ratings go like this: Abominable, Bad, Fair, Good, Very Good, Great, and
Perfect. As you might guess, most movies are Fair to Good. Very few movies
are either Abominable or Perfect.
--
Jesse Kopelman - thebruce@paonline.com
"It's not worth leaving, until you've worn out your welcome."

Title
Review for Austin Powers: The Spy Who Shagged Me (1999)
Here we have the superior sequel to Austin Powers: International Man of
Mystery. This time Austin's nemesis, Dr. Evil, has traveled back in time to
steal our hero's mojo. Of course, Austin has no choice but to revisit his
swinging past in an attempt to regain said mojo and prevent Dr. Evil from
conquering the world. At its best, this movie is far funnier than the law
allows. Unfortunately, there are several slow spots with nary a chuckle.
Most of these unfunny moments involve Austin's romancing of Felicity
Shagwell. The romance does provide many a funny moment, but the film dwells
on it in too much detail. Besides, the funniest scenes are those involving
Dr. Evil, not Austin Powers. It just goes to show you -- Evil will win,
because Good is dumb! Anyway, this movie would be worth seeing just for the
hilarious credits, both beginning and ending, and it offers far more. I have
to give a final word of praise to two of the supporting actors. Seth Green
is brilliant as Dr. Evil's not evil enough son and  Rob Lowe does a
fantastic Robert Wagner impression.
Ratings go like this: Abominable, Bad, Fair, Good, Very Good, Great, and
Perfect. As you might guess, most movies are Fair to Good. Very few movies
are either Abominable or Perfect.
--
Jesse Kopelman - thebruce@paonline.com
"It's not worth leaving, until you've worn out your welcome."

Title
Review for Summer of Sam (1999)
Spike Lee directs a movie set in the summer of 1977, the year in which the
Son of Sam conducted his killing spree. If you are not a fan of Spike Lee,
this movie will not change your mind. Its inherent faults are shared with
many of his other movies, especially its cumbersome length and unsatisfying
ending. Despite its title, _Summer of Sam_ is really the story of a guy
named Vinnie who looses control of his life at the same time David Berkowitz
looses control of his. Berkowitz is portrayed brilliantly by Michael
Badalucco, while Vinnie is John Leguizamo in fine form. I think this
dichotomy of title and story is what hurts the movie the most. While
Vinnie's story is very interesting, it is nowhere near as interesting as
that of the Son of Sam. There are many scenes involving Berkowitz that,
while powerful, distract from the main story. Speaking of which, Vinnie's
problems are twofold. First, he can't stop cheating on his wife, played by
Mira Sorvino. Second, his best friend and he have grown apart and some in
the neighborhood think the friend is the killer. Not a bad plot, but Lee
can't seem to narrow his focus. He crowds too many side stories into the
movie, diluting its powerful main story. As an aside, Mira Sorvino once
again portrays a good woman put upon by those she loves -- Sound familiar?
Sorvino is a very good actress, but I am sick of her playing the same
character in every movie. She should try playing a villain or, at the very
least, someone a bit bitchier. In the end, this movie was compelling, but
not satisfying. Lee has shown a talent for interesting characters and
situations, but he has rarely  been able to deliver a good movie. In his
case, the parts always seem better than their sum.
Ratings go like this: Abominable, Bad, Fair, Good, Very Good, Great, and
Perfect. As you might guess, most movies are Fair to Good. Very few movies
are either Abominable or Perfect.
--
Jesse Kopelman - thebruce@paonline.com
"It's not worth leaving, until you've worn out your welcome."
