Authors
Jon Webb
Number of Reviews
8

Title
Review for Jennifer Eight (1992)
     This is an entirely conventional cop thriller, the only twist being
that the beautiful young lady that the cop falls in love with and must
defend is blind (and played quite well by Uma Thurman).  Andy Garcia is
the cop; he has a bad reputation and a past marred by drinking and
divorce (just once I'd like to see a cop thriller where the hero drinks
socially but not too much, has a wife who understands his devotion to
his job because she is devoted to her's as well, and whose children
admire and heroize him though they naturally wish he could spend more
time with them.  In this fantasy cop thriller, I see the hero coming
home late at night; he enters the house, goes to the kitchen, pours
himself some milk, looks through the day's mail, turns out the light,
goes to bed, slightly awakening his wife, and goes to sleep; the next
scene is him back at work the next morning.)
     The second nicest thing (the nicest is Uma Thurman's performance)
about this film is the feeling of dread in almost every scene through
the first half of the film.  The framing is too tight; there are too
many things in the background that someone could be hiding behind; you
constantly feel that something is going to jump out at you.  After
something finally does, the tension relaxes and the movie gets tangled
up trying to tie together the bits of evidence sprinkled through the
movie.
     John Malkovich shows up for a few scenes towards the end; he's
enjoying himself, and he's just a really fine actor, but I got the
impression that he was thrown in simply to make the film seem less like
the conventional piece of work it is.  He probably worked for a day or
two, tops.
     The plot is casually thrown together; there's little motivation for
Garcia's character to become as obsessed as he does; there are important
technical details wrong, such as every camera in existence makes a fair
bit of sound when it winds the film; the ending doesn't really satisfy;
the stupid final scene is as cloying and sentimental as they come; etc.
     Not a film I liked.  I'd suggest you see UNDER SIEGE instead --
although I haven't seen it, it seems to have remarkable staying power.

Title
Review for Husbands and Wives (1992)
     What a great film.  The story revolves around two couples, one of
whose marriage has just broken up, as we learn in the opening moments of
the film, and the other whose marriage seems stable.
     Woody Allen shows incredible insight into human relationships and
vast skill as a director in portraying them.  I particularly loved the
fight scene as the one couple is leaving the party, and the scene
between Allen and Juliet Lewis in the kitchen.  The latter was deeply
moving, for me, without being cloying or sentimental.
     The acting is first-rate; in particular Judy Davis stands out.  The
layers of feeling she portrays as she tries to cover up her pain and
anger or tries to play a role on a date are complex and convincing.
     This is perhaps Allen's greatest film; it will almost certainly be
his most financially successful, as the controversy surrounding it will
draw people in for a look, and its quality will sustain it.  As a
commentary on that controversy, the film is very compelling; the film
portrays the complexity of human relationships, and seems to be telling
us who are ready to judge Allen as a father or husband, "You do not
(cannot) know the whole story; love is strange; don't judge, it could
happen to you."
     Without the controversy, this film would get Allen nominated for a
Best Director Academy Award, and Judy Davis for Best Actress.  As it is,
who knows.  But this work of art will far outlast the disorder in
Allen's life, and goes a long way to establish him as the greatest
living American director.

Title
Review for Dracula (1992)
     I liked DRACULA very much, almost enough to see it again.  It is a
film devoted to visual imagery, as usual with Coppola, but unlike some
of his earlier films (like COTTON CLUB) where the images seem added on
(and somewhat inappropriate) to a more or less ordinary plot, in this
film the plot is so fantastic that the images merely hint at the plot,
so giving viewers the opportunity to fill in details themselves, and
creating for themselves a richer experience, in the same way that a
painting may create a richer experience for the viewer than a photograph
of the same scene.
     This is largely a special effects movie; actors are secondary.  It
is interesting to note that this film eschews the increasingly popular
computer graphics techniques like morphing in favor of more traditional
methods.  This gives the film an older feeling, and also fits the mood
of the film, which is set in Victorian England.  The point of the film
seems to be the conflict between two cultures, the ancient one of
Transylvania and the war with the Turks and the (then) modern England.
Computer graphics would have placed us *in* Victorian England and made
us a participant in the culture rather than an outside observer, able to
see the conflict going on.
     I thought Gary Oldman did a fine job as Dracula, but it must be
noted that the makeup does an awful lot of the work for him in many
scenes.  One doesn't get any feeling of depth from any of the actors,
except Hopkins as Van Helsing; but that's probably the way the book was
written.  (Hopkins is great, by the way -- funny, exuberant, and
overjoyed at finally discovering his nemesis.)  Still, I would've liked
to see Winona Ryder display a little more quirkiness than she did here
as Mina; I think she has the potential, but perhaps she felt too
constrained.
     There are a lot of references to other Dracula films; any film buff
will enjoy these.  For example, the many forms Dracula takes are
undoubtedly references to the many shapes he's taken in different films;
I recognized him from NOSFERATU, for instance.
     All in all, this is a fun film, something like STAR WARS in its
quality and effective use of imagery, but also like it in its lack of
substance.

Title
Review for Bob Roberts (1992)
     Tim Robbins plays a right-wing Christian fundamentalist folk singer
who is running for Senator from Pennsylvania.  The movie is supposed to
be funny (it started as a "Saturday Night Live" skit), with Robbins
singing songs like "Times are Changing Back" and "Complain, Complain,
Complain" (about welfare recipients).  But it's also supposed to be a
serious attack on our present political structure, as it raises several
familiar issues: for example, the import of drugs into this country to
finance the Contras and diversion of money from failed S&Ls into
right-wing causes.
     The problem with this film is that it never quite gets to be either
a parody or an "enhanced" documentary, like JFK.  You have on the one
hand Gore Vidal (as the incumbent senator) railing against the NSC
secretly running the country, and on the other hand song lyrics
something like "We marched for the poor, we marched to be free, we
marched for self-interest..." and "This land is my land, this land is
our land...."  It's a little too serious to be funny, and a little too
funny to be serious.
     It's still fun, though.  Giancarlo Esposito is great as the
anti-establishment reporter who follows Bob Roberts around and digs up
the dirt connecting him with a failed S&L and drug-running (somehow he
seems to have avoided being caught up with INSLAW, unless one of his
employees was discussing it in German or Japanese).  Tim Robbins himself
has just about the right blend of passion and humor that a right-wing
folk singer would have.  Some of his followers acquire the hypnotized
eyes of youth before an idol, and that's fun too.  The MTV videos are
quite good, blending the kind of quirkiness that would appeal to the
young with right wing passion.  And there are a lot of cameo
appearances; it's almost as if this film had the same kind of appeal for
stars wanting to make as statement with a day or two of work that JFK
did.
     But I wish that Robbins (who directed the film) had either
restrained himself and made the movie as an ironic send-up of right-wing
politics, or really let himself go, the way Oliver Stone did, and really
tried to convince us that all this was true, more or less.  These days,
with Bush all but defeated, in significant part because of the
prominence of right-wing fundamentalists during the Republican
convention, simply raising the spectre of the right wing doesn't provide
enough scare value to drive a film.

Title
Review for Few Good Men, A (1992)
     I was reluctant to see this film because I'm not wild about Tom
Cruise, but THE CRYING GAME hasn't hit Pittsburgh yet, and it came down
to a choice between HOFFA, which my wife didn't want to see, and this,
which I'd actually heard was good.  So we went.
     It turned out to be a pretty good film, after all.  It is
entertaining, funny, and has plenty of good acting, especially from Jack
Nicholson (no surprise there) and Tom Cruise (big surprise to me).
     Tom Cruise is a nonchalant but successful Navy lawyer who is handed
a politically sensitive case: two Marines at Guantanamo Bay have
accidentally killed another in a hazing incident ordered by the base
commander, Jack Nicholson.  Of course, Tom Cruise mus come to terms with
his inability to take anything seriously, grow up, etc.
     What makes this film good is that it is obvious that Tom Cruise is
having a great time.  His performance is full of energy and fun.  I'm
really beginning to think that I've underestimated Tom Cruise; I think
that he can still be a great actor, even though he keeps playing the
same character over and over.  After all, many of the great male actors
have managed to become great with only one good character -- look at,
for example, Jimmy Cagney.
     Jack Nicholson's performance is rich and interesting, too, although
he's not on that much.  At the end, in the courtroom, he seems like an
out of control bull; I would have been terrified to be there with him.
     By the way, there's a marvelous moment when Cruise imitates
Nicholson's character.  Watch for it.
     Demi Moore's performance is a real downer, not interesting at all,
at least to me.
     I respected the screenplay because it showed restraint; some of the
more obvious cliches are avoided, e.g., in the relationship between
Moore and Cruise.  Some of the little tricks are clever, like the
cliched conversation between Cruise and the newspaper seller.
     The direction felt a little odd.  I couldn't tell what was going on
in Cruise's mind during the courtroom confrontation with Nicholson.
Similarly with the earlier meeting in Guantanamo Bay.

Title
Review for Malcolm X (1992)
     This film is an assembly of symbols of racism and politics in this
country.  It opens with two of the most powerful symbols in recent
years: the Rodney King videotape, and a burning American flag.  Clearly,
Spike Lee is trying to grab hold of our political consciousness and move
us.
     The movie is really about three people: Malcolm Little
(a.k.a.  Detroit Red), the hood and dandy; Malcolm X, the follower of
Elijah Muhammed; and the anti-racist who rejected black separatism after
a pilgrimage to Mecca (whose long name I do not recall).  The tone and
direction of the film changes significantly with each incarnation of the
man -- it is really three movies concatenated.
     I liked the first two parts of the film better.  The final
conversion is just not convincing (frankly, I thought it was motivated
by political convenience -- he needed a power base outside the Black
Muslims), and the heart of Denzel Washington's character seems to have
disappeared following the return from Mecca.  (Though it was interesting
actually seeing Mecca, a rare experience; to make this film, some of the
crew actually had to convert to Islam.)  He seems to simply be waiting
for the assassin's bullets.
     This is Spike Lee's master work, the one film he has been moving
towards all these years.  Its length and breadth will make it the
starting point for many in their understanding of what Malcolm X was
about.  It admirably fills that role; it is part historical documentary,
part a course on the issues that moved Malcolm X.  But it is not really
moving in itself.  In Spike Lee's recent films (e.g., SCHOOL DAZE,
JUNGLE FEVER), he explicitly calls on us to wake up to what is
happening to African Americans, and in this film he tries to do so in
every way possible -- by the use of charged symbols like a burning flag
and the JFK assassination, by including actual appearances by
controversial people like the Reverend Al Sharpton and Nelson Mandela,
by showing us the most powerful possible images of African Americans
being brutalized -- still, for me, it was not enough.  Lee tries to
include everything he can think of, but in the process he loses focus.
I found the fairy tale HERO more moving politically than this film.
     Denzel Washington turns in an admirable performance.  It wasn't
until the end of the film, when we see actually footage of Malcolm X
talking, that I realized how good it really was: he has his smile down
just right, his laugh.  The man who plays Elijah Muhammed is also very
good; just the right combination of saintliness and power.  I also
admired the performance of the woman who plays Betty Shabazz, at least
before she married Malcolm X and became somewhat strident.

Title
Review for Leap of Faith (1992)
     Steve Martin plays a con man revival preacher who goes through a
life-changing experience.  Part of the film is a look into technically
sophisticated cons -- identifying people in the audience with particular
problems so the preacher can call on them as if God told him they needed
his help, using wireless microphones to control the show with the aid of
a computer -- and part is a story about a man's relationship with, well,
God.  It's an interesting film in that it doesn't back down an make
acceptable to this Godless world its central dramatic moment, which
hinges on the difference between real and fake miracles.
     This is Steve Martin's first major non-comic role.  He does fairly
well, especially during the shows, when the moves he developed as part
of his comic routines come in handy.  But I found him less believable
off-stage.  He seems too young and hip to be an evangelist.  I suppose
this contrast is intentional, and maybe even based on studies of the
private lives of evangelists.  But either the writing or the acting
didn't convey what it was supposed to convey, to me.
     Another problem with Steve Martin's role is that it is undeveloped.
He was supposed to have an affair with the Lolita Davidovich role, but
that part was almost completely cut.  (She is left with a few scenes,
and almost a superfluous presence in the film.)  So we're left with an
incomplete person.
     By contrast, Debra Winger's character is well-developed in much
fewer scenes.  The only thing left out was parts of the relationship
between her and Martin's character.  I found her role and acting to be
completely credible.
     Lukas Haas is good as the crippled brother of Davidovich, and Liam
Neeson is good (though his role is depressingly familiar from other
movies) as the sheriff.
     The direction is great, particularly during the shows.  Martin's
sermons and the gospel singing move us even though we know they are a
con.
     I liked this film.  But it's a lot more shallow presentation than its
subject matter demands.  A little more soul-searching by Martin's
character, which might have been provided had the relationship with
Davidovich been more developed, would have made it much stronger.

Title
Review for Scent of a Woman (1992)
     Al Pacino plays a blind former Lieutenant Colonel who, being
depressed and irascible, has been left in the care of an impoverished
prep school boy for Thanksgiving weekend.  The Colonel plans a trip to
New York City to experience the best life offers and brings the boy
along.
     I read a review that pointed out that this film was intended to be
a sentimental holiday heart-warmer--both the old Colonel and the young
boy learn from each other, etc.--but it turned into a much better film
because of Al Pacino's performance.  That is exactly right.  Pacino
refuses to give the Colonel the one-dimensional nature that would have
made this a superficial film.  His portrayal gets to the heart of the
character of the Colonel, who is not all bad and not all good, and not
completely healed at the end of the film.  He mouths the lines given
him, turning the good ones (about women) into poetry, and keeping the
bad ones (concerning the subplot of the boy's problems at the prep
school) from being totally sentimental trash.  He makes this film
entertaining and worth seeing.
     The prep school boy (played by Chris O'Donnell) is also pretty
good.  Perhaps it is just in reaction to Pacino's performance, but I
thought he'd captured the character of such a young man very well,
particularly in the early scenes.
     That said, there are numerous flaws in this film.  The script is
bad, and the editing often gives one no impression of time passing --
e.g., at the Thanksgiving Dinner they seem to sit down and have pie, and
when the boy is waiting in the car Pacino seems to take about five
minutes, which is something of a disappointing climax after such a big
buildup.
     Even worse, the direction of the Thanksgiving Dinner family is so
bad you don't have any idea what's going on.  Pacino shows up, and
everyone seems constipated.  What's going on there?  The film is best
when O'Donnell and Pacino are alone; at least then they seem to have
some idea of what they're doing.  Martin Brest, the director, doesn't
have a clue.
