Authors
Richard John Rauser
Number of Reviews
7

Title
Review for Patriot Games (1992)
     Some films seem to fall into the hard-to-define category because
they have no idea what they want to be, or, even worse, they want to be
something they aren't.  PATRIOT GAMES is a shining example of this
dilemma: it is a techno-movie that wants to be an exciting action flick,
but fails miserably.  It fails for two main reasons: (1) Jack Ryan, the
character and (2) the problem of action vs. analysis.
     To start with Jack Ryan, let's be brutally honest.  This character
is boring.  He is uninspired.  He is bland.  He is dull as dishwater.
He is an analyst.   Yes, a CIA analyst, but don't let the "CIA" part
fool you, folks.  An analyst is an analyst whether they work for the CIA
or the Postal Service.  The result is that Jack Ryan is comfortable
behind a desk, clutching a pen, not crouching behind a desk, aiming a
gun.  The boring-as-hell Jack Ryan was a great character in The Hunt for
Red October, because that film was not an action film, nor did it
pretend to be.  It demanded an analyst and Jack was a good one.  PATRIOT
GAMES, by contrast, will not work as anything *but* an action film.
Unfortunately, Jack Ryan is as far from an action hero as can be
imagined.  Yes, he does hold a  gun a couple of times in the movie.  It
looks almost laughable.  The bulk of his time he spends behind a desk or
in a gloomy computer room, wearing a drab suit.   
     Here's the problem: even though this is a realistic portrayal of
CIA analysis, and even though Jack Ryan is a good character for what he
does, there is nothing exciting about watching Harrison Ford analyse
satellite photographs.  This film is, in a word, bland.  It isn't
exactly boring, but it continually kept building up for a large climax,
but then refused to give us a climax.  To use a sexual metaphor, the
film suffers from premature ejaculation.  
     There are terrorists, and they have guns, and yes, they even shoot
them (a couple of times).  But I wanted to see Jack Ryan fight the
terrorists with his own gun, shooting, ducking, running, jumping, and
saving his wife and child, as the previews for this film have so
deceptively implied.  
     This brings me to my second point about PATRIOT GAMES' failure as a
movie: the problem of action versus analysis.  If you are like me, you
went (or will go) to PATRIOT GAMES expecting action.  Not brainless,
laughable, cartoon-style action like in Lethal Weapon 3, but
intelligent, solid, well portrayed action a la Die Hard or The Living
Daylights.  But this is simply not the case.  PATRIOT GAMES is *not* an
action movie.  It is as simple as that.  There are a few action scenes
scattered throughout the film, but they are over almost as soon as they
have done (as I said before, premature ejaculation).And what little
action we see isn't very exciting or nerve-wracking.  We never get time
to experience these emotions.
     So PATRIOT GAMES fails in terms of action, for the simple reason
that there is very little of it and what little we do see is over far
too quickly.  So how about analysis?  Oh, we get plenty of that.  A
typical scene from PATRIOT GAMES is Harrison behind  a desk, brooding
over photographs... Harrison looking into a hospital room,
brooding... Harrison at home, brooding... then cut to the IRA headquarters
and see the main villain also brooding....
     That is the main reason PATRIOT GAMES fails.  The type of movie it
sets itself out to be demands action to make it work.  And anyone who
has seen a PATRIOT GAMES preview will agree that the marketing people
tried (and succeeded greatly) to make this film appear to be a
fast-paced techno-action thriller.  Sorry.  It's a slow-paced
techno...film.  
     Any movie in which the IRA targets a CIA analyst for revenge HAS to
be action filled to work.  This movie has very little action, and what
action it does have is handled all wrong.  And, to make things even more
hopeless, the main character is an antithesis of action.
     The Hunt for Red October was also a techno-analysis film, but it is
a  fantastic film because it doesn't *want* to be an action film, and
doesn't *try* to be.  PATRIOT GAMES wants and tries to be an action
flick, but doesn't even come close.
     Perhaps it's my fault.  After all, I went to the theater expecting
to see Harrison Ford in his own Die Hard.  Nope.  What I saw was
Harrison Ford in his own, dull version of The Hunt for Red October...a
boring version of a great, entertaining movie.
     On a scale of one to ten, I have decided that PATRIOT GAMES
deserves 6 1/2.  Some elements of the plot are mildly interesting, and
the acting is quite good.  But I'm sorry, this film just doesn't
succeed.  You can have a great techno-analysis film, or a great action
film, but not both.  PATRIOT GAMES is certainly not action, and I doubt
if techno fans will think it's even a great techno-film.  
     On the other hand, PATRIOT GAMES is a fairly close adaptation of
the book, so if you enjoy being bored by Tom Clancy's overly-long,
bloated novels, then PATRIOT GAMES will probably suit you fine.

Title
Review for Grand Canyon (1991)
     Before I saw GRAND CANYON someone told me that "it's just like THE
FISHER KING."  Which, in my opinion, was a strong recommendation.
     Well, I just saw GRAND CANYON.  And it was nothing like THE FISHER
KING.  THE FISHER KING was a brilliant movie.  GRAND CANYON, on the
other hand, was bland, yuppie trash.
     I won't bore you with a detailed summary of the events in this
stupid film, but to put it simply, this movie deals with the inner
emotional and spiritual struggles of a group of yuppies who try to come
to terms with their inner feelings.  (Don't ask me what that's supposed
to mean -- ask the nearest yuppie if you can pull him away from his
cappucino; I hope I misspelled that).  [You did.  -Moderator]
     While THE FISHER KING was a deep and powerful film on many levels,
GRAND CANYON is shallow and nauseating on many levels.  In one scene,
Kevin Kline's wife (Kevin plays a wealthy lawyer who, in spite of all
his material comforts, feels a gnawing, emotional restlessness.  I also
felt a gnawing restlessness -- in my stomach) finds an abandoned baby
while jogging.  Later, as she weeps pitifully, she tries to convince a
reluctant Kevin that they should adopt the baby.  She says to him, "You
think I want to adopt this baby because there's something missing in my
life, but it's not true!  This baby was brought to us by fate!"
     At this point several middle-aged women pulled out hankies.  I
pulled out a vomit bag.
     Danny Glover is equally sickening as sweet, wise, intelligent,
all-around *perfect* garage mechanic who is so introspective and so in
touch with his feelings that you'd swear the guy moonlights as a
spiritual guru somewhere in east Asia.  
     Naturally, the black working-class Danny (who of course has no
problems of his own to work out) helps the white, yuppie Kevin to come
in touch with his own feelings.  The male bonding between these two is
quite sickening -- not because there's anything wrong with male bonding,
but because the way this film does it you'd think that it's a growing
trend in the Nineties, like Rubick's Cube or skateboards.
     Of course, GRAND CANYON has the done-to-death theme of racist cops.
At one point Danny's young nephew is running along the sidewalk when,
for no reason, two L.A. cops pull a gun on him, yell at him and call
him names, and push him to the pavement.  They promptly slap on the
cuffs.  Several middle aged women in the audience slowly shook their
heads, oooing and aaahing at what a horrible, wretched, twisted
society we live in.  If the kind of trash that GRAND CANYON spouts is
true, no wonder people aren't in touch with their feelings -- they're too
busy being harassed by Nazi cops.  The middle-aged men in the audience
weren't oooing and aaahing; they were too busy pondering their own inner
struggles in light of this amazing film.
     Of course, just so the script writers can't be accused of being
*tooooo* biased, they threw in a nice cop.  In the most disgusting,
nauseating scene you'll have to endure in this glitzy piece of garbage,
this nice cop says to a weeping young woman (who plays Kevin Kline's
secretary in the film -- she's crying because he won't have an affair
with her) "I just haven't found the right girl...yet."  She eyes him
with stunned adoration.
     Most of the people in the theater leapt from their seats at this
point crying, "See?  You can still find love!  Even in the Nineties!"  I
wanted to hiss, "The Nineties have just started, you friggin' idiot!  What
makes them so unique!?!?!"  But I was too busy heaving into my vomit bag
for the second time.
     Steve Martin is quite good in this film, but only because he
parodies the million-dollar yuppie character that Kevin Kline glorifies.
However, Steve's character doesn't "get in touch with his feelings" and
we're left to mourn him by the movie's end for his, uh, spiritual
isolation (I guess).
     This movie ends with a scene so sentimental you'll want to
telephone Mom and Pop: the main characters all journey to the GRAND
CANYON (except for Steve's character -- we're busy weeping at his moral
decay, remember?  He doesn't get to come along on this feel-good
spiritual trip) and gaze with wonder and awe at the natural spectacle
before them.  In light of it all, (says Danny Glover) their own problems
seem rather small.
     Then the credits came up.  Credits have never looked so good.  I
leapt up from my chair and hurried out, making my way carefully past the
countless yuppie couples who were either in tears or excitedly
discussing amongst themselves how this movie must have come straight
from Mt. Sinai.  All I was thinking about, however, was how two hours
of my life had just been stolen from me.  I wanted to sue for damages.
     I still can't get over how that blasphemous fool I talked to
compared this movie to THE FISHER KING.  THE FISHER KING was a
brilliant, brilliant, brilliant film.  It was stunning in its emotional
power and amazing in its philosophical depth.
     GRAND CANYON, by contrast, was like a sentimental, two-hour episode
of MIAMI VICE: ridiculous in its attempt at being deep, and sinking
under the depth of its own pseudo-philosophical weight.  IF  you're a
yuppie who is itching to understand what the "Nineties are all about"
and are dying to get in touch with your inner karma, this film is for
you.

Title
Review for Leaving Normal (1992)
     I'll be honest: a girl friend of mine dragged me to LEAVING NORMAL.
I figured, what the heck, it's half-price Tuesday and there might even
be an interesting scene or two.  But overall, I expected the film to be
a waste of my time.
     LEAVING NORMAL is, to put it simply, a fantastic movie.  The story
concerns an abused, disillusioned housewife who runs away from her
abusive husband and a streetwise cocktail waitress who inherits land up
in Alaska.  The two women cross paths and journey to Alaska together.
     Doesn't sound like much?  A non-violent THELMA AND LOUISE rip-off,
you say?  A sappy film?  Wrong, wrong, wrong.  The movie is brilliant.
The acting is amazing, the story flows so smoothly you'll be literally
carried along, and the characters are so likable you'll be feeling with
them every step of the way.
     I honestly cannot imagine anyone not liking LEAVING NORMAL.  It is
a movie that should be cliched but isn't.  There is female bonding but
it is believable and endearing.  There is the abused-woman-at-every-turn
theme but it works and isn't top-heavy with scores of evil male
characters.  There are good people and bad, likable and unlikable, just
like real life.  LEAVING NORMAL, with the exception of a few scenes that
are intentionally overdone, is a slice of real life.  And what you see
is happy at times, sad at times, tragic at times, and inspiring at
times.  And when it's all said and done, you realize that this trip to
Alaska and everything that happens along the way is really a metaphor
for our daily struggle through this life ... and if there's one thing
that the viewer of LEAVING NORMAL will come away with, it's that life is
not only worth living, it is worth living with enormous dedication and
strength.
     LEAVING NORMAL is nearly perfect.  It is sentimental in the right
places, sad in the right places, funny in the right places, and 
inspiring throughout.
     There is one scene in this movie I disliked, because I felt the
character types that the film was attacking were treated unfairly ...
but this is minor; I hardly noticed it.  Overall LEAVING NORMAL deserves
a 9-1/2 out of 10, which I happily give it.  
     I just wish the so-called "blockbusters" that have been
disappointing me thus far were half as good as this movie.

Title
Review for Cool World (1992)
      Yup, I'm back in the reviewing game.  To all of you on
rec.arts.movies who (for some reason known only to God himself) got
upset that I changed my opinion about BATMAN RETURNS, go to heck.  I'm
too nice to say "hell".  :-)
      I saw COOL WORLD after reading David Brin's article in which he
urges people to avoid this film because, like all of Bakshi's other
films (in Brin's opinion) it is a work of pure, unmitigated evil.  Of
course, Brin hadn't even seen COOL WORLD at the time but that was beside
the point... (sigh).
      Let me say two things about COOL WORLD right off the bat: (1) I
don't think it will do very well at the box office, and (2) I loved it.
Why do I think it will (more than likely) be a financial flop?  To put
it simply,  COOL WORLD has very limited appeal.  It is a fast-paced
flick with little attention to plot and characterization that operates
on an entirely surreal level.  It is a dream, a fantasy, a look inside
the psyche.  There are plot holes and overall the movie doesn't make a
lot of sense.  People who go to COOL WORLD expecting a fun cartoon for
the kiddies will probably walk out the instant they see Holli swinging
her hips, and people who go to this film expecting a consistent,
well-thought out plot will be screaming and whining five minutes after
the first plot hole.
      So why did I love it?  Simple... I knew what to expect.  Call it a
hunch, but I was expecting a fast-paced fantasy that appealed more to
the emotions than the intellect and I got what I expected.  COOL WORLD
is energy.  COOL WORLD is humour.  COOL WORLD is action.  COOL WORLD is
fantasy.  Complaining that there are some plot holes is like complaining
that a porno has too much sex.  Plot holes aren't relevant in COOL WORLD
because the film isn't about plot.  Oh sure, there *is* some semblance
of a plot and the movie does roll along towards its fulfillment, but
Bakshi is more interested in appealing to our senses, our emotions, and
with subverting our traditional ideas about heroism, stereotyping, and
what constitutes reality.  The exercise isn't intellectual so much as
it is allegorical and metaphysical.  You have to let yourself go to
enjoy COOL WORLD.  You can't sit there and try to make sense of the
universe.  COOL WORLD is a film about the senses, not sense.
      That's another big reason I think this film will have limited
appeal.  (Heck, I *know* it has limited appeal :-).  Most movie goers
are too wrapped up in trying to poke holes in the plot and trying to
understand the world presented to them in logical terms to be able to
enjoy a metaphysical and emotional experience like COOL WORLD.  Someone
pointed out to me that a character at the film's end is too corny and
silly to be taken seriously.  I replied by saying, "That was the entire
*point* behind that character!"  This person missed the emotion and the
allegory because he was too busy trying to fit the film into logical
pigeon holes.  He couldn't see the forest for the trees.
      So be warned: COOL WORLD is one wild ride.  The music is
fantastic, the film is non-stop energy, and the humour is very clever
and very consistent.  Bakshi is poking fun at many things on many levels
and if you watch the film with a careful eye you'll see what it's trying
to say.  But COOL WORLD is not a film for people who love Sherlock
Holmes style plot, and it's not a film for the people on
rec.arts.sf.movies who spent endless hours discussing TERMINATOR 2 plot
holes.
       COOL WORLD is a film for people who want to get blown out of
their seats for two hours and then figure out after what it all meant.
It does mean something... quite a lot, really.  COOL WORLD rocks.  
       But you have to let it rock, and not everyone can do that.  On a
scale of one to ten, I give COOL WORLD 9/10.  It's that good.  But you
have to be able to appreciate it, and COOL WORLD appeals to limited
tastes.

Title
Review for Sleepwalkers (1992)
     I know, I know.  Stephen King on the screen = two hour groans.
But there *were* exceptions: THE SHINING.  MAXIMUM OVERDRIVE (no
flames!  I know everyone hated it but me!).  MISERY.  PET SEMATARY.  And
considering the fact that SLEEPWALKERS was written "expressly for the
screen" I had hopes.  High hopes.  They came a-tumblin' down.  
     What makes this film such an abysmal failure are two main
weaknesses: (1) It is a *stupid* film.  (2) Nothing in the film is ever
explained to the audience (gee, this is sounding like BASIC INSTINCT all
over again).
     Before I begin to sound like an unintelligent reviewer, let me
explain.  Point 1: This film is stupid.  It's that simple.
SLEEPWALKERS is a silly story.  Without giving away anything that
happens (though I really should to prevent anyone from seeing this piece
of garbage) let me give you a few tidbits: savage cat-people called
"sleepwalkers" (we don't know why) come into town.  They are terrified
of cats (we have no clue why) and to survive they suck "energy" (my best
guess) from "pure, untainted" virgins (again, we have no clue why).
There are two sleepwalkers in the film, a mother and son.  They have an
incestuous relationship.  (We don't know why and don't *want* to know.
This is typical King-esque grotesqueness ... usually effective.  But
this time it doesn't wash).  
     The son is infatuated with a cute high school girl (staring at this
girl is the only thing I salvaged out of the two hours...that and seeing
Mark Hamill in a short scene in the beginning of the movie) and tries to
kill her.  Does he succeed?  Gee, take your best guess.
     SLEEPWALKERS is agonizingly cliched.  We have scary Sixties
"horror" music every time one of the sleepwalkers appears on screen (I
keep cursing CAPE FEAR for reviving that style of score) and the film
bombards us with ridiculous dialogue such as:  
  Mother Sleepwalker: Do you love me?
  Son Sleepwalker: Of course.
  Mother Sleepwalker: Are you going to get her? (the virgin girl)
  Son Sleepwalker: Tomorrow.
  Mother Sleepwalker: (licking her lips). Good. I'm SOOO hungry.
     The problem is that Stephen King expects us to take this tripe
*seriously*.  As a spoof on horror films this would work fine.  But the
audience laughs nervously and/or with embarrassment as they realize that
this is intended as a bona fide horror movie.  Scenes such as the one
above are actually suppose to *scare& us.  Trust me, they don't.
     This film slips into absurdity with the sleepwalkers' fear of cats.
Cats are drawn to the sleepwalkers until by the end of the film there
are about one hundred cats lounging around their home and yard (again we
have no explanation for this and by this time we don't want one).  This
is supposed to be eerie, to be scary.  The cats are supposed to be a
premonition of doom, a symbol of bizarre cosmic justice (remember the
cats in PET SEMATARY and CAT'S EYE?).  The problem is that real cats are
much less scary than the hissing demonic felines portrayed in the movie
poster.  MUCH less.  Each time the audience saw this swarm of cats at
the sleepwalkers' home, we laughed.  It just looked funny and cute.
When the cats attacked the sleepwalkers, jumping at them screaming
MEEEEOWWW!  (this happens throughout the film) we laughed even harder.
It looked like something from an Archie comic or a bad sitcom.  There
was nothing scary about it.
     How's this for intelligent dialogue?  Son sleepwalker in his trans
am offers a ride home to beautiful high school girl.  He jumps in the
car without opening the door.  
     Mere words cannot describe how bad the acting in this film is and
how unbelievable the characters are.  SLEEPWALKERS is a study in bad
acting, bad characterization, and *bad* dialogue, things that King is a
master at in his novels.  Why does it translate so badly to the screen?
I wish I knew.
     I almost forgot to mention: the sleepwalkers can alter their
appearance as well as their surroundings (they can turn invisible and
change a car from a Mustang to a Trans Am).  Again, *this is never
explained*.
     Aside from the horrible acting, I think that this is SLEEPWALKERS'
main flaw.  It makes no sense.  Point 2: We are given so many little
clues and hints and suggestions about these strange creatures with their
strange powers and incestuous relationship (yes, we actually see mother
and son in bed) yet we are never told about their origins, their
background, their history ... it's like the last half of the film was
chopped out.
     Stephen King has a very short cameo which is quite humorous (this
time the humor is intentional) and as I said earlier, Mark Hamill is in
the first five minutes of this film as a Sheriff in the town the
sleepwalkers were last in.  It's neat seeing Luke Skywalker.  It's also
nice looking at the high school girl almost killed by the sleepwalkers.
Horrible acting aside, she has a beautiful smile.
     In the above paragraph I outlined the good things about this film.
Everything else is bad.  Score another turkey for Stephen King.  On a
scale of 1 to 10, I would have no choice but to give SLEEPWALKERS a 0.
It is boring, confusing, laughable, *un*-scary, and decidedly
*un*-interesting.  I can say with all honesty that this film has no
redeeming qualities whatsoever.  Not only was I kicking and screaming
when the credits rolled for the loss of my eight dollars, but I also
felt cheated of two hours of my life, two hours I will never get back.
     In short, SLEEPWALKERS is a horrible disappointment.  It's one of
those films that is so bad the viewer is amazed.  Did the producers
actually think this film would be scary?  Did they think people would
like it?
     I can say with all honesty that having suffered through this film,
I cannot imagine the answer to that question being yes.

Title
Review for Split Second (1992)
     Every once in a while a movie comes out that is so bad that it is 
impossible to believe that the producers were actually serious when they
made the film.  HIGHLANDER II is a prime example of this kind of
wretched trash, movies that stink so horribly that the only way to
explain their existence is to write them off as poorly-conceived
satires, or perhaps the result of a dare between two directors.
     In the past, when I have reviewed movies, I have done my best to
discuss their pros and cons at length, to give some insight into why I
felt the way that I did, and to try to understand what makes the movie
succeed or fail.  But SPLIT SECOND does not deserve or merit such a
focus.  It is, to put it simply, a horrible, horrible, horrible,
horrible piece of trash.  It stinks.  It reeks.  It sucks.  It bites.  I
hate it.  I *hate* it.  
     Why?  After all, there have been some pretty decent B-grade campy
sci-fi flicks in the past which have developed a cult following and have
become very respected, enjoyable films.  HIGHLANDER (the first one),
HEAVY METAL, and BUCKAROO BANZAI are a few examples.  But SPLIT SECOND
isn't this kind of B-grade sci-fi film.  It's the other kind, the
horrible, sick, disgusting, piece-of-garbage kind.
     Rutger Hauer plays a ridiculously cool cop who tries to track down
a serial killer in London, 2008.  All the cliches are here, the good
cop/bad cop theme, the strung out "on the edge" cop, the horrible
attempt at copying BLADE RUNNER's world, the female character who serves
no purpose in the film except to display her breasts in a pointless
shower scene.
     As I said before, this film isn't even worth discussing seriously.
So let me just say this: the film is rambling, confusing, incredibly
boring, poorly acted, horribly scripted, and has no originality
whatsoever.  The serial killer is a pathetic Predator rip-off, the sets
are a tenth-rate BLADE RUNNER rip-off, and the main character (Rutger
Hauer) is a ridiculous combination of Rick Deckard (BLADE RUNNER),
Marion Cobretti (Stallone's horrible flick COBRA) and Martin Riggs
("Lethal Weapon" films, of course).  I hesitate to even make these
points, only because I hate mentioning LETHAL WEAPON or BLADE RUNNER
when talking about this piece of filth, SPLIT SECOND (Cobra, on the
other hand, deserves it).  But these attempts at imitation are painfully
obvious.  And painfully funny.  And just downright painful.
     The film has no plot, makes no sense, the ending resolves nothing,
and none of the characters can be taken seriously.  The entire film
cannot be taken seriously.  It is an abomination, a disgusting, wretched
piece of filth.  HIGHLANDER II was slightly better than SPLIT SECOND,
and STAR TREK V was like RETURN OF THE JEDI by comparison.  The only
film I have ever seen that was worse than SPLIT SECOND was a home-made
horror/gore flick called THE BODY SHOP in which a demented scientist
cuts up mannikins (supposed to be humans) to create the perfect woman.
So, I can say with all honesty that SPLIT SECOND was the second worst
movie I have ever seen in my life.
     Please, please, please don't see this film.  Horror fans will be
bored silly, sci-fi fans will walk out half-way, and cult movie fanatics
will throw popcorn at the screen.  Yes, it's that bad.  Please, don't go
see it.
    On a scale of one to ten, SPLIT SECOND deserves less than a zero,
easily.  I will therefore give it a -10 and hope that this rating helps
steer away at least a *few* people from this piece of garbage.
    If my review prevents at least one unlucky soul from experiencing
the same agonizing, painful waste of time and money that I endured at
SPLIT SECOND, then I will leave this Earth a happy man.

Title
Review for Alienł (1992)
     Okay, folks.  Forget anything else you may have heard about this
film, because Rick J. Rauser has *his* review here (egotism is a joke,
actually).
     Seriously, let's talk ALIEN.  Or to be more precise, ALIEN 3 (or
ALIEN CUBED, depending on which rumors you believe).  Let me say this
bluntly: ALIEN 3 is not as good as the first two films.  That having
been said, let me go on to stress that ALIEN 3 is a good, good flick.
It's scary, it's well paced, and the effects are nice.  
     Visually, this film is dazzling.  It looks that good.  The prison
is just as eerie as the Nostromo or the colony settlement on LV-426.  In
fact, I think it's more so.  Well done, well done.  The alien itself is
a nice, spooky variety as in the first two flicks ... but this time the
alien is different.  I won't tell you how, and it's so subtle you might
not pick it up ... but watch for it when you see this film.
     ALIEN 3 has a shocker ending (presuming you haven't been reading
Hollywood gossip columns or spoiler reviews) which, I'm sad to say, was
filmed very poorly.  The ending is great, the way it looks on screen is
almost laughable.  It's sad, because the rest of the film is visually
perfect.  The ending ... *ach*.  But don't let that throw you, it's a
small gripe.
     Another big gripe that I couldn't forget (that's why I'm now typing
it out) is how the characters in this film don't like each other.  They
really don't.  There's no friendship or bonding as in the first two
films between the human victims/fighters.  These characters seem to want
each other to die ... also, this film has an annoying habit of killing
off the wrong characters.  Don't get bonded to any of them, faithful
viewer.  If you thought they were expendable in ALIEN and ALIENS, you
ain't seen nothing yet.
     I also hate the marketing people who deceived us for months on end
with previews that said "In 1992 we will discover ... on Earth ...
everyone can hear you scream."  I'm not giving anything away by telling
you that this film is not set on or near Earth.  That preview is old
garbage, and I'm sure you all know that by now.  But still that annoys
me.  Another scene that I saw in previews was of one of the characters
pressed against a chainlink fence screaming.  *Boy*, that looked cool,
I thought ... the guy in the film is only yelling at Ripley in annoyance.
Again, false advertising.  But it was minor.
     Look forward to wonderful scenery, a fantastic autopsy, a small
group of likable characters (even though they don't like or bond with
each other) a great ending (marred by crappy directing - just the
ending, mind you--and poor filming--again, just the ending) that will
really surprise you and a *wonderful* chase scene near the movie's end.  
     Good stuff, ALIEN 3, good stuff.  Just like DIE HARD 2 this film
doesn't quite live up to what went before it, but like DIE HARD, ALIENS
and ALIEN were tough, tough acts to follow so I don't blame Fox for the
fact that ALIEN 3 fell a little short of the mark.  It's not a huge
film, like the first two were ... it's more of a quick, scary flick.  It
reminds me of Leviathan, if any of you have seen that.  It's short and
satisfying, but not a huge, great horror/sci-fi epic like ALIENS, nor a
long, nicely paced landmark like ALIEN.  
    But let ALIEN 3 breathe freely and you'll be quite happy with it,
in my humble opinion.  It is not a *great* movie, like the first two.   
    It is, however, very, very *good* and I more than highly recommend
it.   Overall, I am happy to give ALIEN 3 eight out of ten.  My
complaints were fairly minor, and the only thing that prevents this
movie from being fantastic is that it doesn't do enough and doesn't look
far enough.  After seeing it you'll undoubtably be happy, yet you'll
also agree it's a "small" film, dealing with a small incident, not a
huge one like the first two.
     However, it's a small incident that you'll really enjoy sitting
through.
     By the way, the way the story runs and the way the film finishes
off leaves more than enough room for ALIEN 4....
