Authors
Amy Dawes
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Whatever (1998)
One can only imagine that something was lost in the translation when
first-time filmmaker Susan Skoog turned her vision for ``Whatever''
into a movie.
Meant as an unvarnished look at what it's like to be a teenage girl
growing up in America, it's gritty and depressing without being
illuminating or the least bit memorable. 
Set in a style-less, nowheresville burg in blue-collar New Jersey, the
film gets its only real energy from a loud and liberally used
soundtrack with 1980s gems by the Ramones, David Bowie, Patti Smith
and others. That and the title - which is more clever and contemporary
than the movie - are likely to be the sole selling points when this
low-budget indie makes its brief appearance in movie theaters. 
``Whatever'' is one of those movies that bungles the first few scenes
and only rarely redeems itself during the rest of its running time.
Two girls in their final year of high school spend a lot of time
together but seem to have nothing in common except downbeat prospects
and plenty of attitude. Brenda (Chad Morgan) is bound for big-time
trouble as a nymphomaniac who spends all her free time in search of
fast company and more sex; Anna (Liza Weil) is her dazed, passive pal
who's meant to be more sensitive and creative, based on her
androgynous clothing and her application to art school in Manhattan.  
But if art is at all exciting and inspiring to her, it doesn't come
across; she merely falls for losers who babble about painting and
passion, while her friend falls for losers who babble about
motorcycles and drugs. Social life consists of teenagers in divey
houses getting blasted on drugs and booze, all of which is graphically
depicted. 
But while Richard Linklater captured these rites of small-town passage
with wit and enjoyment in ``Dazed and Confused,'' Skoog directs with a
much heavier hand and a sense of desperation and doom. There's no
denying that this can be ``what it's like,'' especially for young
people as directionless and contemptuous of adults as these. But Anna,
the central character, is too adrift to provide much hope for escape;
what little redemption the movieoffers comes as too little, too late. 
         (np: Best Of Bowie 74/79)
