Authors
Heather Leone
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Bridges of Madison County, The (1995)
     Whether or not THE BRIDGES OF MADISON COUNTY becomes the next
CASABLANCA of our generation is something else altogether.
     Somehow, the story touched me more when it peeked back through the
mementos and the hurt confusion of Francesca's children than when it
opened up and gave us the four days which changed her life.
     I don't mean to belittle the romance, although at first it did
seem slightly ludicrous for this frumpy housewife to go lustfully
goggle-eyed for this lone, over-the-hill photographer.  But soon they
caught me with their laughter and their human frailty, and I ceased to
be embarrassed by their growing relationship.  Except that's the
thing--I can accept that they fell in love and that love fulfilled them
and changed their lives, but to a cynic like me, four days just doesn't
amount to a relationship.
     So it turns each look/emotion/treasure thereafter into a plot
device.  Everything serves to make the loss more poignant, the regret
more bittersweet.  They succeed beautifully, mind you, but it still
amounts to a plot device.
     Clint Eastwood's style has slowed these past years; he tells
stories without so much gunfire as introspection.  I couldn't help but
compare the gentle lover he'd become to the impatient one he had been
in TWO MULES FOR SISTER SARAH, where he shucked (only) his gun before
climbing on top of Shirley Maclaine in the tub.  His one response to
her request that he at least remove his hat was, "I haven't got time
for that."
     So there I was as the lights came up, with Meryl's beautiful new
accent ringing in my ears and searching frantically for a tissue in my
purse, listening to the row of ladies behind me bitch that the film was
torture to watch.  I don't know if it was because of the pace which
refused to be rushed, the less than perfect spread of the bodies of the
leads, or the nuances of the novel (which all the women behind me had
obviously read) lacking in the film.
     I haven't read the book and cannot speak for the translation.  I
only know that I found the whole of it endearing, even when my
attention began to wander.  What I took away was the desire to know my
own parents and have my children know me.  I took away a contentment in
the knowledge that desire doesn't have to fade.  I took away the idea
that some moments ripen and become a touchstone which gets us through
the rest.
     A classic film?  Probably not.  Some people are going to be
disappointed.  A few might even hate it.  I wasn't.  I didn't.
