Authors
Jonathan Pringle
Number of Reviews
2

Title
Review for Stargate (1994)
I know this is posted late, but I had to give my opinion on the movie
"Stargate."
I just finished watching the movie for the seventh time, and I must say,
that this is one of the most excellent movies I have ever seen!  I will
give a breakdown on all the individual aspects of the movie:
It comes right out of a child's imagination.  Travelling through a
stargate to a planet at the other end of the universe.  Just seeing it
come alive relives many childhood deep thoughts.  Since it was a science
fiction movie, I can understand that most of it is unbelievable, but
that's where we can just lose ourselves in the movie!  Many dramatic
moments and edge of the seat moments all put together in a nice
package.  The egyptian element to the movie was very interesting and
made me want to learn more.
Where did they film this?  I was awestruck with the beautiful sets and
props in this film.  Most of the budget on this film must have been used
in the sets!  I actually felt like I was in Egypt with the pyramids!  It
really did do the job by making me feel like I was in a totally
different world while watching the movie.  While the first half hour's
sets are mildly interesting, the rest of the movie's sets are
astonishing!
The acting was very well done.  I especially liked seeing foreign movie
actors playing the parts of the civilians.  Especially the actress who
played Sha'uari.  She was great considering she could have been talking
about laying bricks for all we know!  The english-speaking cast did a
great job as well.  Especially David Spader as Daniel Jackson.  Kudos to
Kurt Russel as well.  But It keeps coming back to the foreign actors.
They blew me away!  One actor I would have liked to have seen more was
Jaye Davidson as Ra.  I thought he had the most interesting part.  
Once again, a soundtrack has inspired me so much as to buy it.  This is
one of the most incredible soundtracks that I own.  I have even placed
it higher the "Jurassic Park" and "The Lost World:  Jurassic Park."  The
music had a very ancient egyptian feel to it, and it made me want to
hear more of it.  I even stayed tuned for the ending credits because the
music just had to be heard again.  Good job, David Arnold.  
The ending was very appropriate and It made me hope for a sequal, but
then Jaye Davidson's character couldn't be in it!  Oh well, it was nice
that Daniel stayed with Sha'uri and the rest of the civilians in the
desert on the other end of the known universe. . .  
This movie is a definite rental or even purchase.  It should be the
"Jurassic Park" of movie collections.

Title
Review for Lost World: Jurassic Park, The (1997)
        It is now the night after I have seen the movie, and my opinion has
changed slightly.  Right after the showing, I was somewhat
disappointed.  I went in hoping for a four star movie, but came out and
gave it a 2 1/2 star rating.  I thought that even that was generous. 
Maybe it's because I had been anticipating this film for so long that
when I actually saw it, It didn't mean anything to me.
        My first complaints were with John William's almost non-existent
score.  Jurassic Park had much better music, especially the first
brachiosaur scene.  The second complaint would have to be the character
of Kelly.  She was almost useless (except for an incredibly fake
gymnastic scene that really should have been taken out).  To clear up
the
confusion, I found out that Kelly was an adopted child.  Her family had
just left her behind, and Dr. Malcolm took her in.
        Thirdly, the role of Nick Van Owen was utterly useless.  His character
(and many of the other's were very undeveloped).  But with special
effects that were this believable, WHO CARES about the plot?
        The sudden entrance of the hunters was also badly introduced.  Their
entire entrance happened in less than 3 minutes.  Laslty, I was very
disappointed that Laura Dern wasn't around for this one.  She, in my
opinion, was the best actor from the first Jurassic Park.  It was nice
to see Jeff Goldblum and Richard Attenborough return.  Also, It was
wierd seeing how much older Lex and Tim looked in the short scene they
had.
        Now for the good stuff.  Tons of realistic dinosaurs.  Especially the
baby t-rex and the huge stegosaurs.  The San Diego scene was also
incredible.  The best scene, though, had to be the trailer scene and the
slowly cracking glass.  I was on the edge of my seat for that part.
        The violence is much darker and more obvious in this movie, but that's
what makes it better.  We don't want a kids movie here.  It definitely
stretches the PG-13 rating to the max.  Oh yeah and the sound effects
were incredible! They did a great job with however they got the sounds.
        Now that It's the morning after I have seen the movie, my opinion has
changed.  I would change my 2 1/2 stars to 3 stars for this time.  I
don't know if I'll see it again.  I don't think I could sit through the
boring first 1/2 hour again.  Oh well, congrats Mr. Spielberg, you did
it again.
