Authors
David Rind
Number of Reviews
3

Title
Review for My Best Friend's Wedding (1997)
There have been too many negative reviews in ramr of this movie.
MY BEST FRIEND'S WEDDING is a wonderful film.  It opens with a sweetly
choreographed lipsynch number under the opening credits and has several
more magical scenes over the course of the movie.  Although the plot and
dialog are a bit thin, this is more than made up for by these scenes and
at least one superb performance.
The plot centers around a woman (Julianne -- Julia Roberts) learning
that her long-time best friend (Michael -- Dermot Mulroney) has decided
to marry another woman (Kimmy -- Cameron Diaz).  Suddenly jealous, she
decides that she will do what it takes to break them up, but is unsure
how to go about it.
The movie is fair to its plot line and its characters.  Julianne
concocts one over-the-top devious plot to try to anger Michael about
Kimmy, but for the most part she simply plays on the fears and concerns
of the engaged couple.  Kimmy and Julianne are both legitimately
believable love interests for Michael.
Singing and music are used as centerpieces of several scenes, including
the opening credits, a scene in a Karaoke bar, and two scenes with
Julianne's editor (George -- Rupert Everett), a gay man who is played
without any of the usual Hollywood humor/stereotypes.  There is a scene
where George leads a room in singing "I Say a Little Prayer for you"
that is funny, touching, charming, and fun.  I have not seen Rupert
Everett in other roles, but he is great here.
There is also one touching scene without music that speaks to all the
brief romantic moments that can sometimes slip away.  This is a movie
that while being basically a comedy at its heart, has a lot of true
things to say about relationships and romance, just as WHEN HARRY MET
SALLY did.  See this movie.  (Rating 4 out of 5)

Title
Review for Much Ado About Nothing (1993)
     I would not normally have written this review but I was dismayed
to see a less than favorable review of MUCH ADO ABOUT NOTHING appear
here, and would be sorry to have anyone miss this wonderful movie.
     Kenneth Branagh has directed his second Shakespearean play (after
HENRY V) and again stars with his wife Emma Thompson.  I had neither
read nor seen MUCH ADO ABOUT NOTHING previously, and so was able to see
it fresh in its own right.
     The movie tells the story of two couples.  The older couple,
Beatrice (Thompson) and Benedict (Branagh) are anti-romantic to the
point of misandropy and misogyny.  The younger couple, Hero (Beatrice's
cousin) and Claudio (Benedict's close friend), meet and fall instantly
in love.  The (good) other characters conspire pleasantly to have
Beatrice and Benedict fall in love, while (evil) other characters
conspire viciously to drive Hero and Claudio apart.
     It seems presumptuous to even critique the writing, but I was
impressed at how real and intelligent the characters seemed within this
farce.  The dialogue sparkles with wit and understanding.
     The direction of this movie is superb.  Branagh is one of the
premier directors working today.  HENRY V showed that he could make a
rousing, powerful war movie, and DEAD AGAIN showed that he could make a
Hitchcockian thriller as well as Hitchcock (which even DePalma has
never quite done).  MUCH ADO ABOUT NOTHING shows that he can also make
a romantic comedy.  He never seems to waste a scene or a shot.  The
movie flows brilliantly from its opening sequence of villagers and
soldiers getting ready to greet each other, through to the closing
dance in the castle.
     Branagh and Thompson are superb.  They bring their 16th century
characters to life.  The supporting actors are wonderful as well.
Keanu Reeves plays the villain and is appropriately dark.  Michael
Keaton is fantastic as comic relief in the form of a village fool.
Denzel Washington is excellent as a prince -- the leader of the troop
of soldiers.  I was not sure how it would work to have Denzel
Washington (who is black) cast as the brother of Keanu Reeves (who is
white), but after a few minutes this was not in the least distracting.
I suspect that cross-racial casting could work far more often if
Hollywood had the nerve to try it.
-- David Rind rind@enterprise.bih.harvard.edu

Title
Review for Age of Innocence, The (1993)
     THE AGE OF INNOCENCE is Martin Scorcese's new movie based on Edith
Wharton's story of the same name.
     It is set in late 19th Century New York City among the upper crust
of New York high society with scenes also taking place in Boston and
Newport.
     This is a complex and powerful drama.  The plot focuses on three
characters: Daniel Day-Lewis as a young lawyer, Winona Ryder as his
new fiancee, and Michelle Pfeiffer as Winona Ryder's cousin, who has
returned from Europe to escape a bad marriage.  Early in the movie it
becomes clear that the characters played by Day-Lewis and Pfeiffer are
falling in love, but societal constraints make such a match
impossible.  The story follows these characters as they try to
reconcile responsibilities with desires amid the hypocrisies of their
surrounding society.
     The performances are impeccable.  Winona Ryder seems somewhat cast
against type as the less intellectually interesting of the two women --
an odd role for an actress who has played some very intriguing female
characters in recent years -- but plays it skillfully.  Daniel
Day-Lewis is excellent as a decent man torn between love and
responsibility.  Michelle Pfeiffer is superb as ever.  Her character is
played with depth and complexity.  It must have been an extremely
challenging role, but she carries it off with ease.  Her appearance in
this picture could not help but conjure up images of her role in
DANGEROUS LIASONS where she played a very different sort of character
but where again, societal roles were of utmost importance.
     Scorcese lets the audience know that he is the director.  There
are some odd cuts, camera angles, and close-ups that seem to be
intended more to remind the audience of his existence than out of any
real benefit to the feel of the picture.  He does use recurring shots
of logs burning in a fireplace to very good effect.
     Supporting performances are also excellent, as is the use of music
and costumes.  Some of the settings shown are a fascinating glimpse of
how the east coast cities looked a century ago.
     The characterizations are intricate, and at the end of the movie
the group I saw this movie with disagreed about some of the possible
interpretations of motivations.  The characters all seemed remarkably
real and palpable, and behaved in ways that felt comprehensible to a
modern audience despite the setting in a society so superficially
different.  This is a story with something complex to say about romance
and responsibilities and made for a striking contrast with the story
told in the current bestseller "The Bridges of Madison County" which I
had recently read.
     This movie is also quite long, running for about two and a half
hours.  Before going into the film, I was warned by a friend who had
seen it the day before that it might be hard to stay awake.  I had no
problem with this, and was in no rush for the film to end.  It was
textured and complex and produced some interesting conversations
afterwards among the group that had seen it.  I strongly recommend this
movie.
