Authors
Roger Mellor
Number of Reviews
12

Title
Review for I've Gotta Horse (1965)
Roger Mellor (roger@mellor48.freeserve.co.uk)
Billy (Fury) is mad about animals. Already the proud possesser of a
Great Dane (Rusty),an Alsatian,(Sheba), a Doberman Pinscher(Dibby), and a
Chihuahua (Speedy), he goes to a country auction with his dresser Bert to
buy a sheep dog. Instead he returns to the theatre in Great Yarmouth where
he is rehearsing his summer show singing, for all the world to hear , 'I've
gotta horse'. For behind the Landrover, spilling over with dogs, he is
towing a horse box containing Armitage, a horse with a bleak future, which
Billy considers a bargain 40 Guineas. In the stalls of the theatre, Billy's
manager (Hymie, played by Michael Medwin),his secretary (Jo, Amanda Barrie)
and the producer(Bartholomew, Bill Fraser) watch Billy singing a tender love
song with mixed feelings.
 Bartholomew is simmering with rage over Billy's unpunctuality; Hymie is
anxious for his client - and
as for Jo - she is lost in world of dreams in which the words of love are
being sung only for her.
Meanwhile Billy has vanished from the theatre to arrange for the beach
donkey man and his grandson to stable and feed Armitage at his farm. Hymie's
warning to Billy that his preoccupation with his dogs and now with his horse
could have a dramatic effect on his contract with Bartholomew falls on stony
ground. For,on the the same day, in spite of the protest of the stage
manager Jock, Billy brings Armitage backstage to shelter from the rain.
Chaos rensues when the horse becomes entangled with the lighting system to
which his rein had been tied. Hymie, a racing man at heart, takes a new
interest in Armitage, when, after being groomed and properly cared for, the
horse is pronounced good enough to enter for the Yarmouth races. When
Armitage comes in 3rd at tremendous odds, Jo, loyal to the core wins a small
fortune from Hymie, who has backed the winner but taken her bet.
Billy invites the whole company of the show to a barbeque to celebrate
Armitag's success. Jo is mortified when Billy fails to notice the eye
catching gown she had brought with her winnings for his benefit. She relents
later when he tells her in a quiet corner of the barn how his early life has
led to his attachment to animals. Bert breaks the news that Armitage has
caught pneumonia, and depressed, Billy loses all interest in his work. To
lift his spirits, Hymie buys a Derby runner called 'Anselmo' with the
proceeds of Billy's recording royalties. Billy announces that he intends to
go to Epsom to see Anselmo run, even though the date coincides with the
opening night of the show. Hymie's misgivings are matched by the prospect of
having a front seat at the Derby as an owner's friend, and finally the whole
company turns up at Epsom in a vintage coach, having stopped en route in
London to be fitted out for the occasion. Bartholomew almost has a fit when
he sees on tv his entire cast playing truant, so many miles away. Billy is a
proud owner indeed when Anselmo, a complete outsider, comes 4th. On the
return to Yarmouth, it is touch and go whether they will make it to the
theatre on time. But they do, and Bartholomew is too relieved to see them to
raise any objection. They open the show, still in their Derby suits, with
Billy triumphantly singing "I'VE GOTTA HORSE"..............
Directed by Kenneth Hume,  'I've Gotta Horse'' is simply designed as a
vehicle for early sixties pop singer BuIlly Fury and produced by his manager
Larry Parnes, and whether you like it or not depends entirely on whether you
like Fury or not. At the peak of his fame, Billy Fury used to play a summer
season at the
Windmill Theatre, Great Yarmouth in a Rock and Roll Revue with Marty Wilde
and other Larry Parnes acts.  Much of 'I've Gotta Horse'  was actually shot
in
Great Yarmouth  while Billy was
appearing in the stage show during the evenings. The theatre used in the
movie is the 'Royal Aquarium', a larger venue than the Windmill , and hence
more suited to filming. Billy Fury's Stage show was much more rock and roll
orientated than the movie, which is clearly designed to follow the precedent
of the ABPC Cliff Richard musicals, and move Billy Fury more into the
'family entertainer' field. (see also Joe Brown in "Three Hats For Lisa"
another British musical movie of this period, with songs by Leslie
Bricusse). The
songs (with music and lyrics mainly by David Heneker and John Taylor)
include:
 "I've Gotta Horse" (Billy Fury), Stand by Me (BF), Do the Old Soft Shoe
(BF, Sheila
O'Neill ), I Cried All Night (The Gamblers),Far Far Away
(The Bachelors), I Like Animals (BF),
Find Your Dream (BF) (by John Taylor), Dressed Up for a Man (Amanda Barrie,
Sheila O'Neill), He's Got The Whole World In His Hands
(The Bachelors), Won't Somebody Tell Me Why? (BF) , Problems
(Michael Medwin and Amanda Barrie), You've Got To Look Right For The
Part (Billy Fury, Jon Pertwee, Amanda Barrie, Michael Medwin) and Wonderful
Day
(Song By Michael Leander).
The pop material is blended with some attractive musical comedy
songs by David Heneker and John Taylor, of which for me the standout number
is "You've Got To Look Right For The Part"  set in a studio fashion store,
with a nifty bit
of product placement for 'Cecil Gee' of Shaftesbury Avenue (a store where
the really trendy young men of the sixties obtained their kit). Choreography
is by Ross Taylor. It  is an enjoyable mix of 60's pop and musical comedy
mumbers,
well photographed in attractive colour. As for Billy Fury: well, he does not
always look entirely comfortable in the musical comedy numbers, as he always
has the lean and hungry look of the rock and roller about him! Not
charismatic outside of the pop numbers, he comes across as quite natural (he
cannot act at all!) and shy, and this, together with handsome boyish looks,
clearly accounted for the large number of teenage girls who wanted to mother
him in the early 1960's. He receives excellent support from such reliable
actors as Michael Medwin and Bill Fraser, both on excellent form, And Amanda
Barrie performs well in an underwritten part - it is surely no co-incidence
that Amanda Barrie resembles Una Stubbs (in Summer Holiday) hairstyle and
everything!
It was filmed on location in and near Great Yarmouth, Norfolk, at the Royal
Aquarium Theatre Great Yarmouth, Great Yarmouth racecourse, Epsom racecourse
(Derby Scenes) and at Shepperton Studios.
Roger Mellor (roger@mellor48.freeserve.co.uk)
Check out the British Musical Movies website at:
http://britmusicalfilm.webjump.com

Title
Review for Bitter Sweet (1933)
A Review by Roger Mellor
Bitter Sweet (1933 Film)
Produced and Directed by Herbert Wilcox for British and Dominions
Noel Coward's musical weepie was first produced at Her Majesty's Theatre
London in 1929, and later in the same year New York (Ziegfield Theatre) with
Evelyn Laye. Set in Vienna, with a plot involving a poor musician, a lady
who, through poverty, becomes a dance hall hostess, an amorous count and a
fatal duel, it can been seen as Coward's tribute to the world of operetta,
its flashback structure providing an invocation to a past Viennese world.
It is, however, an incomplete version of the operetta, with over half the
score missing, with much filleting of the script and songs (check out the
recently recorded 2xCD set on TER records (CD TER -2 -1160)  to see just
what has been omitted, numbers such as: That wonderful melody/The call of
life/If you could only come with me/What is love?/The last dance/Life in the
morning/Ladies of the town/Bonne nuit merci/Ta-ra-ra-boom-de-ay/Kiss
me/Alas, the time is past/We all wear a green carnation/Zigeuner).
Unimaginatively directed by Herbert Wilcox, the film only really comes to
life in  the cafe
scenes, where I think one can attribute any visual flair [such as the
tracking shot on the bottle on
the waiter's tray at the lead in to ''Tokay''] to the cameraman, Freddie
Young (the same Freddie Young who went on to photograph ''Lawrence of
Arabia''  thirty years later), especially as Wilcox, coming from the a
business/distribution background, was renowned within the industry for an
almost complete lack of knowledge of the technicalities of film making (such
as where to place the camera......). It is said that many of his films were
actually " directed '' on the floor by his regular cameraman, Max Greene
(Mutz Greenbaum). After a well filmed opening scene set in 1930s [the
"modern'' tailpieces feature the contemporary dance music of Lew Stone and
his band]  there follows  a dully filmed static dialogue scene in  long
takes between Sarah and Carl.
The leading actresses are excellent in this film:both  Anna Neagle (as
Sarah, Marchioness of Shane [the Peggy Wood role] sings "Ã'll See You again"
and the duet "Dear Little Cafe'') and Ivy St Helier [as Manon, La Crevette]
who gives a heart rending performance of Noel Coward's classic ''If Love
were all'' are superb.
The men are much weaker (and Fernand Graavey as Carl, the music teacher,
gives  a particularly
feeble performance). Hugh Williams makes an impression, however, in an
incisive cameo role in the prologue and epilogue scenes.
The main interest of this film is that it was made only four years after
first production, and so preserves a contemporary style of performance,
which is of great historical value. But if only Herbert Wilcox had taken the
entire West End cast into the film studio [although he would inevitably have
replaced Peggy Wood with his lifelong amour (and later wife) Anna Neagle)],
and filmed a musically complete version, perhaps with some judicious
trimming of some of the diaogue scenes, this film would have been priceless.
It is Ivy St. Hiller provides us with an indication of what might have been.
Still, it is a fascinating effort.
This film  of "Bitter Sweet" was very popular with audiences in 1933, and is
in many ways preferable to the MGM Hollwood version, which Noel Coward,
incidentally hated.
[Incidentally, the version viewed was distributed by Raymond Roehaeur, and
ran for about 80 minutes, even shorter than the running time in many
reference guides of 93 minutes].

Title
Review for Stop the World: I Want to Get Off (1966)
Stop the World - I Want To Get Off (1966)
Anailable on video in the USA (NSTC only)
Book, Music and Lyrics :Leslie Bricusse and Anthony Newley
Based on the Stage Productions at Queens Theatre, London (1961) (485
performances), and Shubert Theatre, New York (1962) (555 perfs)
Filmed in at Pinewood Studios outside London and at the (old) Lyric Theatre,
Hammersmith.
Cast:
Tony Tanner (Littlechap)
Millicent Martin (His wife)
Twins:Leila Croft [Susan], Valerie Croft[Jane] (His daughters)
Dancers: Georgina Allen, Natasha Ashton, Sandra Burville, Carlotta Barrow,
Vivyan Dunbar, Katerina Holden, Margaret Frost, Ann Holloway, Liz Gold,
Derina House, Marion Horton, Carolyn Irving, Pam Hart, Pam Jones, Sarah
Hardenberg, Kay Korda, Rosemary Phillips, Judith McGilligan, Jo Anna Short,
Julie Pitcher, Liz White, Heather Simms
Credits:
Director: Philip Saville
Mime and Movement Director: Tutte Lemkow
Production Designer: Sean Kenny (as Stage Production)
Custumes: Kiki Byrne (as Stage Production)
Photography: Oswald Morris (Mitchell Camera System 35)
Music Director: Al Ham
Producer: Bill Sergeant
Stage Director: Michael Lindsay-Hogg
Additional Material by: David Donabie, Al Ham, Alan and Marilyn Bergman
As the overture commences, we are presented with a sequence of monochrome
still photographs, of a theatre musical director waving his baton; of scenes
in a recording studio, with the principals, chorus , conductor, a large
orchestra, surrounded by microphones, booms and other equipment; of scenes
in the theatre dressing rooms as the principals and other performers the
actors preparing for the night's performance, applying their custumes and
make up, with a particular emphasis on Tony Tanner's transformation from
almost unrecognisable everyday self to the white faced clown Littlechap. At
the end of the credits, the image switches to orange hued Technicolor and
movement, and the performance begins................with a mime sequence.
>From the very beginning therefore, theatricality is emphasised. We are
to see a PERFORMANCE It is Brechtian, in the sense that one is never
allowed to forger the PROCESS of production. There are various
'alienation' devices to comment on the action, and prevent the viewer
getting too involved in the story: the film is on several occasions
interrupted when Littlechap shouts 'Stop the World! , and he launches
into a monologue to camera which returns to Black and White. The film
also shows us shots from the stage, of a theatre audience applauding
after some songs, and shots of the conductor in the pit.  The essence
of the appeal of STW is theatrical, a real challenge (if not
impossible) to turn into a film, and the film's producers have wisely
avoided all attempts at naturalism.....
Here we have what is basically a filmed record of a stage production, so
one's response to the film depends entirely on one's response to the show,
and the performers. Promoted in London and New York as a 'new style musical'
with a 'new style entertainer' (Anthony Newley) in 1961, STW was a
considerable stage success. It is a young man's show, and , in mood, a
typically early 1960s piece which seems rather 'quaint' by today's
standards. It caught the mood of the time with its comments on social class
and politics, and (some would say, banal) attempts to make a statement on
'the human condition'. At a time when audiences were willing to accept
experiment in the arts [including theatre(Beckett) and movies Godard)], it
had some of this sense of 'experiment'. A musical with very little
narrative, especially by todays standards ('Cats', also a mime show is its
nearest equivalent, but is much cosier and less challenging).
In STW one can see the influence of Charlie Chaplin on Newley and on the
production (especially 'Modern Times' - the images of the depersonalising
effect of machinery, skillfully portrayed in mime by the dancers). The film
also reflections certain 1960s notions of 'Art'. It opens with a very
stylised mime routine, revealing the influence of the French mime artist
Marcel Marceau, with Littlechap's clown costume and white face make up. A
circus ring setting is suggested in Sean Kenny's design.
The central character Littlechap is an Everyman figure, with roots going
back to medieval theatre, but also an 'antihero' (another very 1960s term
!), a 'little Englander' and a 'chauvinist' in his relations with Evie and
his daughters. (there are also 21 pretty girl dancers in the film, who have
an important role in the film - they act as a chorus, and comment on the
action, both visually in mime, and in words). The satire is at a pretty
shallow level, however. The role of Littlechap is a tour de force for the
leading actor, placing heavy physical and vocal demands on the performer,
who is never off the stage. The film 'Introduces' Tony Tanner (but this was
not his first film - he appeared in 'Strictly For The Birds' in 1963).
Tanner followed Newley in both the London and New York stage productions,
and replicates Anthony Newley's performance, including his vocal mannerisms.
Personally, although he gives a skilful performance in a very demanding
role, I found Tony Tanner overbearing and very irritating after a while, and
if one finds Littlechap tiresome, the show loses a lot of its appeal.
As a show STW had many admirers, especially Sammy Davis Jr. who recognised
the quality of its songs and appeared in it more than once, and adopted
several of its songs. Certainly, nobody could complain about the quality of
the songs in this show. With several excellent numbers [with powerful ('What
Kind of Fool am I?') and tender ('Someone Nice Like You Evie' songs], it is
one of the best scores of the period (from any source), and together with
'Oliver' is one of the great British musicals of the 1960s. Other songs
include: 'The ABC Song'(TT), 'I Wanna Be Rich' (TT), 'Typically
English[Deutsche/Russian/Japanese/All American]' (MM), 'Lumbered' (TT),
'Gonna Build a Mountain'(TT), 'Meilinki Meilchick' (TT/MM), 'Mumbo
Jumbo'(TT), and 'Once in a Lifetime'(TT).
Also both Newley and Bricusse deserve credit for the boldness of the
concept- a concept musical before the term became fashionable, it is only
preced by the Weill/Gershwin 'Lady in the Dark' and Rodger's and
Hammerstein' s 'Allegro' in its originality. Unfortunately, what was new and
'fresh' in the 1960s was bound to date quickly, and the show, far from being
timeless and universal, subsequently proved to be unrevivable, as various
short-lived attempts since the 1960s have shown.
This film attempts to capture the experience of live theatre. As this is an
impossible task, one has to give the producers credit for attempting to
place the show on record, although the film is fatally flawded by not having
Anthony Newley in the leading role. Whether Newley's non appearance was due
to contractual disagreements, or because he was appearing on Broadway in
another show, is not certain (if the latter, why wasn't the production of
this film moved to New York to accommodate Anthony Newley's other
committments?). It was crazy to proceed with a film of 'Stop The World'
without Anthony Newley on board.
The experience of seeing 'Stop The World' live in the theatre in 1961 ,with
the show's creator/performer, Anthony Newley on a good night, and in top
form, in 1961 must have been electrifying. Love it or loathe it, this film
is a poor substitute, but let's be grateful - it is all we have as a visual
record of this show..
By Roger Mellor
If you have any comments on this review, or the movie, you can e mail me at:
roger@mellor48.freeserve.co.uk
Check out the British Musical Movies site at:
http://britmusicalfilm.webjump.com

Title
Review for Maytime in Mayfair (1949)
Roger Mellor (roger@mellor48.freeserve.co.uk)
'Maytime in Mayfair'  is set in the magical world of Mayfair's haute couture
and the creators of ladies fashions. Eileen Grahame (Anna Neagle) is the
designer-manageress of one of Mayfair's exclusive dress salons. She creates
designs for the rich - the lovely and the 'unlovely' alike: the dresses and
accessories which dictate the style of the whole fashion world. Across the
street is a rival establishment run by suave singing playboy D'Arcy
Davenport (played by West End Musical Star Peter Graves), who regularly
entertains his wealthy lady clients at the piano with a verse of "Amor,
Amor". Between them Eileen and D'Arcy are the despots of womens modes and
moods. D'Arcy would love Eileen to give up her own salon, and merge with his
business.
Michael Gore-Brown (Michael Wilding) appears on the scene. Irrepressible,
insouciant and impoverished, he finds himself by means of a legacy, heir to
the salon which Eileen runs. He is encouraged to sell the business by his
cousin, Henry (Nicholas Phipps), who is totally distainful of the fashion
business, who sees this as an opportunity for Gore-Brown to sell and make
some money.
Michael and Henry go to check the salon over, and are pleasantly surprised
by Eileen, as they were expecting to meet, in Henry's words 'a battleship in
black satin'. To Henry's disgust, Michael decides to take a lively interest
in running the busines with Eileen. Reluctantly, he is supported by the well
meaning Henry, who brings the threat of disaster to the salon: surprised
that Darcy belongs to the same 'gentleman's club' as himself, he allows
himself to be inveigled by D'Arcy into a drinking session, which ends with
Henry in the custody of the police, and D'Arcy gaining the secrets of
Eileen's latest "New Look" designs. He discloses these secrets to the press,
with a view to ruining Eileen's business.
Michael is also in romantic pursuit of Eileen, who initially, is not
unreceptive, but later she mistakenly believes that it is he who leaked her
trade secrets. In disgust, she leaves her salon, and travels to Paris to
view the latest collections. Darcy goes as well. Michael pursues her to
Paris, but Eileen and D'Arcy move on when the latter discovers that they are
being followed. Michael dispondently returns to London, and is on the point
of selling the business to two fashion 'spivs' (acting on D'Arcy's
instructions), when in walks Eileen,who has returned poste haste, after
learning of D'Arcy's betrayal.
Eileen and Michael send the spivs packing, and Michael decides to settle the
score with D'Arcy, the result of which he finds himself at the police
station. Eileen arrives to bail him out, and 'takes charge' of him herself,
as wedding bells ring..............
Herbert Wilcox's film, made at MGM Studios, Boreham Wood, is a Technicolor
follow up to 'Spring in Park Lane', one of the top UK box office successes
of 1948. It has the same stars (his wife Anna Neagle and Michael Wilding, in
an very mannered performance), songs (which here include:"Do I Love You"
(Music:Bruno Bidoli/Words: David Heneker), "I'm Not Going Home"(Music:Fred
Prisker/Words: Kermit Goell) and "Maytime in Mayfair" (Music: Harry Parr
Davies/Words: Harold Purcell),  the same musical director (Robert Farnon:
the score features Farnon's composition "Melody Fair" (for a fashion parade
sequence), together with arrangements of "The Moment I Saw You" and "Early
One Morning"), and screenwriter (Nicholas Phipps). However, whereas 'Spring'
was a deliciously light souffle concoction, albeit in black and white, this
sequel is more of a stodgy Technicolor pudding. Thora Hird makes a good
impression as a rather 'refined' receptionist at the salon.  'Maytime'
features a fashion show of top UK designs of 1950, which is of interest to
fans of the 'New Look', and (as in the earlier film) Neagle and Wilding
dance in the style of Astaire and Rogers. In an era of ration books and
postwar austerity, it is not difficult to see wny films such as 'Maytime in
Mayfair' were popular, particularly with female audiences, to whom the
characters and their world must have epitomised "glamour". As a contribution
to the late 1940's fantasy/glamour cycle of films ('The Red Shoes' is
another example), 'Maytime In Mayfair' is not without interest.
Roger Mellor (roger@mellor48.freeserve.co.uk)
Check out the British Musical Movies website at:
http://britmusicalfilm.webjump.com

Title
Review for Good Companions, The (1957)
The 1957 British film musical version of THE GOOD COMPANIONS (Directed by J.
Lee Thompson for Associated British) creates a world far removed from the
present in which a different, cosier set of values reigns, which
isseductively attractive to those of a certain age. In the opening scene of
the film the world of the theatre concert party is compared by a heartless
theatre manager with the emerging culture of 'rock n' roll, striptease and
television', and indeed the form of the film itself, in its use of
widescreen, colour and enchanced sound (it is likely that at the film's
premiere engagement at the Warner cinema in London's Leicester Square, the
film had  enchanced sound, as ABPC Elstree was experimenting with
'perspecta' (pseudo stereo) sound at this time), it directly takes on the
new domestic competition of television, which was beginning to take hold of
the British viewing public by 1957. In this old world is philanthropic
spinster Miss Trant (Celia Johnson), living comfortably in middle age, and
very much Laura Jesson from BRIEF ENCOUNTER, if she had not married Fred in
that classic film. Her encounter with the struggling concert party, the
'Dinky Doos', and the world of the touring theatre as depicted by J.B.
Priestley is well known to English audiences, and was much appreciated by
the lyricist Johnny Mercer, who, with composer Andre Previn, worked on a
stage musical of the story which played in London at Her Majesty's in 1974.
THE GOOD COMPANIONS was previously filmed by Gaumont in 1932 with Jessie
Matthews and John Gielgud. Apparently, a remake was planned in 1953 with
ABPC contract stars husband and wife team Michael Denison and Dulcie Gray,
together with a young and little known actress/dancer named Audrey Hepburn
to be cast as Susie Dean. Then Hollywood became interested in Audrey, and
Paramount brought her out of her contract with ABPC so she could star in
ROMAN HOLIDAY, and the rest, as we know is history. ABPC then shelved the
project, and released the others from their contracts. Three years later,
they decided to revive the project, brought in new writers to polish the
script, and decided to turn it into a CinemaScope musical, with newly
commissioned songs from Paddy Roberts and others. They brought in a new
cast, mainly composed of young contract talent, which is how Janette Scott,
John Fraser and Rachel Roberts became involved.
The 1957 version of THE GOOD COMPANIONS had been out of circulation for many
years - it was last shown on British television in the monochrome days of
1964. One had assumed that the colours had faded and that the film was
beyond repair. What a joy therefore to see the new print which was first
broadcast on Channel Four(UK) in 1997. In the restored print the CinemaScope
image is simply wonderful with all colours looking bright and sharp, and TGC
is now revealed as one of the most attractive and elegant British films of
its decade. The lighting of interiors is exceptional - rooms and decor are
beautifully depicted: Jess Oakroyd's living room, public houses, a private
dining room at the back of a seedy cafe which takes on a warmth all of its
own because of the theatricals seated round the table, theatre interiors,
and there is a scene in a lavish hotel dining room with Joyce Grenfell (Lady
Parlitt) in which the surroundings are rich in detail. Special praise should
go to the director of photography (Gilbert Taylor).
As the setting of the story is updated from 1929 (when touring shows were
highly popular) to the 1950's, when they were in decline, the musical style
is also updated, and the songs are all catchy in the style of
ballads/revue/variety c1956/7. This perhaps explains why the film was not a
big commercial hit in 1957, in spite of an Easter release date- it had the
misfortune to open just as rock and roll was taking off as the music for the
young, and even to the teenagers of 1957 (the target audience defined in the
film's press book), it must have seemed terribly old fashioned, looking to
the past rather the present. It also had the misfortune to be released in
the UK (it was never released theatrically in the USA- not the kind of film
Allied Artists, the distributor of Associated British films in the USA was
interested in- it had no 'exploitation' angle) in the same month as the Fred
Astaire/ Audrey Hepburn FUNNY FACE, one of the all time classics of the
musical genre, and critics were tempted to make comparisons with the British
musical effort. In hindsight however, this is unfair to THE GOOD COMPANIONS,
and with the passing of time the qualities of the film are more evident. For
TGC is priceless as a 1950's British film musical which owes nothing to
operetta or rock and roll - in its recording and celebration of fifties
variety it is unique, bearing in mind that all television variety at the
time went out live. In the UK little was filmed and videotape was still
several years away. The decline of this form of entertainment is disguised
by the triumphant finale, although earlier passing reference is made to the
'three graces' appearing 'stripped to the buff', as in the 1950's touring
nude revues. Interestingly, at the same time as THE GOOD COMPANIONS was
released, 1957, John Osborne's Play THE ENTERTAINER, with Laurence Olivier
as Archie Rice, was premiered at London's Royal Court Theatre (and later
filmed in 1960), and it provides a fascinating counterpoint to the essential
optimism of TGC. What a fascinating double bill these two films would make!
(An interesting foonote: the main location of the film of THE ENTERTAINER is
the Lancashire seaside town of Morecambe, where Janette Scott spent her
early years. Her grandfather was manager of the theatre used in THE
ENTERTAINER, and this was the theatre where her mother, the actress Thora
Hird (who incidentally appears in both films) made her stage debut).
THE GOOD COMPANIONS, although greatly condensed, remains faithful to the
essential spirit of Priestley's novel in its celebration of showbusiness and
the theatrical life, and in particular, the metaphor of the touring theatre
as an escape for the middle aged male from a society that is domesticated,
drab and puritanical, epitomised in those apron wearing, dour wives (played
by Thora Hird and Beatrice Varley in TGC) who appear at the stage door and
attempt to drag their 'erring' husbands away from the chorus girls, and back
to a 'reality'. Then there is the sense of community amongst the performers,
and of communal travel by steam hauled trains through the length of Great
Britain from Wales to Yorkshire, to Bournemouth and on to London. This
romantic vision is captured in a beautifully realised montage sequence which
commences with a distant shot of a train crossing a viaduct, goes to the
train (which looks like a toy train, but isn't) chugging through a verdant
green mountain valley, which fades into a travelling shot of the view from a
carriage window of a harsh industrial landscape, a steel works, which then
cuts directly to the nets of a theatre stage and the performance of a ballad
'If Only' by Susie Dean (Janette Scott). The sequence is linked by the title
song on the soundtrack, and the whole effect is strangely moving, perhaps
something to do with the power of the entertainer to transform our
perception of the world around us, and brighten our lives.
Practically all the minor roles in THE GOOD COMPANIONS are played by
performers who subsequently became much more famous, so the film is full of
incidental pleasures. Because so many of these artists were also appearing
in West End shows in the 1950's, the film provides us with an invaluable
snapshot of certain performers at a specific stage of their careers. Some
were just beginning and had appeared in West End productions of the period:
others were vetrans whose career in musical comedy goes back to the 1930's
and earlier. In the latter category was Bobby Howes, who appeared in
numerous shows from 1923 onwards, the most well known being
Mr.Cinders(1929). In the 1950's he appeared in Paint Your Wagon(Her
Majesty's 1953) and in the NY revival of Finian's Rainbow with Jeannie
Carson (46th St. Theatre 1960). Joyce Grenfell, a West End revue artist
since 1939, appeared in the 1950's revue Joyce Grenfell Requests the
Pleasure of your Company (Fortune Theatre 1954 and for one month in NY in
1955). Paddy Stone and Irving Davies had both appeared in Annie Get Your Gun
(London Coliseum 1947), in which the latter performed the duet 'Who do you
Love, I hope?' with Wendy Toye: both Stone and Davies had also appeared in
the aforementioned Joyce Grenfell revue in 1954, in which Irving Davies
performed a duet with Joyce ('Ordinary Morning'). They also both appeared
with Jeanie Carson in a song and dance number ('In Again/Out Again Heart')
in the 1955 film AS LONG AS THEY'RE HAPPY (which was also directed by J. Lee
Thompson, and featured Janette Scott). Regrettably THE GOOD COMPANIONS was
Paddy Stone's only major featured film appearance. Apart from his brilliant
solo chair number ('Where there's You'), he also choreographed all the
numbers, with Irving Davies, and is responsible for much of the film's
energy. Along with Davies, in the 1960's he became resident choreographer
for Lord Lew Grade's Associated Television variety shows (featuring
Millicent Martin, Librace, Englebert Humperdinck, Tom Jones and many others,
and his most recent screen credit was as choreographer for the 1982 movie of
VICTOR,VICTORIA. John Fraser was later to appear in Strike a Light
(Piccadilly,London 1966) with Jeanie Carson and Evelyn Laye. He is probably
best remembered for his portrayal of Lord Alfred Douglas to Peter Finch's
Oscar Wilde in THE TRIALS OF OSCAR WILDE (US:THE MAN WITH THE GREEN
CARNATION)(1960), and is an amiable romantic lead - there is a charming
little scene where Inigo and Susie take a ride on the top deck of a tram in
a Midlands town (actually filmed in London). John LeMesurier appeared in
Twenty Minutes South ((Greenwell(m) /Browning(l)) at the Players Theatre in
1955. Anthony Newley had appeared in Cranks (Addison(m)/Cranko(l)) in London
New Watergate Theatre 1955) and NY (1956). Rachel Roberts had appeared in
the revue At the Lyric (Lyric, Hammersmith London 1953). As no recordings of
this exist, her featured spot in THE GOOD COMPANIONS ('The Gentleman is a
Heel' number) provides a good indication of the style she must have brought
to revue. Soon after TGC she appeared in the musical Oh! My Papa! (Garrick,
London 1957), and was later to appear in Lionel Bart's Maggie May (Adelphi
1964). So in TGC we can see the star of such classic British 'realist' films
as SATURDAY NIGHT AND SUNDAY MORNING and THIS SPORTING LIFE as a song and
dance lady! Incidentally, her co-star in the former film, Shirley Anne
Field, appears briefly in TGC as the brunette of the 'three graces', and
looks as pretty as a picture as a gold trilby hatted chorine. The
distinguished actor Alec McCowen (who incidentally plays Professor Henry
Higgins in the 1997 CD recording of the complete My Fair Lady score (TER
records)), appears in an early scene as Albert, Jess Oakroyd's son. I will
leave you to spot the rest of the familiar faces! Scenes are charmingly
played by the two romantic leads, Janette Scott (Susie Dean) and the
aforementioned John Fraser (Inigo Jolliphant), an archetypical 1950's 'nice
couple',although Susie's calculating sense of ambition at moments threatens
this spirit of niceness and prevents Susie from being too cloying.
TGC is not an integrated musical - the songs (with composition shared
between Paddy Roberts(m/l), C. Alberto Rossi(m/l), and Geoffrey Parsons(l)
do not further character or plot, and the lyrics are not related to the
story, except in a most tenuous way. All musical numbers are performed
either on the theatre stage or in rehearsal. Nevertheless, they are staged
with a professionalism that is rare in a fifties British musical film.
Although imitative of Hollywood models, staging and colour design show some
flair - for example the finale ('Round the World'), in the use of orange and
red in the casbah scene and cool blue for 'Flo's Ice Club'. The lavish
orchestral arrangements were provided by Laurie Johnson, later to compose
the music for many films and television shows (ie THE AVENGERS), as well as
the music for Lock up your Daughters (Mermaid Theatre London. 1959). The
large ABPC studio orchestra was conducted by distinguished vetran conductor
LOUIS LEVY, whose film credits go back to the 1930's, and fondly remembered
for his work with the Gaumont British Symphony Orchestra. Eighteen year old
Janette Scott (placed under contract by Associated British as a child
actress, and groomed for stardom as a teenager throughout the 1950's, and
once, according to David Frost (in volume one of his autobiography) in the
running for the lead in My Fair Lady on Broadway in 1956) does not receive
top billing, but clearly emerges as the star of THE GOOD COMPANIONS, and
remains a potent icon of a past age of innocent screen romance. She displays
great spirit and loads of charm, especially in 'Today will be a Lovely Day'
in which she appears with Paddy Stone and Irving Davies as her two partners
in a very slick routine, which starts with a gamine Jan liltingly responding
to her suitors' invitation 'Whatya doin' Tonight?' - her enthusiasm is also
quite infectious in the skilfully staged finale, when accompanied by a large
troupe of dancers, she is joyously swept across the Elstree soundstage on a
luggage trolley, and lifted into flight to exotic climes across the
CinemaScope screen. Her youthful joie de vivre led one English critic, Peter
Baker of 'Films and Filming' to write (April 1957) that he sees in Janette
Scott 'that vivacity and unaffected warmth which marked the young Judy
Garland in THE WIZARD OF OZ, BABES IN ARMS and LITTLE NELLY KELLY'.
Reviewing the premiere at the Warner Cinema in London's Leicester Square,
Variety's correspondent writes more modestly that 'Miss Scott makes a
refreshing and appealing showing as the concert party star with ambitions'.
At the conclusion of the 'Round the World' number, the pampered, overweight
cigar smoking critic, sitting in his private box with his blonde 'secretary'
comments directly to camera (ie to the cinema audience ):'It is my job to
extinguish lights, but tonight I've seen a little light that one day may
become a star', and we, the spectator, are invited to collude with this.
However, this was the last musical film made by Janette Scott, and ABPC's
next musical project was THE YOUNG ONES(1960), a much bigger commercial
success which incorporated rock and roll (amongst the more traditional
musical numbers by Peter Myers and Ronnie Cass) in the form of Cliff Richard
and the Shadows. The type of musical represented by TGC was no longer a box
office attraction. Janette made many later films of course, including the
classic SCHOOL FOR SCOUNDRELS and several sci -fi films (such as THE DAY OF
THE TRIFFIDS), but none of the later films have the spontaneous innocence of
THE GOOD COMPANIONS, which is uniquely a film of its time. Janette Scott
retired from feature films after her marriage (1966 to 1977) to Mel Torme.
I would also single out for praise Eric Portman, who is perfect in the role
of Jess Oakroyd, and brings richness and depth to the role. There is a
wonderful moment at the end of TGC, when after Susie Dean's triumph, he nods
leans forward and glances towards Miss Trant, who is sitting in the same row
of the theatre stalls, and almost telepathically communicates with her to
share Susie's moment of triumph with a thumbs up sign followed by the
removal of a handkerchief from his top pocket in order to dry his eyes. THE
GOOD COMPANIONS has several moments like this (those looks that Jess Oakroyd
(in the wings operating some piece of equipment) gives to Susie as she is
performing, speak volumes. TGC is strong in rich character acting in a very
English tradition (even a theatre manager has an individuality about him,
even though he appears only briefly with one line of dialogue). It is also
to the credit of the direction and the writing, that with such a large cast
the characters are so clearly defined and the narrative remains focused. It
is these qualities, together with the film's excellent production values and
the charm of the performances make the film such good entertainment.
Back in April 1957, I saw THE GOOD COMPANIONS as an Easter treat at my local
ABC cinema when it was first released. I was nine at the time and the film
made a deep impression on me. Seeing it again for only the second time forty
years later in 1997, I was amazed to find how much I could remember from the
first viewing. A film must have something rather special to remain in one's
memory so clearly for so long. I cannot think of any other British film of
the 1950's that evokes so vividly a sense of time and place - of steam
trains, rides on trolleybuses, tea rooms, provincial theatres and touring
variety - it is all there in colour and CinemaScope, and thankfully, has
been preserved.
If you have an interest in, or any comments about the subject of this
article, or any notes for corrections and additions, please contact the
author : roger@mellor48.freeserve.co.uk

Title
Review for Golden Disc, The (1958)
Between 1956 and 1958 film producers were confused. They didn't know whether
rock and pop was just a passing fad (like 3D movies, another 1950's
phenomenon), or whether 'rock was here to stay'. So  producers were clearly
hedging their bets with 'The Golden Disc' (Directed by Don Sharp), which
manages to embrace a wide range of musical styles.
The musical numbers (musical director: Philip Green) feature :'I'm Gonna
Wrap You Up' (by Ray Mack, Philip Green) performed by Dennis Lotis; 'Before
We Say Goodnight' (by Norman Newell, Philip Green) performed by Mary Steele;
'Dynamo' (by Tommy Connor) performed by the Terry Kennedy Group ; 'C'min and
be Loved' (by Len Paverman) performed by Terry Dene ; 'Charm' (by Ray Mack,
Philip Green) performed by Terry Dene; 'The Inbetween Age' (by Ray Mack,
Philip Green) performed by Sheila Buxton ; 'Let Me Lie' (by Sonny Stewart)
performed by Sonny Stewart and his Skiffle Kings; 'Candy Floss' (by Len
Paverman) performed by Terry Dene;  'Lower Deck' (by Phil Seamon) performed
by Phil Seamon Jazz Group; 'Balmoral Melody' (by Philip Green) performed by
Murray Campbell ); 'Johnny O' (by Len Praverman) performed by Nancy Whiskey,
and 'The Golden Age' (by Michael Robbins, Richard Dix) performed by Terry
Dene.
'The Golden Disc' includes some skiffle, rock n' roll,  jazz (in an all to
brief 'Birth of the Cool' type piece from a British jazz combo), ballads,
and even a trumpet solo clearly modelled on the then popular Eddie Calvert.
The story revolves around the 'Lucky Charm' coffee bar (the name 'sounds
gay' says wide eyed Mary Steele who looks and sounds as if she has just
stepped out of a 1950's television commercial for OMO or DAZ, and probably
has).  Her acting is wooden and awkward - Mary Steele is delightfully bad,
in a particularly 1950's way.....The movie also stars Canadian Lee Patterson
(who had very period hairstyle, became a regular star of British second
features between 1956 and 1960), and the DJ  David Jacobs (as a TV presenter
of 'Tip for the Top').
However, if you recall being a 1958 teenage bobbysoxer who screamed and
swooned at the microphone technique of Denis Lotis and mobbed him at the
stage door of provincial variety theatres, or are an archeologist interested
in 1958 pop, then you will find much to enjoy. For this is the real
thing........however bad it may seem to us in hindsight, particularly in
this very 'B' grade movie from Butchers Film Productions, which was filmed
at (the soon to close) Walton Studios, Walton on Thames. With movies like
this, it is not difficult to see why........
By Roger Mellor
If you have any comments on this review, or the movie, you can e mail me at:
roger@mellor48.freeserve.co.uk
Check out the British Musical Movies site at:
http://britmusicalfilm.webjump.com

Title
Review for As Long as They're Happy (1955)
When American singing sensation Bobby Denver 'the crying crooner' (whose
tearful singing technique  has a traumatic effect on females, schoolgirls
and old ladies alike) arrives on the Queen Elizabeth to sing in London for
the first time, he stays at the home of stockbroker John Bentley at 35
Acacia Avenue, Wimbledon London SW19. His arrival has an amazing effect on
all females in the household, including his wife Stella (a former actress),
the maid Linda (who has the habit of fainting at the sight of Bobby), and
especially his three daughters:Patricia (a vivacious redhead, who with her
husband Peter, has adopted a bohemian lifestyle in Paris before she returned
to London, and frequently adopts yoga type postures), Corinne (an English
rose
type who returns to London from Texas with cowboy husband Barnaby, complete
with horse and full cowboy gear), and sixteen year old Gwen, who is
infatuated with Bobby, and declares that she is is in love with him. The
house is thrown into chaos, and John, who likes an orderly existence, seeks
the help of a crazy psychiatrist, Dr. Schneider, who labels crooners as
'cardboard lovers for frustrated wives' As a cure he invents a water cistern
which
he calls 'The Bobby Denver' to cure the girls of their obsession. By the end
of the film , Bobby Denver manages to reunite John and Stella and he also
causes Patricia and Peter to give up their bohemian lifestyle. Bobby also
reveals to Gwen the secret of his crying crooner technique (a hidden onion!)
together with the fact that he is married. Gwen, tearful,  exposes this to
the newpsapers,but it does Bobby no harm at all, for there is no such thing
as BAD publicity........
In hindsight, the British cinema of the 1950's can be seen as the golden age
of the formula film. The high spending (as well as the originality and
artistic experiment) of the 1940s, and later the 1960s,  were out of favour,
and the aim of Rank films of the 1950s was simply to produce quality popular
entertainment. This film, made in the middle of the decade, is a fine
example of a Rank Organisation Pinewood comedy, and it displays all the
confidence of the Rank Organisation in its fifties prime, the era of middle
class/middlebrow comedy, Rank starlets, fan magazines, glamour photographs,
Pinewood Garden parties, and a continuous output of films from the studio.
'As Long As They're Happy'  is even confident enough to have several
references to 'Mr Rank' in the script, at a time when JAR was still head of
production.....Even that leading member of the Rank 'family'of the 1950s
Norman Wisdom, appears at the door of the Bentley household at the end of
the film, and just has time to sing his signature number 'Don't Laugh at me,
Cause I'm a Fool'. and the film ends with Gwen switching her devotion from
Bobby Denver to Norman, who she calls 'Darling'..............
Bobby Denver is played by Jerry Wayne (a star of the 1950's West End
production of Guys and Dolls (from which, incidentally, he recorded four
songs, on two Philips 78s) who has a strong attractive vioce. The Bobby
Denver character is, of course is a direct satire on the early 1950s cult of
real life American sobbing crooner Johnny Ray, and the film even features
one of his greatest hits 'Cry'. It is also full of many other 1950's
references: Marlon Brando, Gene Kelly, 1950's existentialists/bohemians in
Paris  (See Funny Face (1956) for more satire on this topic), Abbott and
Costello, Frankie Laine, Billy Daniels The Embassy Club, Val Parnell
presents at the London Hippodrome, aa well as several references to 'Mr
Rank'.
It has a witty screenplay by Alan Melville, adapted from the hit West End
comedy of the same name by Vernon Sylvaine, with jokes about popular/
highbrow culture (a symphony by Picasso etc.).
It has a nice satire on Americans in England. At his London press
conference, Bobby says: 'I want to see something of your wonderful country:
London, Stratford, Scotland - towns like that'.........
The three daughters are played by Jeannie Carson,(Patricia) a vivacious
redhead, who is slightly older, more cool towardas Bobby Denver. She has
intellectual petensions, but is persuaded to give them up, and we last see
her husband Peter wearing a city suit, and seeking a respectable career in
'insurance'- something about the triumph of 1950s values here, I think.....
Susan Stephen (as Corin) is cast again as the perfect 'English Rose' type,
and Janette Scott plays Gwen, sixteen years old, impressionable and most
infatuated with Bobby Denver.  She has a
lovely scene with Bobby where she keeps calling him 'darling'.
The supporting cast of this film is also wonderful. Many fondly remembered
1950s faces make brief appearances in cameo roles: Richard Wattis (backstage
at the theatre), Dora Bryan (as the girl in a lift who wants to swap Billy
Daniels bow tie for Frankie Laine's trouser buttons), Joan Hickson (as a
barmaid), Athene Syler (as the neighbour), Nigel Green (nicely playing
Peter- a very 1950s bearded bohemian type who arrives at the Bentley house
demanding 'Where's my Woman?'),Diana Dors as 'actress' (or'brazen huzzy' as
Stella calls her) Pearl Delaney, is at her most voluptuous, as she performs
'Come Do the Hokey-Pokey Polka', and  1950s BBC television personality
Gilbert Harding also appears. There is a 1950's in joke here (which may be
lost on today's audiences): Gilbert Harding, against his better judgement,
cannot hold back the tears during Bobby's singing at the London Hippodrome.
A  little old lady sitting next to him (played by Edie Martin from "The
Ladykillers") says to Gilbert:
'Do you dig him?'
Gilbert tartly replies :
'I'd bury him'
Little Old Lady:
'You rude man'.
Other members of the audience include Ronnie Stevens (From the 'Dentist'
films, George Minter's response to the successful Doctor comedies) as an
fanatical Bobby Denver fan with a nasty cold, and a super cameo by besotted
fan Charles Hawtrey, who says of Bobby Denver:
'He's wonderful, man- I DIG him!'
Other future 'Carry On' stars appearing include Joan Sims (as Linda, the
fainting maid) and Hattie Jacques (in the party scene).
The songs (by Sam Coslow, except the final one) are all attractive, mainly
in the style of 1950s ballads.They are: You Started Something (Jerry Wayne)
(JW); Quiet Little Rendevous (Jeannie Carson) (JC); I Love the Morning (Jack
Buchanan); I Don't Know whether to Laugh or to Cry Over You (JW); The light
that Lies in Liza's Eyes(JW); Crazy Little Mixed Up Heart (JC); Cry(JW); Be
My Guest(JW); Come Do The Hokey-Pokey Polka (Diana Dors); Cry (Reprised by
Jack Buchanan at the party  in a very low vocal register); I Hate the
Morning (Reprise)(JB); I Don't Know whether to Laugh or to Cry Over You
(JB), and 'Don't Laugh at Me 'cause I'm a Fool' (Norman Wisdom)
The choreography for two staged numbers is by Paddy Stone and Irving Davies.
'Crazy Little Mixed Up Heart' is performed by Jeannie Carson and relates to
her relationship with Peter. It commences with Jeannie leaning on a tree and
moves into a fantasy dance sequence which starts on a park ride with Paddy
Stone (with beard) and Irving Davies, with all dressed in white.  They also
staged 'I Don't Know whether to Laugh or to Cry Over You' (as it is
performed by Jack Buchanan at the end of the film, with a brief solo dance
by Jack, who is then joined in an up tempo jazzy routine by the maid, Joan
Sims). In this sequence, there is a wonderful moment when JB picks the
telephone and says, 'Gene Kelly Speaking'.......JB displays masterful comic
timing throughout. He ia most ably partnered by Brenda de Banzie, as Stella,
an ex-actress, who 'longs to return to the theatre' She is the perfect foil
for Jack Buchanan, as she overdramatises, quoting lines fron Hedda Gabler on
her return to the house, as Jack's 'party' is in full swing. Her tone of
voice perfactly matches his and their scenes together are a delight,
especially the scene at the end, where timing an delivery are perfect.
This is an exceptionally good natured entertaining comedy, finely played by
an excellent cast. It ia also attractively mounted, although the television
copy (from Eastman Colour) was not in particularly good shape, being a
little faded in parts.
Interestingly, Bobby's TV show in the film is in colour (in 1955 ! in
England !).     Filmed at Pinewood.
Check out:
British Film Musicals - http://britmusicalfilm.webjump.com

Title
Review for Trottie True (1949)
This film tells the story of 'Trottie True', a middle class girl who becomes
a child star of the Bedford Music Hall, graduates to the heights of being a
successful Gaiety Girl, marries a Lord and eventually leaves the stage.  It
is not a particularly original or thrilling storyline, and it could be a
very dull film if it were not for the sumptuous costumes and scenery that
are so beautifully selected to display the Technicolor process.
The on-stage scenes (which are few and far between) show some colourful
costumes as do the various ballroom and restaurant scenes.  This newly
restored print enables us to have a good idea of what the film would have
originally been like to see the cinema, and it must have been a wonderful
way to forget the aftermath of the war.
Apart from the lavishness and brightness of the film, the female
performances are a delight, especially that of Jean Kent as 'Trottie True'.
Miss Kent gives a truthful performance of a rising star who falls in love
with a Balloonist, becomes a successful stage performer, and marries a Lord.
The story all sounds rather far-fetched, but Jean Kent's performance makes
it work.  So often, characters that are aiming for stardom become
untruthful, but Miss Kent was totally believable.  She aimed to get to the
top of her profession, and did so without becoming the usual 'bitch', a trap
that these type of roles can easily fall into.  She is also totally
believable towards the end of the film when she marries the Lord and becomes
a Duchess.  A particularly moving moment happens when she performs her Music
Hall songs at the Servants Ball.  We all think that her rather austere
mother-in-law will be mortified, but instead turns to her husband, and says:
"She can stay" - perhaps a little sentimental, but rather moving.  Apart
from giving an excellent performance, Jean Kent also looks so beautiful in
her extravagant dresses and with her gorgeous red hair used to full effect
in the Technicolor filming.
The other female roles are equally well cast, particularly the
ever-wonderful Hattie Jacques as a fellow Gaiety Girl.  She gives a
wonderfully rich comic performance that never steps over the mark.  It is
good to see her in an earlier stage in her career.  Hattie Jacques is
matched brilliantly with the late Bill Owen as 'Trottie's' Music Hall
friend.  He gives a performance without any of the ususal stereotypical
characteristics of a 'Cockney Music Hall Performer', and although it is
obvious that he is in love with 'Trottie', he never becomes too sentimental
as if playing 'Buttons' in "Cinderella".
Unfortunately, the male leads let down  the film.  James Donald as 'Lord
Digby' is extremely dull.  'Trottie' has far too much vitality to fall in
love with him!  Her first love, 'Maurice' (the Balloonist) (Hugh Sinclair)
was an unbelievable character and his rather awkward smile filled the screen
too many times.  I rather felt that 'Trottie' may have had more fun if she
had gone off with some of the film extras - and why not when they comprise
of such names as Roger Moore, Patrick Cargill and Ian Carmichael!  In fact
the list of small part players is rather amazing, with a wonderful ripple of
recognition when Gretchen Franklyn appeared as 'Martha' the maid in
'Trottie's' childhood home!  A special mention needs to go to a young
teenage Dilys Laye who plays the young 'Trottie'.  She gave a delightful
performance and gave a clear indication of the successful career that she
was about to embark upon.
The most important element of this film is depiction of the differences
between the Music Hall and Gaiety Theatre.  There is a wonderful scene
between 'Trottie' and Lana Morris as 'Bouncie Barrington' in which 'Bouncie'
comments on all the jewellery she has been given from her Stage-Door
Johnnies.  She says that she is a Gaiety Girl because she is pretty - which
is all that is expected from her when she performs on the stage.  'Trottie',
of course, has other ideas, and knows that she is a good performer and that
the audiences love her for her talent.
This film gives a good indication what these days must have been like - it
is just such a shame that a full Musical Number is not seen on stage at the
Gaiety.  One number between Bill Owen, Hattie Jacques and Jean Kent is seen
(in part) from the wings of a theatre.  It should have been filmed in its
entirety, but was cut short few to financial constraints at the time of
filming.  The other songs were sweet, including a Music Hall number written
by Carroll Gibbons which commenced with Dilys Laye as the young 'Trottie'
and moved forward in time with Jean Kent finishing it as the older
'Trottie'.  Another song "White Wings" (which is supposed to have been one
of the Queen Mother's favourite songs) seemed rather dull and although was
supposed to be sung by Jean Kent, looked suspiciously dubbed!
The print viewed was a newly restored version of a gorgeous film that gave
us some lovely performances plus historical facts of the Gaiety Girls.

Title
Review for London Town (1946)
The critical and financial failure of the extravagant LONDON TOWN (1946),
Britain's first major Technicolor musical (there were one or two attempts in
the thirties, but not on this scale), is part of British film legend.
Lavishly funded, and produced by the Rank Organization in association with
the American director Wesley Ruggles at a time of rationing and shortages of
materials (perhaps this explains why so many of the chorus girls costumes
are muddy green or khaki!), it was filmed in the shell of 'Sound City
Shepperton' (later renamed the London Film Studios by Korda, and later
'Shepperton Studios') which had just been made available as a film studio
after being requisitioned during the war as a factory for aircraft parts.
According to reports, part of the studio was still being used for this
purpose during the production of LONDON TOWN. It was unusual for Rank to
produce a film here, but perhaps Denham was fully booked! (Pinewood was
still occupied by the goverment, not being released for film production,
until well after the war).
Sid Field was the talk of London town at the end of the war, having just
conquered and cheered up wartime London audiences with his enormously
successful stage variety shows, and so he could more or less dictate his own
tems for the film. He insisted on having an American director, as was of the
opinion that no British director was capable of making a good musical
(hadn't he heard of Victor Saville?). J.Arthur Rank, flush with funds
(Cinema admissions in 1945 were at an all time high), was happy to spend
large sums of money to bring over a fading American comedy director of the
1930's with little experience of musicals, whose career was, frankly, on the
slide in Hollywood, and give him lots of money and a financial stake through
his own production company, mainly funded by Rank. Top US songwriters were
comissioned, musicians were placed under "long term contracts", and the stud
io also had to be re-equipped from the ground up! Rank was confident that,
even though he was wasting money left, right and centre, the cinema business
was so boyant at this time, that he would still make a healthy profit. And
financial Controls were slack, to say the least......
The movie became a legendary turkey! It was not that UK audiences stayed
away in droves from "London Town", just that the film needed to perform
spectacularly well just to break even at the box office. Critics were
dismissive, calling it "Tacky and Tasteless". In hindsight, and especially
for 1940's nostalgia fans, these aspects make it absolutely fascinating!
Apart from the kitsch elements, the film is also interesting historically.
After Britain's victory in the war, it can be seen as a tribute to London
and its citizens, and as a celebration of popular cockney culture,
especially music hall. It also, in a way in which the makers almost
certainly did't intend, celebrates the sense of community, the "all classes
in harmony" as seen in the Riverboat sequence, filmed as a day out on the
River Thames, below Windsor Castle. The symbolism of this is fascinating, as
all are included, from the very high, Royalty in the Castle, to an Eton
Schoolboy, to the cockney folk, all living in harmony in this "English
Utopia". With its emphasis on "Community Values", it could almost be an
election commercial for Clement Atlee's Labour government, which swept to
power in the same year!
The Songs in 'London Town' include: 'You Can't Keep a Good Dreamer Down',
'The 'Ampstead Way', 'Any Way the Wind Blows' 'So Do I ' (performed by
1940's Dance Band singer Beryl Davis),  'My Heart Goes Crazy', and a  medley
of cockney songs: 'Knock 'em in the Old kent Road/Any Old Iron/(My Old Man
said) Follow the Van'
The musical director was Tutti Camerata, from Decca Records, and many of the
musicians who played on the Soundtrack went on to form the Ted Heath band.
The film orchestra is, in effect, the Ted Heath band of 1945 in embryonic
form. (Ted Heath was the "orchestral contractor" for the film, which may
have given him a taste for band leadership!). The music and lyrics were by
Bing Crosby's regular collaborators,Jimmy Van Heusen and Johnny Burke, and
the film is not without interest. Much of the material for the comedy
sketches comes from comedian Sid Field's two West End wartime variety
revues, Strike a New Note(Prince of Wales,1943) and Strike it Again (Prince
of Wales,1944), which were highly successful with the public (followed by
Piccadilly Hayride (Prince of Wales,1946). Strike it Again featured the golf
sketch which is seen in LONDON TOWN. Thus the film provides a valuable
historical record of 1940's variety, with comic sketches and musical
production numbers, and all in Technicolor. Among those featured are Kay
Kendall singing 'The 'ampstead way', and with 'The Dozen and One Girls'
(also known as 'The London Lovelies', as they are billed in the film's press
book) 'My heart goes crazy': fourteen year old Petula Clark appears in a non
singing role, and Tessie O'Shea, later to appear in Noel Coward's The Girl
Who came to Supper (Broadway Theatre NY, 1963) demonstrates her ability to
steal the show, in the 'Pearly Kings and Queens' sequence.
LONDON TOWN was released in the US in a truncated form by United Artists in
1953 under the title MY HEART GOES CRAZY.
Roger Mellor
If you have any comments on this review, or the movie, you can e mail me at:
roger@mellor48.freeserve.co.uk
Check out the British Musical Movies site at:
http://britmusicalfilm.webjump.com

Title
Review for Charley Moon (1956)
Charley Moon  (Director:Guy Hamilton) is a pleasant, if simple minded movie,
designed as a vehicle for Max Bygraves, and clearly aimed at children and
the 'family' audience. It never shies from milking easy sentiment. Its main
interest now is that much of it is set in the lost world of 1950s provincial
variety theatres (theatrical digs, with signs outside saying "Actors Taken
In", touring nude revues) and also 1950's West End revues. This aspect of
the film is rather good, albeit with some rather overdone satire at the
expense of theatrical agents (the Solly Silvers character) and managers,
'false' West End people and values, epitomised in the Mary Minton character
played by Florence Desmond, and the extended Queens Theatre musical
sequence'The Fabulous Golden Boy' performed by Max and the dancers, in which
he does quite a successful impersonation of Noel Coward, and sends up the
new (for 1956) world of British commercial television.
The musical numbers are by Leslie Bricusse and Robin Beaumont and include
'Out of Town' (The big hit number, performed twice by Max. Firstly on the
stage of the Queens Theatre (commencing on an underground carriage set) and
then at the end, in the country, to his real true love (Patricia Driscoll) ;
'Fingers Crossed' (Max sings to the Circus Children, led by Benesta played
by young Jane Asher, who he meets riding the wagon of a travelling circus);
'It Isn't That One' (Max, in variety) ;'The Fabulous Golden Boy' (Max in the
Queens Theatre revue sequence); 'Three Wishes' (Max sings to Shirley Eaton);
'Head Over Heels in Love' (Max, Florence Desmond) and  'He's Got a Heart,
The Same As You' (Max and Dennis Price  in variety. The musical staging is
by Vida Hope (assisted by George Erskine-Jones) and the musical arrangements
are by Wally Stott
Michael Medwin gives solid support at Max's old army pal, who becomes a
loyal fan, and gets into a fight with another audience member (Eric Sykes)
when the latter won't keep quiet. Blonde Shirley Eaton is a glamorous panto
star, whose song rendition is ruined. Dennis Price appears as a panto goose
and in drag as an ugly sister. There are also some nice images of rural
England ,complete with a hearty, extrovert vicar (Reginald Beckwith).
Unfortunately the film has  dull muddy Eastman Colour transfer - with
decent, bright colour remastering, it would be very watchable. Made at
Shepperton Studios by  Colin Lesslie Productions and released through
British Lion.
By Roger Mellor
If you have any comments on this review, or the movie, you can e mail me at:
roger@mellor48.freeserve.co.uk
Check out the British Musical Movies site at:
http://britmusicalfilm.webjump.com

Title
Review for Duke Wore Jeans, The (1958)
Summary
Married without his parents consent, the Hon.Tony Whitecliffe (Tommy
Steele), whose main interest is cattle breeding,  is horrified when his
parents ask him to woo a European Princess (the reason being that they are
after her wealth). By chance, a cockney double (also played by Tommy Steele)
arrives at their stately home and the Hon. Tony plans to send Tommy to woo
the Princess in his place. Tommy travels to the Principality with his
manservant Michael Medwin in support (who has a nice 'tipsy' scene-
incidentally this is not the only 'pop' film in which he provided valuable
support - he was also in  the Billy Fury vehicle 'I've Gotta  Horse').  The
Princess initially takes a dim view of Tommy, but soon falls for his
informal, unstuffy style . By the end, Tommy wins over the court by proving
that he is an aristocrat after all- his parents being a 'Pearly King and
Queen', and leads them all in a 'knees up'.
This is a real old fashioned musical comedy plot, with doubles (cockney
pretending to be aristocrat, in order to woo a Pricess), which borrows
freely from vintage 1930s and 1940s shows such as  'Mr Cinders', Ivor
Novello (pretty foreign Princess, 'Ruritanian' atmosphere), Me and My Girl
(The Lambeth Walk /Cockney Pearly Kings and Queens), and the films of George
Formby (with Steele's, at times, outrageous mugging to camera)
This rather silly story is rescued by the vitality of Tommy Steele, (fondly
remembered for the leading role in David Heneker's musical 'Half a Sixpence'
in the West End, on Broadway and on film) who proves here that he always was
a 'family entertainer' even in the early rock n' roll' years. He is a
natural performer, and a much better actor than most other pop performers of
the era (compared with say, Billy Fury for example).
The film also stars (as the romantic lead) the deliciously pretty, beautiful
and graceful June Laverick (note the scene where she appears in the top half
of a bathrobe displaying her beautiful legs, 1950s cheesecake style!). June
made a couple of films under a Rank Contract (1958-1959), and is perhaps
best remembered for her weekly leading role opposite Dickie Henderson in the
'Dickie Henderson Show' (Associated Redifussion Television), a popular
sitcom of the late 1950s/early 1960s. June also appeard on stage with Dickie
Henderson in 'When in Rome' (Kramer(m)/Shaw and Miller(l)) at London's
Adelphi Theatre from late 1959.  In this musical she sang 'Sympatica', 'It's
So Nice to Sleep with No One' and 'Stop' (all recorded on Oriole (45)
CB1535/6/7)
The songs featured in 'The Duke Wore Jeans' are: It's All Happening  :What
Do You Do? (Tommy Steele duets with himself) :Our Family Tree (Tommy
introduces himself to the court) :Happy Guitar (the 'Top Ten' hit from the
film, a skiffle type number performed with 'The Steelemen') :Gotta Let Your
Hair Down (a 1957 Rock n' Roll number) : It's All Happening (Reprise)
(Ballad Version); May I Call You Princess? (an attractive romantic ballad,
with a lovely atmosphere, performed on nice studio set, with Tommy and June
on a tree swing); Photograph My Baby (a duet, perfomed by Tommy and June)
(June Laverick sang on the West End stage in 1959 (see note below), so
presumably this is her own voice): 'Thanks a Lot, I've Had a Ball' (in which
Tommy leads the court, and the Pearly King and Queens in a 'good old knees
up')
Songs in 'The Duke Wore Jeans' are all good, especially for such a modestly
budgeted movie (black and white, and no foreign locations beyond what seems
to be Elstree aerodrome!). All are attractive, in varying styles: from early
rock n' roll, to skiffle, to lush romantic ballads, with some fine musical
scoring by Bruce Montgomery. It is interesting to note that, in 1957, the
producers did not go for an out and out 'rock n roll' musical - they still
wanted to retain the older, family audience, so the film includes something
for everybody.
In summary, a pleasant, watchable but totally undemanding musical/comedy in
the George Formby tradition!
By Roger Mellor
If you have any comments on this review, or the movie, you can e mail me at:
roger@mellor48.freeserve.co.uk
Check out the British Musical Movies site at:
http://britmusicalfilm.webjump.com

Title
Review for King's Rhapsody (1955)
Pure escapism, set in a rarified, if rusty 'Ruritanian' world that only Ivor
Novello could create. The story has echoes not only of the romance between
King Carol of Rumania and actress Magda Lupescu, but also the of 1930s
cause
celebre, the abdication of King Edward VIII over Mrs. Simpson, which perhaps
accounted for its popularity on the West End stage at the Palace Theatre in
1949 (when it ran for 839 performances). Errol Flynn plays King Nikki of
"Murania" who has been living in exile with his love, Marta Karillos (Anna
Neagle). His then(real life) wife Patrice Wymore plays the 'Snow Princess'
Christiane of Norseland who is looking for love. When she first runs down an
Elstree studio snowscape wearing a pale blue fur lined frock and sings "Some
Day My Heart Will Awake" , one knows I think that suspension of disbelief is
required.
The musical numbers include: Some Day My Heart will Awake (Patrice
Wymore);
Take Your Girl (Orchestra/Chorus);The Years Together (Anna Neagle);
The Gates of Paradise (Anna Neagle/Chorus)
If This Were Love (Patrice Wymore, Edmund Hockridge, Chorus);
A Violin Began To Play (Patrice Wymore/Chorus) and Coronation Scene
and Finale (Orchestra/Chorus)
Although some songs are left out and others are reduced in length to one
chorus/verse and thus shortened from stage version, there is still a lot of
music in the film, as Novello's melodies are used in some masterful
underscoring by Robert Farnon. There are some nice choral arrangements too,
and much ceremonial music- for processionals, royal weddings, parades,
coronations and the like. 'Kings Rhapsody features dance music prominently,
from folk dances ('Muranian Rhapsody') to a modern dance dream/nightmare
ballet featuring the princess (Wymore) and a group of uncredited male
dancers wearing face masks on the back of their heads, but young Lionel
Blair is clearly recognisable.
By 1955, Errol Flynn's Hollywood star quality was in descent, and he was
working in modestly budgeted films in England. I suppose it is a sign of a
star that they have an aura about them, and viewers cannot take their eyes
off of them whilst they are on the screen. In this film, although is
performance is rather on the lazy side, Flynn retains much of his old charm,
has true star quality, and is compulsively watchable, from his entrance in a
drunk scene (surprise.......)
'Kings Rhapsody' is however, clumsily shot - camera setups are frequently
dull and unimaginative, and the film is decidedly sluggish in parts with the
static shots and long takes typical of early CinemaScope movies. The
lighting in some scenes is also very odd, with pink hues, whick give a tacky
look , and the (at times) weak 1950s Eastman Colour doesn't do the film any
favours. The films opens in Monte Carlo, and is set in Royal palaces and
spectacular scenery, which is also rather poorly photographed: it looks as
if some of the location shots were brought in from a travelogue/another
source- perhaps evidence of a budgetary problems with this film: it really
neeed big US money to give the lavish look required. Working with very
limited resources, Herbert Wilcox has tried to produce a 'lavish' musical,
but the cracks do show, particularly in the location photography and the art
direction. However, the sound is quite lively for 1955, with what seems to
be stereophonic , or at least 'perspecta' (directional ) sound. This MAY be
the first British Musical film recorded with a magnetic stereophonic
soundtrack. On the print viewed, the orchestral playing has presence and
bite, and some really loud sound effects (gunshots etc.). But, the sound in
some studio dialogue scenes in the early part of the film is reminiscent of
early sound films, with every rustle of clothing and footstep
over-amplified....(!)
The whole film is quite preposterous of couse, and you either surrender to
the piece or dismiss it. Take the ending which is kitsch of the highest
order, and which is brought off very well by the director to tug at the
emotions, in syncronisation with Novello's glorious music. As his young son
is crowned, Rikki is in the Cathedral, hiding in the shadows, After the
service Nikki goes alone to the altar to pray as , unseen to him,
Christiane, his Snow Princess appears in the RH side of the frame. If you
have surrendered to this story, there will not be a dry eye in the house at
this moment - which is just how Novello would have wanted it, as THE END
comes up on the screen..........
By Roger Mellor
If you have any comments on this review, or the movie, you can e mail me at:
roger@mellor48.freeserve.co.uk
Check out the British Musical Movies site at:
http://britmusicalfilm.webjump.com
