Authors
Danielle Flynn
Number of Reviews
2

Title
Review for Cruel Intentions (1999)
Review/Character Analysis by Danielle Flynn
Cast:
Sarah Michelle Gellar, Ryan Phillippe, Reese Witherspoon, Selma Blair
MPAA Rating:
R for dialogue, language, sexual situations, and thematic elements
Summary:
Rather than the typical Hollywood pattern of promoting promiscuous, immoral
people as accredited examples we can follow, they have broken out of the
corrupt mold of filmmaking and have promoted them as nothing more than
promiscuous, immoral people.
Review:
This is one of those rare, unseen cases where you must look beyond what the
previews unfurl. If one sees the trailer and only the trailer, here is what the
extent of his plot summary will be: spoiled, rich college-age boy bets his
equally spoiled, rich college-age stepsister that he can, what is a nice way of
putting this, sleep with the school headmaster's daughter, famous for her
morals of "waiting for true love", and eventually the boy falls in love with
her instead oh great, more complications. Sounds twisted, huh? Tell me about
it. Ah, how trailers can deceive.
I nonchalantly walked into the theater expecting to be dragged out ten minutes
later by my I-only-like-old-G-rated-movies type of mother who knew nothing
about this flick we had decided to stay and watch after seeing another one. But
instead, I was intrigued by every moment. Go in there expecting what you want,
none of it will matter. I suppose one of the primary reasons I found myself
fascinated was the acting. I had counted on a bunch of Hollywood's teen stars
thrown into a foul-mouthed, tasteless "B movie". I was wrong. You'll never look
at Buffy the same way again.
Sarah Michelle Gellar carries this movie fantastically. Though a fully dazzling
cast shines in every scene, it truly is Kathryn Merteuil we all find ourselves
drawn to simply for her flagitiously wicked disposition and no-conscience
perspective. This is a person who has never been loved by anyone. She gets her
pleasure in life by the pain in others', which she proudly displays wordlessly
in each scene. This is someone with no concrete emotions and a heart of stone.
Yet still there is an aspect of fear; fear of getting seriously hurt. Fear of
the world and of being defeated by people like herself. She perhaps may be a
vicious, relentless villain on the outside but inwardly she is a scared little
girl who desperately needs someone to love her, and you can see it in her eyes
the whole time no matter how brutal she may carry herself to be. Gellar takes
an immense stretch from her famous television role of "Buffy the Vampire
Slayer" as she boldly and successfully plunges into the position of someone
much more sinister. My personal favorite scene in the entire film, and not to
mention Gellar's finest, was at almost the very end, when the entire school
discovers her secret, compliments of Cecile. There is no actual dialogue in
this scene but it is still to me the most powerful and moving one of all.
Another crucial role is that of Kathryn's stepbrother Sebastian Valmont, who
proposes the bet in the first place. Ryan Phillippe (reuniting with Gellar
after their first appearance together in the horror smash "I Know What You Did
Last Summer") renders a scathingly commendable yet unadorned performance as
someone also in great need of attention. He holds an offensive reputation as
the rich kid who takes advantage of every "insipid Manhattan debutante" he
desires. Phillippe's character exhibits great chemistry with the others',
especially Gellar's. An intensely dramatic transformation in the film is when
Sebastian realizes that he truly loves Annette. There is more complexity to
this than meets the eye, seeing how selfish and perverted Sebastian has always
been. Phillippe furnishes this sequence with an emotionally distraught display
of honesty and conviction, which just blew me away.
Reese Witherspoon offers a simple yet simply elaborate show of being "the good
girl" (Annette Hargrove) without making her inaccessibly "goody-goody". A sort
of subtlety and maturity about her character results in the audience being able
to connect to her. This is not someone who needs a lot of figuring out but
rather needs a lot of acceptance. Her spirit holds a tenacious truth that seems
to act as sort of the conscience for the entire film. I would have to say
Witherspoon's most prominently well-mastered scene is when Sebastian reveals
the truth to her. She is able to just lose control without compromising her
entirety, which I thought was nothing more than a finely polished job on her
part.
There is a certain depth and innocence yet mischievous mystery to the role of
Cecile Caldwell, immaculately played by Selma Blair. She is probably the most
complicated character of all because she has so many levels. There is a little
8-year-old version of her that still wants to play and have fun, and there is a
30-year-old version that wants to encounter the so-called great adult
experiences of life. It's a girl who has also not experienced much love in her
life, especially from her wealthy, egotistic, over-bearing mother. She is truly
looking for love in all the wrong places, and rather than find it, she gets
clobbered. But not knowing what she should have expected anyway, she takes it
in a rather naďve way, clumsily playing by the only rules she knows in the only
way she knows how.
I cannot remember the last time I've enjoyed a movie to such an extent. Not in
the way of, "oh this is just so much fun", but more in the vicinity of, "this
is smart, deep, and very dark yet very accessible". A strong word of advice,
however; don't drag anyone under 15 to see this. It may have a cast chock full
of young people, but it's a movie highlighting the cruel intentions of adults
in the world today. A superb, simple, and entertaining script combined with a
surprisingly impressive cast has made "Cruel Intentions" one of the most
exceptional movies I've seen in years. Until next time, "happy hunting", and
remember: "in the game of seduction, there's only one rule: never fall in
love."
Until the next great movie I see, I remain sincerely,
Danielle Flynn, IMR (Independent Movie Reviewer)
AlanisM567@aol.com

Title
Review for Pleasantville (1998)
'Pleasantville' (1998) Taps into Hollywood's Lack of Integrity with Subtle
Messages That Can Be Easily Missed
In Short:
It takes a lot of careful observation to see the true morals and lessons
brought out in this film; one can easily be misled as to what the real message
is.
Review:
In a literally colorless world with an almost mechanical population, there is
no room for transitioning variety or even the customary happenings of everyday
life, such as rain, fire, or emotions. The town of Pleasantville has one
adjective: pleasant. There is no sadness, no fear, no danger, no discomfort, no
love, and no hate. Put simply, it's a place Alanis Morissette could really work
wonders for. J One big note however is that it is only a 50's sitcom that airs
in reruns on an "oldies" TV station or is it?
I had waited months to see this movie and after doing so on opening day I was
not disappointed. I found it quite intriguing and delightful and went back 3
more times in the period it endured at the box office. But it wasn't until
months later, when I slipped in for a small showing in one of those crummy
"dollar theaters" after not having seen it for so long, that my eyes were
opened to such a deeper meaning and perspective than I had previously
experienced.
It is a far too feasible misconception that this is a film which forwards the
idea that a world without some "healthy" immorality is not a world at all.
Instead, the actual message, which so far has not been recognized by many
viewers that I know of, is that a world without immorality doesn't give one the
ability to discern right and wrong for himself, because everything is
automatically right. There is no room for mistakes and growth and learning
because there are no mistakes to be made, no space for growth, and never
anything new to learn, and that is the key component to the entire purpose of
the story. Now I'm not saying that's necessarily the way it was intended to be
interpreted, but that is hands down the proper way in which it should be.
Besides a hidden symbolic depth and themes that go beyond what we can absorb
from previews, this film has elements of physical wonder and strength that make
it just so great to watch. The visual effects are indeed striking and what
little color is revealed is impartially favorable. After spending the bulk of
the movie staring at black and white, it's hard not to identify and appreciate
the fact that our own world allows for all that brilliance and more. A truly
intelligent addition to it all, however, is the charming and ardently
attainable cast that operates together like clockwork.
That said, the plot goes as such. David and Jennifer are two very 90's high
school twins with the typical "relationship" outline of
don't-mess-with-my-life-and-I-won't-mess-with-yours. They demonstrate the
well-known teenage qualities of two of the common versions of adolescents
today. David is the shyer, subtler twin who would rather watch TV Land than
MTV, while Jennifer is the wild, licentious one who spends her days at the mall
and relishes in the pleasures of the offensive world of degradation.
But when a freak accident enchantingly plops them smack dab in the middle of
Pleasantville as two of the main characters, they are forced to depend on each
other to make it back home. Nevertheless, Jennifer works her magic and
introduces the town to a more unrestrained approach to life, and while David
frantically tries to stop her and get them back home, he realizes that change
was exactly what the town needed. And, as said earlier, not to flip the town
around into some corrupt society, but rather to give people the choice to
decide between good and bad and to reap the results of their decisions and
learn from them. Not only were difficult choices being brought upon the town,
but the simple accepted occurrences of ordinary existence also began to take
place. People got hurt. They cried. They became afraid and happy and thoughtful
and started to think for themselves, and that's when their physical world
turned colors as well.
This can be looked upon as quite a controversial movie, but to me the message
is finally clear. I hope after reading this people can be more open to the film
than they had been in the past, and realize that without choosing how our own
lives will be run, we'll never know what we could have done better.
Until the next great movie I see, I remain sincerely,
Danielle Flynn, IMR
