Authors
John Oswalt
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Wolf (1994)
          Capsule review:  A rather standard werewolf story set in
     modern-day New York: excellently cast, and very well done,
     despite the rather weak ending which leaves you saying, "is
     that all?" Jack Nicholson turns in his best performance since
     ONE FLEW OVER THE CUCKOO'S NEST.  Rating: low +2 (-4 to +4)
     It has been quite a while since Jack Nicholson took the lead in a
major film.  Except for 1990's THE TWO JAKES (which he also directed,
and which bombed), he hasn't carried a movie since PRIZZI'S HONOR.  In
WOLF, he is perfectly cast, and performs well.  He's a bit older, and
slightly toned down, but still has plenty of opportunity to flash us
his patented sardonic grins.  I would rank this performance right up
there with the best of his career, in movies which solidified his
reputation, such as EASY RIDER and FIVE EASY PIECES.
     Jack plays a major publishing-house editor who gets bitten by a
wolf while returning from a business trip to Vermont.  He then begins
changing.  At first, the changes are all positive.  He can see without
his glasses, his bald spot fills in with hair, he can smell and hear
better.  He feels better and has renewed sexual vigor.  He's more
aggressive in attacking the problems he has on the job, and in his
personal life.
     But at night, he loses control and turns into a wolf, and does
awful things which torment him when he is more himself, during the
day.
     Michelle Pfeiffer, never lovelier, plays the love interest, the
grown-up former rebellious X-Generation daughter of the billionaire who
buys Jack's publishing house.  She plays her part very well, but is not
given enough to do.  WOLF is very much Jack Nicholson's movie.
     James Spader is excellent as the main bad guy, the junior executive
who covets Jack's job as senior editor.  His role is reminiscent of Dickens'
Uriah Heep: forever claiming how humble he is, but secretly scheming to take
over.
     I was looking forward to a new score from Ennio Morricone, best
known for his music for THE GOOD, THE BAD, AND THE UGLY, and the other
Clint Eastwood-Sergio Leone spaghetti westerns.  The music here is
hardly noticeable.  Perhaps that is good, since it blends in and serves
its purpose.
     Om Puri, the rickshaw wallah in Roland Jaffe's CITY OF JOY, has a
small part as an old scholar whom Jack seeks out when he searches for
help in understanding his new powers and predicament.  Puri has made
more than a hundred movies in India, but we have seen very little of
him in the West.  I hope this changes, because he is a fine actor.
     There is some sex and some violence, but it is not particularly
graphic.  The movie is rated R, but I can't see why.  I think PG-13
would be more appropriate.
     Science fiction fans will recognize a wall full of Tor books in
one scene.  Tom Doherty and Tor Books received a thanks in the credits
for this.
     The main failing of the movie is the ending.  It doesn't have the
courage to take the situation to its logical conclusion, and instead
cops out by ending with something which is supposed to be a surprise,
and leaving the main plot question--what happens to Jack--up in the
air.
     But overall, it's quite effective.  All the supporting parts,
including several I didn't mention, are well done.   Mike Nichols does
a solid job of directing.  This is not a special effects movie, but the
effects that there are are believable.  In my opinion, WOLF is the best
release of the summer season so far.  I rate it a low +2 on the Mark
Leeper -4 to +4 scale.
