Authors
Robert Strohmeyer
Number of Reviews
16

Title
Review for CyberWorld (2000)
filmcritic.com presents a review from staff member Robert Strohmeyer.
You can find the review with full credits at
http://filmcritic.com/misc/emporium.nsf/2a460f93626cd4678625624c007f2b46/afcaf18761198d898825696a000bd8db?OpenDocument
The critique of an IMAX film defies many of the standards against which
traditional films are judged, if only because no IMAX picture to date
has attempted anything like real storytelling.  Nevertheless, these are
films and it is our responsibility to give them our earnest criticism.
CyberWorld, brought to us in large part by the good people at Intel, is
a lush visual trip in the spirit of The Mind's Eye and Beyond the Mind's
Eye.  In fact, some of the content appears to have been lifted directly
out of these films.
After a few moments of sincerely awe-inspiring 3D visual effects, we
meet Phig (voiced by Jenna Elfman), our animated hostess, who opens
(with her schmanzy little laser wand) the doors to the various short
animations that make up this mini-odyssey.  Some of these shorts, like
the IMAX 3D rendering of a scene from Antz, will be warmly familiar to
some viewers.  Others, like the IMAX 3D rendering of that tired old 3D
Simpsons episode, will be sickeningly familiar to most viewers.  A few
people around me actually groaned through it at one preview screening.
Still, some of these shorts are so densely packed with visually
thrilling moments that only the most inattentive patrons managed to
leave without a sense of wonder.  Particularly captivating is the first
short, Monkey Brain Sushi, which crams so much psychically resonant
imagery into just a single minute that it takes several screenings to
fully absorb.
Ultimately, though, CyberWorld is limited by its IMAX technology and
provides little substance to compliment its intense visual rush. 
(Unless, of course, you eat a sheet of acid before you go, in which case
you'll no doubt extract infinite meanings from the various metaphorical
movements of the shorts.)  In the end, it is little more than eye candy
and in 48 short minutes it's over.  But, by all means, it is 48 minutes
well spent, and arguably it's the best IMAX experience available today.
Director: Colin Davies, Elaine Despins
Producer: Steven Hoban, Roman Kroitor, Hugh Murray
Writer: Steven Hoban, Hugh Murray, Charlie Rubin
Starring: Jenna Elfman, Matt Frewer, Robert Smith, Dave Foley
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!

Title
Review for Family Man, The (2000)
Just in time for Christmas comes a story worthy of both Ebenezer and
Jimmy Stewart, with Wild at Heart's Nicholas Cage cast in the role of
the out of touch rich guy.  Jack Campbell (Cage) is not a bad man.  He's
not even a callous man.  He's just a regular guy who happens to believe
that millions of dollars, a beautiful blonde lover, and a Ferrari in the
garage are ample compensation for whatever he may be missing in the way
of mediocre suburban living.
But when this good-natured Wall Street mega-titan puts his life on the
line to save a convenience store from a firefight, he makes a big
mistake.  Because that kid with the pistol (Don Cheadle) is no ordinary
hoodlum -- he's some kind of wacky angel or
ghost-of-Christmas-in-a-parallel-universe or something.  And little does
Jack know, as he lay himself down to sleep on Christmas Eve, that he'll
wake the next morning to the life he could've had if only he'd married
his college girlfriend (Téa Leoni, Deep Impact) instead of following his
ambition to become one of the world's richest, most powerful men.
The movie tries earnestly to make a case for the intrinsic value of
middle class life, but fails miserably to pull through, largely because
it makes power brokering look so easy and fun.  I won't bog you down in
all the little details of Jack's boring suburban life, but suffice it to
say he makes the honest, simple life seem pretty unappealing.
Cage's performance is strong enough, at times even believable, but his
hairpiece needs some serious work.  Leoni is a subtle charmer as the
spunky mother of two, and Cheadle's work in the beginning of the film
carries a potency not seen since his appearance in Boogie Nights.  But,
oddly enough, it is the child actor Mackenzie Vega who adds the most
dimension to the picture as Annie, the Campbells' precocious daughter. 
The only really funny or heartwarming moments in the film revolve around
Annie's frank (but misguided) understanding that Cage is not her real
father but an alien come to observe our planet.  Never has the phrase
"Welcome to Earth" drawn such touching laughter from an audience.
(Except maybe in ET.  Did they say that in ET?)
The Family Man is, in the end, a carefree tale of love and bad New
Jersey accents.  For every man who's ever wondered what life he could
have had if he'd never married the mother of his children, this film has
the answer.  And, just as you might have suspected, you may have been
better off alone.  While the film fails in many ways to reach a
memorable conclusion, it just might carry enough soft-hearted cheer to
make a tired old married couple smile on Christmas eve.
Director: Brett Ratner
Producer: Marc Abraham, Zvi Howard Roseman, Tony Ludwig, Alan Riche
Writer: David Diamond, David Weissman
Starring: Nicholas Cage, Téa Leoni, Don Cheadle, Jeremy Piven, Amber
Valletta, Paul Sorvino, Mary Beth Hurt, Mackenzie Vega
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!

Title
Review for Beautiful (2000)
filmcritic.com presents a review from staff member Robert Strohmeyer.
You can find the review with full credits at
http://filmcritic.com/misc/emporium.nsf/2a460f93626cd4678625624c007f2b46/7bdd22b907aeefa0882569690006544d?OpenDocument
     Few things simultaneously sicken and seduce the feminist spirit in
quite as thorough a way as an American beauty pageant.  Now an
inextricable fixture on our cultural landscape, the pageant defines,
glorifies, and objectifies Woman as a prescription for all time.  An
evening spent watching the Miss America proceedings on TV is like a
psychosexual time warp, dragging us back to a kinder, simpler time when
the female of the species need not worry itself over difficult issues
like voting or wearing shoes.  So it was not without a sense of irony
that I walked down the cinema for a screening Sally Field's Beautiful.
     Irony is the central force of Field's representative pageantry, and
in the tradition of Drop Dead Gorgeous, it is no disappointment.  But
this is also a human story, about women in search of identity and
belonging.
     Mona (Minnie Driver) is a dubious beauty queen, having spent her
entire life contesting--against all reason and likelihood--for the crown
of Miss American Miss.  Though not graced with especially striking looks
from the outset, and born into a household that makes Hee Haw look
glamorous, Mona's years of determination and artificiality are finally
paying off.  She has become Miss Illinois.  Now, if she can keep her
false persona straight, she stands a chance of winning the crown.  And
if it weren't for the untimely suicide of her best friend's convalescent
patient and the disqualifying existence of her 7-year-old daughter
(played by Hallie Kate Eisenberg, that annoying little girl from the
Pepsi commercials), victory might be simple.
     Fortunately for moviegoers, life is not so simple.  But equally
unfortunately, much of this tale's delivery is bogged down by an
incongruous sense of vision.
     At the story's outset, it is compelling and funny.  Young Mona is
precocious and endearing as she struggles to grow up and prove her self
worth in the shadow of her alcoholic mother.  Her drive to win beauty
pageants is a believable compulsion, though fraught with ridiculous
overtones.  But, by the time Driver steps in to play the role, Mona has
become little more than a caricature.  She is absurd and unloving,
one-dimensional in her desire to win pageants and incapable of basic
human emotion.  This lack of humanity makes the character fundamentally
boring to watch, in spite of Driver's obvious talent.
     Eisenberg, however, is--though I so hate to admit it--quite good in
her role as the young Vanessa (except for the argument scenes, in which
her shrill screaming was more deafening than interesting).  Once we've
made it through the long, irritating period of watching how far Mona's
personality has degenerated, Eisenberg's performance as the story's
conscience-bearer is a much-needed refreshment.  Too quickly, though,
does this spiral into an uncontrollable finale of cheesy feminist
messages.
     Sally Field's direction is, for the most part, above par.  But this
film is disappointingly short on substance.  In the end, mothers and
daughters may bond over many of the movie's funnier, heartwarming
scenes, but most moviegoers will do well to wait for the DVD.
Director: Sally Field
Producer: John Bertolli, B.J. Rack
Writer: Jon Bernstein
Starring: Minnie Driver, Joey Lauren Adams, Hallie Kate Eisenberg,
Kathleen Turner, Leslie Stefanson, Bridgette Wilson, Kathleen Robertson
http://www.beautifulthemovie.com
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!

Title
Review for Billy Elliot (2000)
filmcritic.com presents a review from staff member Robert Strohmeyer.
You can find the review with full credits at
http://a.filmcritic.com/misc/emporium.nsf/2a460f93626cd4678625624c007f2b46/6f5ab9db67d16af288256948007dca1d?OpenDocument
"Just because I like ballet, it doesn't mean I'm a poof," says
11-year-old British mamma's boy Billy Elliot (Jamie Bell). And that just
about sums up the story of this oddball child prodigy. After all, when a
lad from a northern British mining town forsakes his granddad's boxing
gloves for a pair of satiny ballet slippers, it's more than the
neighbors and townsfolk can comprehend and, therefore, inherently good
cinematic drama.
Beyond the fact that the whole
coal-miner's-kid-has-talent-and-big-dreams genre has been horrifically
overdone from the earliest days of English-language narrative, Billy
Elliot (aka Dancer) is actually a treat to watch. Maybe it's just the
funny accents, but the dialog comes off fresh and surprising, even when
it's just Billy's dad (played by Gary Lewis) saying some stock like, "No
son of mine is going to be dancing ballet." In fact, Lewis conveys an
intense fury through his role as the apparently ignorant father, while
maintaining a sense of depth and dimension that is, at times, endearing.
Debut screenwriter Lee Hall has thrown this film against the backdrop of
the 1984 English miners' strike, adding richness to the otherwise banal
family drama. Yet other attempts at broadening the lives of these
characters fail entirely to be interesting. For instance; the typical
and unsurprising shots at sexual discovery, the completely pointless
presence of a cross-dressing, gay schoolyard buddy as a pretense for God
knows what--it just comes off cheap and stupid--and a happy-go-lucky
ending that made everyone in the audience (except for two fat ladies
directly in front of me) want to regurgitate their popcorn and Kit Kats.
Ultimately, though, Billy Elliot is a funny, charming movie. The cast is
loveable and believable. And the almost-entirely-T. Rex soundtrack
worked magically next to Jamie Bell's subtly awkward dancing to create a
memorable, satisfying film.
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!

Title
Review for Est - Ouest (1999)
filmcritic.com presents a review from staff member Robert Strohmeyer.
You can find the review with full credits at
http://www.filmcritic.com/misc/emporium.nsf/2a460f93626cd4678625624c007f2b46/d1b6caa10aede38c882568bc00600590?OpenDocument
Director:  Régis Wargnier
Producer:  Yves Marmion
Screenwriter: Roustam Ibraguimbek, Serguei Bodrov, Louis Gardel, Régis
Wargnier
Stars: Sandrine Bonnaire, Oleg Menchikov, Serguei Bodrov, Jr., Catherine
Deneuve
MPAA Rating: PG-13
Year of Release: 1998 in France, 2000 in USA
Academy Award-winning director Régis Wargnier (Indochine, A French
Woman, Lumiere and Company) returns to the Oscar-caliber arena with this
multilingual period drama about a family lured back to Stalinist Russia
under a false promise of amnesty. Wargnier's nomination for East-West is
certainly deserved.
Russian emigrants Alexei (Oleg Menchikov-Barber of Siberia, The Kiss)
and Marie Golovine (Sandrine Bonnaire-Circle of Passion, Les Innocents)
receive a disappointing welcome when they step off the boat in Odessa
with their young son, Serioja (played by Ruben Tapiero and Erwan
Baynaud). But, because of Alexei's medical skills, the family is spared
execution and shipped off to Kiev to share meager quarters with a
household of alcoholic miscreants-including a strapping young swimmer
named Sacha (Serguei Bodrov, Jr.) Wracked with guilt over the
miscalculation that has landed his family in captivity, Alexei struggles
to protect his foreign-born wife while avoiding the scrutiny of a
fear-ridden polity. Hope stirs when French actress Gabrielle Develay
(Catherine Deneuve-Indochine, The Hunger, The Last Metro, Belle de Jour)
comes to perform in the local theater.
Tensions plague the Golovine family, from within as well as without.
Alexei, estranged from his wife, begins an affair with their building
superintendent, Olga (Tatiana Doguileva) and Marie turns to the young
Sacha for solace. There's nothing sexy here, however. Just lonely,
desperate people clinging to each other in the dark.
This film is beautifully constructed, with enough emotionally potent
material to keep you in your seat, even if you've had to pee since
curtain. Bonnaire is devastating in her desperation and Oleg Menchikov's
stony-faced coldness is wonderfully unnerving. Catherine Deneuve's
performance as Gabrielle is a smoldering delight, though she only
appears on screen a few times during the film. Despite some appallingly
flat portrayals of Soviet officials that harken back to bad Cold War
stereotypes, the movement of this film is upsetting and delivering;
worthy of the Oscar nomination, if not the Oscar itself.
--
Christopher Null - cnull@mindspring.com - http://www.filmcritic.com

Title
Review for Liberty Heights (1999)
[filmcritic.com presents a review from guest writer Robert Strohmeyer.
You can find the review with full credits at
http://www.filmcritic.com/misc/emporium.nsf/2a460f93626cd4678625624c007f2b46/51596202106003158825683d007c5576?OpenDocument
LIBERTY HEIGHTS is a coming of age story, a comedic drama about two
brothers growing up Jewish in Baltimore in the mid-1950's.  Against the
tumultuous backdrop of McCarthyism and racial integration, Van (Adrien
Brody) and Ben (Ben Foster) Kurzman, together with their parents, Nate
(Joe Mantegna) and Ada (Bebe Neuwirth) face the daily trials of social,
religious and racial discrimination.
Those familiar with Barry Levinson's other works, such as DINER and TIN
MEN, may find LIBERTY HEIGHTS disappointing.  This picture strives to
project a social consciousness but falls tragically short of the mark
set in 1990 by Levinson's Academy Award-nominated AVALON.  The powerful
subject matter LIBERTY HEIGHTS attempts to address is never fully
pursued, quickly falling away behind a glut of gimmicky coming-of-age
scenes lacking both in sincerity and originality.  At times the
characters are so stereotypical, they border on offensive.
The real weakness of this picture is the dialogue, which is so lacking
in subtlety as to leave nothing for the audience to wonder at.  Even
when the characters do find a finer point to talk about, they just can't
resist beating it over the head with a mallet.  Most of the time,
though, they aren't given this chance.  The younger brother's friend
Sheldon (Evan Neumann), for instance, has few lines that aren't related
to genitalia and fewer still that suggest there may be a human being
behind those words.
Fortunately for audiences, the cast of LIBERTY HEIGHTS delivers a
powerful performance that brings life and compassion to these otherwise
stock characters.  Joe Mantegna is surprisingly believable as
well-meaning racketeer Nate Kurzman, imbuing the role with sensitivity
and charm.  Adrien Brody and Ben Foster are charismatic and compelling
as the two brothers, and Bebe Neuwirth's performance lends a refreshing
vulnerability to the family.  But the real gem here is Rebekah Johnson,
making her feature film debut as Sylvia.  Together with James Pickens,
Jr., who plays Sylvia's father, she creates what may be the film's most
memorable scene as Ben hides out in the bedroom closet.
There are a lot of funny scenes in LIBERTY HEIGHTS and at times the
drama is successful, but overall this movie just doesn't live up to its
aims.  If you're looking for a cute coming of age story, you may enjoy
LIBERTY HEIGHTS.  But if what you want is a compelling social drama, you
may do well to look elsewhere.  I'm giving this one three stars.
--
Christopher Null - cnull@mindspring.com - http://www.filmcritic.com

Title
Review for One (1998)
filmcritic.com presents a review from staff member Robert Strohmeyer.
You can find the review with full credits at
http://filmcritic.com/misc/emporium.nsf/2a460f93626cd4678625624c007f2b46/a46c7fd38f94c1c0882569660003758e?OpenDocument
The story of two friends drifting apart in a world of increasingly
conflicting interests, One is the directorial debut of former fashion
photographer's assistant and college ballplayer Tony Barbieri.
Meet Nick Razca (Kane Picoy), a twenty-something San Francisco trash
collector who coulda been a contender in Major League Baseball if he
hadn't started his career by socking his coach in the face.  Now meet
Charlie O'Connell, fresh out of the Big House after apparently assisting
in his grandfather's suicide.  Nick and Charlie are lifelong friends.
Now that Charlie's out of prison, Nick and his family (he still lives
with his parents) have opened their doors to him indefinitely.  Soon
Charlie will be working the trash truck with Nick, but first he has some
community service to do, under the management of a moderately plausible
love interest named Sarah (Autumn Macintosh).  Meanwhile, some bad guys
are out to kill poor Charlie because he pissed some people off in
prison.
Due to its horrendously amateurish scripting and direction, it took
yours truly about 60 of this film's 88 minutes to learn all the
background presented above; converting what seems at face value like an
interesting story into little more than a tangle of bad editing and
ambient noise.
And let's talk about the noise for a moment.  While it's perfectly
understandable that filmmakers on a budget might not produce the best
possible audio tracks, Barbieri's insistence on having his actors talk
with their mouths full for two-thirds of the movie is absolutely
senseless.  Coupled with the slow, pathetic dialogue, conversation
between the characters serves little purpose beyond breaking up long
periods of slurping spaghetti and shuffling feet.
So, based on observations from this film's failures, here are a few tips
for you budding filmmakers out there: 1) When characters are speaking,
it's a good idea to show them on camera -- at least some of the time. 
About a third of Macintosh's lines are spoken off-camera, sometimes
showing just her hands so we know she's still there.  It's a real
tension killer.  2) Lay out your story up front.  There's nothing wrong
with plot twists and surprises, but it's a good idea to let your
audience know right from the beginning that your movie is actually about
something.  3) Keep it moving.  Long, pointless silences may be common
in real-life conversations, but should be kept to a minimum in
movie-life, unless they convey some kind of meaning, which wasn't the
case in any of One's innumerable long, pointless silences.
On the bright side, actors Jason Cairns and Autumn Macintosh show a lot
of potential, and they might even have saved the film had Barbieri's
direction not bungled the job so completely.  Sadly. Kane Picoy's
portrayal of Nick is one-dimensional and bland, but the highlight of the
cast is Paul Herman as Nick's hot-headed father, Ted.
In the end, this flick has all the trimmings of a fourth-year film
school final project and just isn't ready for the big screen. 
Barbieri's One probably could have pulled a B+ at UCLA, but at
filmcritic.com it gets a D-.
http://film.sgfilmseries.com/one.html
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!

Title
Review for Committed (2000)
filmcritic.com presents a review from staff member Robert Strohmeyer.
You can find the review with full credits at
http://www.filmcritic.com/misc/emporium.nsf/2a460f93626cd4678625624c007f2b46/09b1c50eb22e1645882568d10007a213?OpenDocument
I walked into the screening of Committed with low expectations, having
acquired some taste for Heather Graham though her appearances in
Drugstore Cowboy, Swingers, Boogie Nights, and, perhaps most notably,
Austin Powers: The Spy Who Shagged Me, but bearing little hope for a
good story. After all, even Miramax's promotional synopses gave this
picture about an over-zealous love junkie a lackluster pitch. The lesson
here: Sometimes bad salesmen pitch good widgets.
As Forrest Gump might put it, Heather Graham is as Heather Graham does.
In this flick, she does pretty good. Backed by the furrowed brow malaise
of Luke Wilson (Home Fries, Dog Park and one of the best episodes of The
X Files) and the way-cooler-than-his-brother Casey Affleck (200
Cigarettes), Graham's wide-eyed charm is disarming and convincing.
You'll also find some great supporting performances from Patricia
Velasquez (The Mummy-Don't worry; she's much wittier here.) and Alfonso
Arau (Like Water for Chocolate, A Walk in the Clouds and-my favorite-El
Guapo from The Three Amigos). The premise of the story is lame at best,
but the combination of on-screen talent and resourceful writing and
directing manage to pull off a better-than-mediocre movie. Committed is
a perfect date movie, and I suspect it'll also be a winner among women
whose men are too dumb to stay put.
Graham plays Joline, a newlywed who is, as the title points out,
committed to her marriage beyond all reason. She's not just into
marriage, but honesty in general, and the film's first postulate is that
that makes her unique. Whether you buy this or not is irrelevant because
once her husband (Carl, played by Wilson) walks out the door, she's off
like a flash (after a brief cameo from Everclear lead singer Art
Alexakis) to Texas, led by a random smattering of homegrown witchcraft.
Lending some credence to the validity of her practices, she does happen
upon Carl near the Mexican border, leading to some of the most
heartwarmingly cheesy I-know-you-need-your-freedom-but-I'm-here-for-you
dialog ever written for the screen.
Writer/Director Lisa Krueger has pulled off a charming, funny script and
brought it to film against all odds. This is a film that shouldn't be
good, but somehow is, and I advise all you young lovers out there to
grab yourselves some tickets and see it.
For those of you looking for comedic weirdness Graham showed in Austin
Powers, look elsewhere. And forget about the sex; it's only hinted at
here.
Director: Lisa Krueger
Producer: Dean Silvers, Marlen Hecht
Writer: Lisa Krueger
Starring: Heather Graham, Casey Affleck, Luke Wilson, Goran Visnjic,
Patricia Velasquez, Alfonso Arau
http://www.megachannels.com/watch.asp
--
Christopher Null - cnull@mindspring.com - http://www.filmcritic.com

Title
Review for Chunhyang (2000)
Due in part to a dense shroud of regulatory policy, the Korean film
industry finds few viewers in the West.  One of a mere handful of
directors to break through this barrier in recent years is Im Kwon Taek
(Mandala, Ticket).  The latest in a line of more than 100 films for Im
(Korean family names come before given names), Chunhyang is a vivid
retelling of the classic Korean tale of an 18th century love that
withstands and defines a culture.
A musical of sorts, Chunhyang emerges as a rare pairing of film with the
ancient Korean operatic tradition of pansori.  As such, the picture
opens on a black, dimly lighted stage as the pansori singer begins the
tale, blending quickly into the moment of action.
Mongryong (Cho Seung Woo), the devoted son of a provincial governor,
asks his servant to show him the sights of the region and gets more than
he bargained for when he spies the beautiful Chunhyang (Lee Hyo Jung). 
The daughter of a courtesan, Chunhyang is a forbidden fruit that
Mongryong can't resist.  No sooner are the two married than Mongryong
must depart for Seoul.  But Chunhyang, being little more than a
courtesan herself, must stay behind or cost her husband his chance at a
noble title.
As Mongryong leaves, a new governor comes to town and learns of the
much-desired Chunhyang.  But, as a devoted wife, she refuses the new
governor's advances and is sentenced to death.  The remainder of the
picture concerns, of course, the return of Mongryong and the dishing out
of justice to the corrupt governor.
In itself, the story behind Chunhyang is no more intriguing than that of
Romeo and Juliet.  Two lovers come together against all odds, yadda
yadda yadda.  What surprised this critic was the stream of feminist
commentary surrounding this picture, laudable for its vision of strength
in womanhood.  If anything, however, Im's vision of Chunhyang as a
character is simply that of a devoted woman who knows her place.  Far
from an uplifting break from traditionally misogynistic views of
femininity, what we're really being offered here is a modern re-hashing
of an essentially Confucian idea that women can achieve greatness only
through self-sacrifice in the name of their husbands.
Simultaneously, though, it is a richly experimental movie, demonstrating
(as Mandala did before it) the vast cultural offerings of Korean
cinema.  Cunningly acted and breathtakingly filmed (except for the
pansori scenes, which appear to have been shot by a drunk with a
Handicam), Chunhyang takes bold risks with point of view and narrative
style that might never have come from any director other than Im Kwon
Taek.
Director: Im Kwon Taek
Producer: Lee Tae Won
Writer: Kim Myoung Kon
Starring: Lee Hyo Jung, Cho Seung Woo, Kim Sung Nyu, Lee Jung Hun, Kim
Hak Yong, Lee Hae Eun, Choi Jin Young, Hong Kyung Yeun
http://www.chunhyang21.com/
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com

Title
Review for Holy Smoke (1999)
filmcritic.com presents a review from staff member Robert Strohmeyer.
You can find the review with full credits at
http://www.filmcritic.com/misc/emporium.nsf/2a460f93626cd4678625624c007f2b46/8730b4327ec078fd88256864001e0c14?OpenDocument
It's so comforting to see a talented actor recover from the precarious
heights of mass-market success.  After TITANIC, I was perfectly prepared
to condemn Kate Winslet to the same pit of has-been obscurity Leonardo
DiCaprio belongs in.  Fortunately, Winslet didn't sink with the ship.
 HOLY SMOKE is the entrancing story of two zealots on a collision course
with fate.  Ruth, played by Winslet, is a young Australian who finds
what she believes to be the path to enlightenment through the influence
of a Guru while on holiday in India.  When Mum (Julie Hamilton) gets
word, she cooks up a plot to lure Ruth home and hires top cult
deprogrammer PJ Waters (Harvey Keitel) to bring her daughter to reason.
 Once trapped by her family, Ruth agrees to spend three days with
Waters, beginning a game of cat-and-mouse that blurs all boundaries
between therapist and patient.  The balance of power turns when PJ falls
under Ruth's seduction, leading them both on a descent into madness that
is disturbing, enchanting, and sickly hilarious.
 Winslet is positively enthralling in her role, presenting an inspired
encore to her 1999 performance in Gillies MacKinnon's HIDEOUS KINKY.
Keitel is intense and commanding, tapping into the same hardcore
energies we saw in Abel Ferrara's 1992 shocker, BAD LIEUTENANT.  For
what it's worth, I'm predicting Oscar nominations.
 Once in a while, first-rate acting meets up with powerful directorial
and cinemagraphic vision to make a truly great film and this time it's
the audience who got lucky.  Cinematographer Dion Beebe and director
Jane Campion (THE PIANO) deserve strong kudos for this one.  Also worth
mentioning is the comic and bizarre contribution of the supporting cast,
including Pam Grier (JACKIE BROWN).  Sophie Lee (MURIEL'S WEDDING) is a
complete riot as Ruth's incompetent sister.  I suspect much of Grier's
work on this film is cluttering the cutting room floor, and her
character is just never realized.  Outside of this one shortcoming, HOLY
SMOKE is a masterpiece.  See this movie.
--
Christopher Null - cnull@mindspring.com - http://www.filmcritic.com

Title
Review for Mr. Death: The Rise and Fall of Fred A. Leuchter, Jr. (1999)
filmcritic.com presents a review from staff member Robert Strohmeyer.
You can find the review with full credits at
http://www.filmcritic.com/misc/emporium.nsf/2a460f93626cd4678625624c007f2b46/1354b221864e2cbf8825684e000b00d9?OpenDocument
Errol Morris, critically acclaimed director of the 1997 documentary
FAST, CHEAP AND OUT OF CONTROL, vaults to new heights with MR. DEATH.
This film, an examination of the life and work of controversial
execution equipment designer and revisionist historian Fred A. Leuchter,
Jr., is sure to draw audiences out of their malaise, stunning even the
more jaded minds among us.
Don't let the film's cheesy dissuade you.  Following this sideshow of
horror-lab special effects we are plunged quickly into a non-stop
exploration of the weirdness that is Leuchter's life and mind.  Morris
follows the trail of Leuchter's madness with appalling lucidity,
revealing in a surprising and frightening way what most of us could have
guessed to begin with: This Leuchter guy is seriously messed up.
Virtually raised within the American penal system by a father who worked
within prison walls, Leuchter seems to have come somewhat naturally into
his profession; designing and maintaining execution equipment for state
penitentiaries, in spite of his lack of credentials.  After a moderately
successful career making electric chairs and designing gas chambers and
gallows, Leuchter came to the attention of neo-Nazi and revisionist
historian Ernst Zundel, who was facing criminal charges in Germany for
publishing his `theory' that the holocaust never happened.
Morris's interviews are surprisingly congenial, drawing the subjects
into a carefree banter that gives them more than enough rope with which
to hang themselves.  Zundel speaks to the camera as though it were his
mensch.  Leuchter seems completely at ease, sometimes jovial.  Part of
this effect may be due to Morris's new interviewing machine, called the
Interrotron, which is responsible for creating eye contact between the
subject and the interviewer.  This was the first time Morris had used
the device, and the results are startling.
Combine the irony of these interviews with Leuchter's reenactments and
reels of creepy stock footage of his trip to Auschwitz and Birkenau, not
to mention a haunting clip of Thomas Edison electrocuting an elephant,
and you've got one compelling and disturbing documentary.  While this
film isn't for the feeble-minded or weak-hearted, it is a valuable
addition to the cultural landscape.  Aside from a few dragging minutes
toward the end of the piece, Morris has given us a fresh look at a
dismal subject and I, for one, feel bettered by the experience.
--
Christopher Null - cnull@mindspring.com - http://www.filmcritic.com

Title
Review for Little Nicky (2000)
For better or for worse (mostly for the worse) Adam Sandler's back on
the big screen.  And it's pure, satanic family fun.
Little Nicky (Adam Sandler) is the devil's third--and least
impressive--son.  Bested in brains by his brother Adrian (Rhys Ifans)
and in strength by his brother Cassius (Tiny Lester), Nicky finds little
joy outside of hanging out in his hell-bound bedroom, banging his head
to heavy metal favorites.  That is, until his father's 10,000-year reign
draws to a close and it's time to name the new ruler of Hades.
When the devil (Harvey Keitel) decides to continue his rule rather than
bequeath the throne to one of his sons, Nicky's relief is palpable.  (He
knows full well the eternity of wedgies he might otherwise endure.)  But
Cassius and Adrian are not so agreeable, and they leap through the gates
of Hell to wreak havoc on the unsuspecting world above.  Now little
Nicky must face his fears and unleash the evil within himself to save
his father, and the world, from certain doom.
Perhaps the most amazing thing about the Adam Sandler phenomenon is the
actor's wild popularity and box office success, in spite of a pronounced
outward stupidity and total inability to act.  Not unlike Mike Myers,
Sandler is funniest at his absolute lamest extreme.  Just as he reaches
the zenith of idiocy, his humor becomes surreal and self-referential. 
He reflects each of us as grade school clowns, spewing milk from our
spastic nostrils.
But Sandler's attention to comedic detail betrays a greater intelligence
behind his work.  As Nicky dons his hellish robes to greet his father,
the robe itself is comedy, covered in heavy metal patches for Pantera,
Iron Maiden, and the like.
Like any Adam Sandler movie, Little Nicky is a Saturday Night Live
reunion, pulling cast members from as far back as the early eighties. 
The very first scene features Jon Lovitz peeping in on a panty-clad
woman, Kevin Nealon stars as the boob-headed gatekeeper of Hell, Dana
Carvey (as part of a carefully orchestrated--and probably
doomed--comeback) appears as a possessed basketball referee, and the
list goes on.  What's more impressive is the caliber of Sandler's
supporting cast, which includes Quentin Tarantino and Michael McKean in
minor roles, and cameos by Ozzy Osborne, Henry Winkler, and Regis
Philben.  Make no mistake; these are not great performances.  But these
self-effacing appearances lend a depth and clarity to the film's humor
that will assure it a place in cult history.
Ultimately, Little Nicky is a very stupid movie.  And that's just the
way we like it.
Director: Steven Brill
Producer: Robert Simonds, Jack Giarraputo
Writer: Tim Herlihy, Adam Sandler, Steven Brill
Starring: Adam Sandler, Patricia Arquette, Harvey Keitel, Rhys Ifans,
Allen Covert, Tommy "Tiny" Lister Jr., Kevin Nealon, Jon Lovitz, Rob
Schneider, Frank Sivero, Jackie Titone
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!

Title
Review for Woman on Top (1999)
filmcritic.com presents a review from staff member Robert Strohmeyer.
You can find the review with full credits at
http://filmcritic.com/misc/emporium.nsf/2a460f93626cd4678625624c007f2b46/c3b5c2f0cf53e1ce8825694d0004b121?OpenDocument
Once in a very great while a motion picture comes along to captivate the
minds and spirits of audiences everywhere, magically suspending
disbelief in all who witness it. And, though it tries earnestly, Woman
on Top is not that picture.
I love movies. In particular, I hunger for films that invite me into a
world beyond the limits of mundane, material, daily existence. While
Woman on Top deserves some credit for its fresh, innocent effort to make
this invitation, it is disappointingly infantile once we all get to the
party.
It's not for lack of a talented cast, or good screenwriting, or even
smart directing, that this movie fails to charm. All the ingredients for
wonderment are here, they're just poorly blended.
Isabella (Penelope Cruz) is a vibrant young Brazilian woman with a
talent for cooking. (Note: the film is in English.) After marriage, she
and her good-timing husband, Toninho (Murilo Benício), open a restaurant
in Bahia, where Toninho basks in the glory created by Isabella's unseen
labors in the kitchen. Otherwise, apparently, he's quite charming. But
Isabella can't be stifled, she can't be put down. She is, after all, a
woman on top, which is just how she likes it.
Alas, however, poor Toninho is too manly to be on the bottom every time,
even if it does take less work. To satisfy his need for the dominant
position, among other things, he climbs out the bedroom window in the
still of night and into the bed of his next-door neighbor.
Naturally, Isabella wakes up minutes later and, finding her husband
missing, does what any sensible woman would do: walks right over to the
neighbor's apartment, lets herself in, and catches that cheating bastard
red, er, handed. Then dear Isabella does some little Santeria
prayer-thingie and jets off to San Francisco, where there is only one
cab driver and she is a lesbian Rastafarian who works all hours and will
let you drive yourself around for a hundred bucks. (Which is good
because Isabella is such a sociopathic control freak that she not only
needs to be on top every time she makes the lovin', she also can't ride
as a passenger in any vehicle without spraying orange salsa puke all
over the street--which, by the way, happens repeatedly in this film.)
"Okay," I say to myself, quietly so as not to disturb the other people
in the theater, "This is a fantasy film. It's a magical romance, full of
whimsy and my God! How did they manage to drive down Lombard Street at
45 miles an hour without waiting in that 30 minute line first?" But I
accepted this, went with the flow so to speak, and shut my mouth.
Once she arrives at her destination, she is informed by an old man that
her friend Monica (Harold Perrineau, Jr., from HBO's Oz), the fabulous
drag queen who invited her in the first place, is "detained." By which
he means incarcerated. They don't say why, but I like to assume that
she's a twenty-dollar Tenderloin streetwalker. Again, though, the
fantastic bubble bursts when Monica steps out the door of the prison to
find Isabella waiting for her in front of historic Fort Mason! The
Golden Gate stands majestically in the background as they hug
enthusiastically and here begins the continuous downhill slide of this
brazenly idiotic attempt at magical realism.
Now, I can already hear about a hundred of you out there clacking away
at your keyboards to write me hate spam and accuse me of having no
heart, or whatever it is critics are supposed to have but don't. So let
me reiterate: I love movies. In particular, I love magical realism. But
if you want to see a finely crafted work of this sort, go rent Like
Water for Chocolate or even A Pyromaniac's Love Story and see how the
grown-ups do it.
In fairness, many of you who don't live in San Francisco probably won't
notice the tremendous liberties taken with the city's geography. But it
doesn't stop there. Woman on Top takes liberties with everything. There
is no foundation, no realism to work magic on. The characters are hollow
and daft. They fall in and out of love like children. They're well
acted, but poorly sustained by the material, though the script isn't
terrible; it's often incredibly funny. What really seems to be missing
here is the maturity to create continuity within the fantasy-something
even Saturday cartoons try to do.
Okay, so back when Isabella was stifled away in the kitchen of Toninho's
restaurant in Bahia, master chefs the world over had stopped in, dined,
recognized her talent, and offered her jobs. Now, in San Francisco,
she's calling them on their offers. But alas, they don't remember her
and she's out of luck. She can't even land a job at a fish and chips
place because she insists on making the butter spicy. She is, after all,
a hot Latin lady.
So she gets a job teaching at a culinary school, performs some more
Santeria rituals to fall out of love with her husband, and makes herself
some coffee, the scent of which is so delectably powerful that her
neighbor across the street, a local television producer, falls madly in
love with her and follows her to work. It must have been some potent
java, because by the time she actually arrives at the cooking school she
is being trailed by a hundred men.
Cliff, the TV producer (Mark Feuerstein), is so smitten that sets her up
with her own prime time cooking show, which becomes the talk of the
town. Toninho flies to San Francisco, where the only cabbie in town
picks him up and drives him around in search of his love. Madcap
craziness ensues, and they all live happily ever after.
Warning: viewing this film may be hazardous to your intelligence.
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!

Title
Review for Long Night's Journey Into Day (2000)
filmcritic.com presents a review from staff member Robert Strohmeyer.
You can find the review with full credits at
http://www.filmcritic.com/misc/emporium.nsf/2a460f93626cd4678625624c007f2b46/688604d4ea5026b28825693800054463?OpenDocument
Aside from a keen enjoyment of the Special AKA song, "Free Nelson
Mandela," I've never known much about South African apartheid. And, in
my own defense, I don't think I'm entirely to blame for this. Sure, I've
seen periodic newscasts over the course of my lifetime. Some kids in my
high school used to like wearing pins denouncing apartheid and, as a
general sort of thing, I opposed it too. But beyond that, it hasn't
figured very strongly into my social consciousness. At least not as much
as, say, the meanings of all those little emoticons people use to spice
up their otherwise boring e-mails.
Frances Reid and Deborah Hoffman have made up for this, to a degree,
with Long Night's Journey into Day. This potent 95-minute documentary
visits the ongoing proceedings of the South African Truth and
Reconciliation Commission (TRC), by which that nation administers
amnesty for the horrors of apartheid crimes on a case-by-case basis.
Packed start to finish with heart-wrenching interviews and bleak,
sometimes gruesome, unedited footage of murdered bodies bleeding in the
streets, Reid and Hoffman's film is a long-overdue eye-opener.
The picture examines four cases brought before the TRC; two in which
whites were victimized, and two in which the victims were black. The
sense of balance here is largely superficial because it must always be
remembered that the blacks were victims before they were murdered,
putting the white killers at a distinct disadvantage before the
commission. Ironically, however, the film points out that the vast
majority of amnesty applicants are black.
Among the subjects visited in this documentary are the parents of slain
American Fullbright scholar Amy Biehl, as well as one of her killers,
Mongezi Manqina, and his family. A South African security forces officer
seeks amnesty for his part in the killing of the "Cradock 4," a group of
black South Africans slain for alleged conspiracies against the state.
And Robert McBride, another high profile figure in the later days of
apartheid, faces the sister of one of his bombing victims before the
commission.
What's most striking about these people is the mutual compassion they
have for each other. Each of them, perpetrators and victims' families
alike, seems genuinely sorrowful for the condition they share. It is
refreshing and promising to see the hopeful spirit with which these
people confront one another.
While it's obvious that this is only a microscopic view of the larger
reconciliation process, the candid eyes of Hoffman and Reid reveal a
larger picture of the South African predicament. And, like the
reconciliation process itself, it is both painful and rewarding to see.
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!

Title
Review for Fantasticks, The (1995)
filmcritic.com presents a review from staff member Robert Strohmeyer.
You can find the review with full credits at
http://filmcritic.com/misc/emporium.nsf/2a460f93626cd4678625624c007f2b46/a798b7c8e97eb65c8825695900042829?OpenDocument
After 40 continuous years of off-Broadway performances, the musical
sensation of Tom Jones and Harvey Schmidt comes inexplicably to the big
screen. That's right, folks. All the dancing, singing, and
mindbogglingly stupid antics of off-Broadway's longest-running
embarrassment can now be experienced at a cinema near you.
Set deep in rural America, this is the story of two neighboring fathers
who fake a feud in order to trick their children into courtship. Of
course, the young man and woman (played by Joe McIntyre and Jean Louisa
Kelly, respectively) are easily duped and everything is going as
planned. That is, until the circus comes to town. And that's when the
moronic singing starts.
Perhaps the most baffling thing about this incomprehensible production
is that it languished for about five years on MGM shelves, nearly (but
not nearly enough) not making it to the screen, until Francis Ford
Coppola offered to have a look at it at much risk to his own sanity.
Sadly, even FFC's magical touch could not spare us the horror The
Fantasticks has in store. The unique combination of cheesy choreography,
inept dialog, and insanely ridiculous music, so brilliantly captured
under Michael Ritchie's direction, is surely enough to have audiences
howling all the way to their cars within the first twenty minutes.
This is the sort of film our grandmothers might have loved. Well,
probably not my grandmother but maybe yours, if she was an invalid. One
credit I can pay this flick is that, against all probability, its makers
managed to cram more moments of ungodly torture into an 86-minute
musical than I could ever have thought possible.
The saddest thing about The Fantasticks is the inclusion in its cast of
Cabaret's memorable emcee, Joel Grey. A longtime fan of Grey's
performances, I will be forever scarred by this experience. To be sure,
Jean Louisa Kelly and Joe McIntyre will live long enough to regret their
roles in this picture. Teller (of Penn & Teller), on the other hand,
might very well consider this the crowning achievement of a career spent
frolicking silently about in the shadow of a lowbrow windbag.
The Fantasticks might well serve as a worthwhile sacrifice in American
filmmaking, demonstrating for all time the God-awful stupidity of silver
screen musicals. Use it as you would a roadside accident; gawk
thoroughly as you cruise slowly by, praying for all your life is worth
that this sort of atrocity never happens to anyone, ever again.
Director: Michael Ritchie
Producer: Linne Radmin
Writers: Tom Jones and Harvey Schmidt
Starring: Joel Grey, Barnard Hughes, Jean Luisa Kelly, Joe McIntyre,
Jonathon Morris, Brad Sullivan, Teller
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!

Title
Review for Someone Like You... (2001)
Based on the Laura Zigman novel, Animal Husbandry, Someone Like You is a
romantic comedy about a late night TV talent coordinator named Jane
(Ashley Judd), whose luck in love is predictably bad.  So predictable is
her misfortune, in fact, that she has devised a pervasive theory on the
subject, revolving around the notion that men are like cattle.
When she meets her show's new executive, Ray (Kinnear, You've Got Mail),
however, her luck -- she thinks -- begins to change.  But Ray, she
discovers, is just a typical bull, looking to spread his seed in wider
pastures.  And it's not until he dumps her for his ex-girlfriend that
she realizes the true depth of her plight.  Jane, it seems, is an old
cow.  And Ray is looking for a new cow.  This joke more or less carries
the film, and -- though interesting at first -- it gets old after its
twentieth or fiftieth appearance in the script.
Fortunately, though, the film's fresh, funny dialogue packs enough power
to keep things interesting.  And the wry, cynical performance of Hugh
Jackman (X-Men) as the incorrigibly good-timing Eddie drops in just in
time to prevent the entire film from degenerating into a ridiculously
softball piece of fluff.  These combine with quick, quirky editing to
provide enough stimuli to keep most audiences alert for this sub
two-hour picture.
Those needing a little more stimulation than that (men, mostly) should
take heart in the fact that Ashley's underpants scene from the movie's
trailer is served justly on the big screen.  (Though anyone looking for
world-class cheerleading sequences will be saddened to learn that Judd's
jumping splits performance was ruined by her inability to keep both legs
straight in midair.  For the record, this didn't bother me a bit.)
Judd carries her role with a Meg Ryan-esque charm that should prove
valuable in future productions, while Jackman proves he has all the
qualities of a rugged, enviable leading man.  The supporting cast is
funny, and well placed, as well -- particularly Ellen Barkin as the host
of the late night show.
Much to my surprise, Someone Like You made for a funny, enjoyable
picture right up until its final moments, when it completely brained
itself by falling into the usual rut of romantic comedy conclusions. 
With its richness of dialogue and editing, I was certain it might have
overcome its genre to set some new precedent in romantic comedy cheese. 
But no.
In the end, this is still a warm, fuzzy picture with enough wit to
satisfy most audiences in need of a laugh.  Ladies: Go for the humor. 
Gents: Stay for the underpants.
Director: Tony Goldwyn
Producer: Keith Addis, David Blocker, John Herzfeld, Nick Wechsler
Writer: Elizabeth Chandler
Starring: Ashley Judd, Greg Kinnear, Hugh Jackman, Ellen Barkin, Marisa
Tomei
http://www.someonelikeyoumovie.com/
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com
