Authors
Ronald O. Christian
Number of Reviews
6

Title
Review for Battlefield Earth (2000)
If a major religion decides to sink nearly an hundred million dollars
into a movie version of a scifi novel, couldn't they at least have
picked a decent author?
I must confess, I don't really know anything about Scientology, and
although I've seen the book Dianetics on the night table of various
roommates in college, I've never read it and have absolutely no idea
what's in it.  I walked past the bright yellow Scientology sign in
downtown Portland without ever having the urge to find out more about
it.  I'm dimly aware that there is some controversy surrounding the
funding of the film, but don't feel qualified to talk about it.
But God, what a movie.  I do not mean that in a positive way.  How do
movies like this get made?
Before I start, I'd like to say that I absolutely do not believe, as
reported by other reviewers,  that Scientologists have been assigned
to break the kneecaps of anyone giving a less-than-favorable review of
this turkey.  From what I've read so far, they'd have to take out
practically every professional film critic, a move that surely would
have been reported in the popular media.
Nor do I believe the story that "hollow-eyed Scientologists are
passing out free tickets on streetcorners so that the movie will have
a good opening weekend".  First of all, I haven't seen anyone doing
any such thing, and secondly, all three of the screens in which it was
playing Saturday May 13 at the multiplex in Hillsborough, Oregon were
barren.  (I know this because I didn't catch the theater number at the
ticket counter and had to ferry the family's popcorn and drinks
through each one until I found them.)  If they *are* passing out free
tickets, they've been profoundly unsuccessful at it.  And if Regal
Cinemas thought Battlefield Earth would have the kind of opening as,
for instance, Gladiator, they're now profoundly disappointed.
There's no decent way to say it.  This movie sucks.  There really is
absolutely no reason why a reasonable person would waste his time
seeing it.  Really horrible dialog, laughable makeup, surprisingly
un-special effects for the purported $90 million cost of the film, and
a plot that leaves all thinking beings going "Hunh?"
My daughter was bored out of her skull, and kept asking "is the movie
about over?"  Now, to put this in perspective, she *liked* Supernova.
She saw Batman and Robin *twice*.  She sat thorough all 3 hours of
Titanic and wanted to see it again.  But about 20 minutes into
Battlefield Earth she was done.  I don't know how many times I'll have
to sit through Dinosaur to make it up to her.
John Travolta puts in the performance of his life.  I mean that
literally.  He seemed to be determined to put every ounce of his not
inconsiderable talent into single-handedly saving this film from being
the most expensive direct-to-video release ever.  If you absolutely
must see this film, (as I did -- my wife, a rabid "saturday night
fever" fan,  forced me) watch the scenes with Travolta and snore
through the rest.
But this is not unusual for Travolta, post-comeback.  His performance
was the best, make that the only, thing watchable about "Broken
Arrow".  You have to give him this -- he plays larger-than-life
villains to absolute perfection, and his "Terl" is a masterpiece.  But
just as a masterful performance by Tim Curry in Legend couldn't save
that film, Travolta has been given too great a task to pull
Battlefield Earth out of the muck.
How can I say this?  It was a horrible experience.  If the theater had
paid *us* eight bucks a seat to sit through this piece of crap, I
would still feel cheated.
My wife owes me big time.  And on the day before Mother's Day.  Ouch.

Title
Review for Lost in Space (1998)

How could a movie who's advance information looks so good get such
terrible reviews?  My family and friends discussed this while in line
for the first showing of Lost in Space on Saturday.  We went in hoping
that it would be decent, but were prepared for a possible stinker.  Of
the eight of us, only my daugher (3 years old) liked Akiva Goldsmith's
previous effort "Batman and Robin"; the rest of us thought it stank.
So it was with a certain understandable anxiety that I took my place
and broke open the first box of malted milk balls.
Well, guess what:  Lost in Space is a winner.  Good characterization,
mostly decent dialog, a reasonable plot.  It offers many kudos to the
old show while going deeper into the meaning of their voyage and the
lives of the family than the series ever did.  We get the "doctor
smith theme" on the soundtrack while Dr. Smith first stows away,
mention of the chariot and lander, and of course the Robot.  (Who's
name is not Robby!  Different movie, guys, and a decade previous to
LIS.  Don't show your ignorance.)  But we also get a lot more
chemistry between Judy Robinson and Don West, better insight into
Will's genius and how his gifts have alienated him, Penny's typical
teen angst, John's conflict between his driving passion for his work
and the desire to be a good father.  I think the best moment of the
film is when John tries to embrace Judy after a rather harrowing close
call, and Judy backs away from him, mindlessly reciting her own vital
signs.  This family is not without it's interesting quirks.
I won't bother to rehash the plot, as if you're a regular reader of
these newsgroups you've already read it a dozen times.  It is in
essence a remake of the original series pilot with more depth, a real
budget, and some new surprises.
I think that the problem some people are having with the film is that
the visuals are *extremely* busy and the plot is perhaps a little too
complex.  Lost in Space is no "Star Wars", a special effects space
opera which even a three year old can comprehend.  The plot of Lost in
Space doubles back on itself more than once, and some of us found this
a little confusing at first view.  My daughter thought it
incomprehensible, although she loved the Robot and the cool graphics.
Moreover, fans of the campiness of the old series are going to be
disappointed.  There's no Giant Talking Carrots, no Space Vikings, no
Galactic Department Store, and good riddance.  The movie adheres more
to the tone and concepts of the original 2 hour series pilot, a time
before (well, shortly before) the show descended into self-parody.
Surprisingly, amongst the record number of special effects lurks an
actual plot.  The consistent underlying theme of the movie is John
Robinson's alienation from his family, especially his son, and this
plays up in the ending in moderately surprising ways.
I thought all the cast turned in good performances.  Even Lacy Chabot
and Matt LeBlanc.  In fact, let me say this about that:  I can't STAND
"Friends".  In particular I can't stomach the too-stupid-to-live
waste-of-skin characters played by Matt LeBlanc and Lisa Kudrow.  I
expected LeBlanc to be the weakest cast member of Lost in Space.  Oh
hell, I expected him to suck and I was prepared to grit my teeth and
somehow get through his performance.  Imagine my astonishment when he
turns in a reasonable performance.  He gets some of the best lines
("Ohhh, THAT was scientific.")  and delivers them fairly well.  And
this, I think, is one of the problems some reviewers have had with the
movie.  They are SO convinced (and understandably) that LeBlanc will
suck that there's nothing he could have done on screen to redeem
himself, which exemplifies to me the bad cinematic karma that comes
with being associated with a popular but utterly mindless sitcom.
The tone of the movie is rather dark and parts were a bit scary.  But
it was a more suspenseful kind of scary than (for instance) the
over-the-top ultraviolence of Starship Troopers.  My daughter got a
little upset in a couple parts, but she made it through and wants to
see it again.  So do I.  I think this is a movie we will see several
times.
Lost in Space is well worth the investment, both for fans of the old
series and for kids who've never heard of it before.  My
recommendation:  Ignore the reviews and just go see it.  It ends...
Well, never mind.  Just go see it.

Title
Review for Tarzan (1999)
Sometimes, a movie goes so far beyond political correctness that it
becomes necessary to coin a new term to describe the bizarre gyrations
a movie studio will undertake to avoid offending the professionally
offended.  In my opinion, a good candidate for this new term is
"tarzan", as in:  "That movie was tarzan from end to end" and "man,
they really tarzanned that one up".
Mind you, the visuals of Disney's new animated Tarzan are often lush,
and the hardware assisted graphics are mind boggling.  In fact, the
only times where the animation falls short, where it gets most
saturday-morning-ish,  are the very times when the movie is at it's
most obsequious.  It's almost as if two animation teams worked on the
film; one from a major motion picture studio, and one from Darkwing
Duck.
Tarzan is, thankfully, entirely free of the dreary, unrelenting potty
humor that has plagued recent Disney releases.  Although the humor is
usually forced and often embarrassing, it doesn't stoop to the stygian
depths of My Favorite Martian, or even the mild anal references in
Flubber.  Tarzan, in fact, has the antiseptic quality of early Disney
cartoons.  Back when they were, you know, good.
But what Disney studios did to the story, and for what (apparent)
reasons, is something that should never happen to a major novel.
Tarzan of the Apes, published in 1912, was the first novel in a series
that eventually became 30-odd novels, books of short stories, and
juveniles.  In this story, John Clayton, Lord Greystoke, and his young
wife are abandoned on an African beach by mutineers.  Clayton does the
best he can for his young bride, but eventually, some time after
giving birth to a son, she succumbs to madness and death.
Nearby dwell a tribe of the "near exinct"  (and probably fictional)
"great apes" the "largest and most ferocious" of the simians.  Their
leader is the bloodthirsty Kerchak, a huge bull ape prone to episodes
of sudden uncontrollable rage.  It was during one of these episodes
that he attacks Kala, a young female in his tribe, and causes the
death of her child.
Inevitably, the tribe finds Clayton's cabin, and Kerchak himself kills
John Clayton as he sits in deep depression after his wife's death.
The apes explore the cabin, and Kala finds Clayton's young son still
alive in the crib, next to the body of his mother.  Nearly mad with
grief over the loss of her own cub, Kala takes the young child to
raise as her own, calling him Tarzan.  Tublat, Kala's mate, appeals to
Kerchak (during one of his more lucid moments) to force Kala to give
up the hairless ape, but Kala threatens to leave the tribe, and
Kerchak is reluctant to lose her.
Tarzan, of course, grows up with the apes, learning to use his greater
intelligence and natural curiosity to compensate for his lack of brute
strength and natural armament.  At ten years old, his curiosity leads
him to his unknown father's cabin, where he finds the hunting knife
which would be the means of his salvation when he's attacked soon
after by a huge gorilla.  Tarzan narrowly escapes death and makes his
first great kill.
Years later, when Kerchak flys into one of his famous rages, Tarzan
kills him and assumes leadership of the tribe.
The story is told from an ape's point of view, using words in the
(again, fictional) ape language to describe the world around Tarzan.
Hence, we have Numa, the lion, Sheeta, the panther, Tantor, the
elephant, Gora, the moon.  Tarzan lives with the apes, but differs
mainly in his intelligence, practical jokes, and preference for fresh
meat which he has killed himself, as opposed to the grubs and carrion
preferred by the rest of the tribe.
When Tarzan reaches adulthood, a wandering tribe of cannibals moves
into the neighborhood.  When Kala is killed by Kulonga, the son of
Chief Mbonga of the cannibal tribe, a bloody feud is begun between
Tarzan and the tribe that would last for many years.  From the tribe,
Tarzan steals weapons and his first garments.
Through a bizarre set of circumstances, Tarzan learns to read and
write English and speak French but not the other way around.
Later, William Clayton, nephew of Tarzan's father John Clayton,
American Jane Porter, her black servant, her father and his assistant
land near the cabin to look for an historic buried treasure.  When the
group is threatened by jungle animals, a renegade from Kerchak's
tribe, cannibals and pirates, Tarzan must save them repeatedly.  A
love triangle develops between William Clayton, Jane, and Tarzan that
is not resolved by the novel's conclusion.  Eventually, Tarzan follows
Jane to civilization.  His odd education is filled out along the way,
and in the fullness of time he becomes a polished aristocrat with the
instincts, strength and reflexes of a savage beast.
That's Tarzan of the Apes in a nutshell.  Now, let's let Michael
Eisner loose on it.
First of all, we must scour the story clean of any People of Color.
Gone are Jane's servant and all local natives.  Disney's Africa is,
curiously, completely devoid of Africans, reminding one of Apartheid's
"empty land theory".  This was, apparently, preferable to showing
People of Color in roles that might upset the Terminally Offendable.
Or maybe Eisner just doesn't like blacks in his cartoons.  I don't
know.
Of the lily-white cast, Tarzan's parents lose their objectionable
upper-crust heritage and become no-name survivors of a ship fire.
William Clayton, Lord Greystoke, Tarzan's cousin, becomes the
completely unrelated "Clayton", a standard, paper-thin Disney villian,
utterly interchangeable with Governer Rattcliffe and Gaston,
ostensibly the guide of Professor Porter.  In a great unintentional
in-joke, Tarzan, when learning English, mistakenly believes that
"Clayton" is the name of the noise made when the villian fires his
gun.  And that's all Clayton is, in the movie -- an excuse for lots of
gunshots.
Guns, of course, are only ever two things:  Completely ineffective
(the shotgun in Tarzan's luckless parents' cabin) or completely evil
(the double barrelled high capacity elephant-machine-gun wielded by
Clayton).  Clayton "searches for apes" by shooting at anything that
makes a sound.  Just what you always wanted in a guide.
Professor and Jane Porter are transformed from treasure seekers to
naturalists in search of gorrillas to study.  Burroughs' "great apes"
become Gorillas In The Mist.  Tublat is gone, and Kerchak (now a
silverback Gorilla) takes his place as Tarzan's wise, noble, adopted
father.  Just as Clayton and his henchmen are intolerably bad, the
gorillas are intolerably good and noble and just.  You can't have any
shades of grey in a Disney movie, no sir.  Nor can you have animals
acting like, well you know, animals.
True to Disney formula, Tarzan is saddled with two wisecracking
sidekicks, an embarrassed sounding Wayne Knight as Tantor The
Anxiety-Ridden Elephant, and in probably the most annoying role in her
career, a screechy, wisecracking Rosie O'Donnell as Terk, a midget ape
with bad hair.  In a minor divergance from formula, the sidekicks are
not at Tarzan's side for the entire movie, but true to the Disney
vision, they contribute nothing to the plot except some really painful
attempts at humor and one completely improbable rescue.
Thankfully, Tarzan isn't a musical as such, with the exceptions of a
brief bedtime song from Kala to young Tarzan, and a really horrible
be-bop number by Rosie O'Donnell that stops the story dead and is
guaranteed to make you squirm in your seat.  An excellent time for a
potty break.
Phil Collins tunes comprise most of the background music, and are
decent enough to almost make me want to buy the album.
As mentioned above, Burroughs' Tarzan subsists mostly on meat he has
killed himself.  Disney's Tarzan, true to nineties sensibilities, eats
only fruit and appears to be completely non-violent, killing nothing
during the movie's 88 minutes, not even nasty old meat-eating Sheeta,
the panther, who expires bloodlessly by accidentally falling on
Tarzan's spear offscreen.  In all of Tarzan's altercations, his main
strategy seems to be to keep his opponant occupied until said opponant
accidentally hurts himself.
There are ragged scraps of the original story in there someplace, and
indeed, Disney's Tarzan retains more of Burroughs' Tarzan of the Apes
than most of the 30-odd Tarzan movies that preceeded it.  Some of the
action scenes are amazing.  But while Disney has retained cosmetic
similarities, they've torn the guts out of the story, leaving only a
good looking, unoffensive corpse in it's place.
In fact, what is left is no more or less than a gender-switched
Pocahontas, with the same basic plot, character types, and a slightly
different ending.
Burroughs is on record as saying that his Tarzan character could best
be realized in animation, and this latest effort shows the potential
of the medium to tell the story of the displaced Lord Greystoke.
Perhaps some day we will see an effort from some other studio (perhaps
one of the Anime teams?) that hasn't been deliberately neutered.
Score:  One star of four for spectacular computer-assisted animation,
a few great action sequences, and some decent backgroup music.  Should
have been two stars, but I had to subtract one for general annoyance.

Title
Review for Rugrats Movie, The (1998)
I've been fond of Rugrats the series since before my daughter was
born.  It not only provides a charming look into childhood, but also
lets us laugh at the parenting mistakes of ourselves and others as
Tommy's parents act all of them out.
When my daughter turned 3 a year ago, she was also charmed by the
series, and we would watch it together, she laughing at the kid jokes
and me laughing at the adult jokes.
So, how well does the series translate to the big screen?  That's the
wrong question, actually.  It's not a matter of translation, but of
implementation.  The possibilities of moving Rugrats to the big screen
are obvious -- better animation, bigger budget, clever use of
multichannel sound.  The opening underscores this by showing us the
classic opening on a tiny screen in mono sound, and then suddenly
opening to the big screen and full theater sound in the last few
moments.  Reminiscent of the Enhanced Star Wars trailer.  But the
implementation....  Ah, there's the rub.  It  isn't very good.
In fact, it's pretty bad.  There's only about a half hour of plot in
the 80 minute running time.  The rest is stretched out with unneeded
(and unfunny) scenes, and -this is the bad part- some of the worst
songs to assult our ears since Quest for Camelot.  The plot is...
embarrassing.  Not clever or illuminating as the series has been, but
just downright dull and painful to watch.
There are a few clever moments, but we've already seen about half of
them in the trailer.  There doesn't appear to be any reason for this
movie to exist, except to make us pay seven bucks a seat to see
characters we used to see for free.  And let's not forget the full
length commercial, excuse me, cartoon Catdog.  Or was that Dogcat?  I
forget.  And I wish I could forget that cartoon.  It reminded me
somewhat of Micky's Brain, in that I kept hoping that this was the
last scene... no, maybe this was... nope, maybe this one.
Anyway, on a 0 to 4 scale I'd have to rate the experience a 1.  Even
at discount prices, I didn't get my money's worth.
As I said at the beginning, there are two ways to look at this movie.
Here is the other one:
Kool, Duud!  Klasky/Czupo are geniuses.  With Rugrats they have raised
the bar for big screen parody, and have done it in such a subtle
fashion that almost no one will get it!  In the series, the Rugrats
scriptwriters routinely lampoon cutesy smarmy kiddie movies, and they
brilliantly continue the motif on the big screen.  Tommy, Chuckie and
the bunch want to see Reptar (an obvious reference to Godzilla and
other action movies) and couldn't care less about watching an achingly
saccarine movie about a bunch of babies.  So while the adults are
trying to figure out why Rugrats the movie is so bad, the kids are
sneaking out to watch Enemy of the State.  Oh, the humanity!  Check it
out -- all the morons who are assulting Rugrats because of poor plot,
awful music, bad dialog, are just too dense to understand that it's
SUPPOSED TO BE LIKE THAT!  It's SUPPOSED to be bad.  That's the POINT!
What Genius!  I'm going to see it again and again!
Ahem.  Anyway, whether you look at it as a rather flat kiddie movie or
a profound inside joke on the audience, one thing Rugrats the movie
certainly does not have is the charm and wit of the series.  If you've
never seen the series but were dragged into the movie, you owe it to
yourself to catch a couple episodes to see how it's supposed to be.

Title
Review for Inspector Gadget (1999)
Some movies I should just skip.  My daughter and I had a really vile
time at My Favorite Martian a few weeks back, and here comes another
Disney effects-filled live-action flick based on an old TV program.
True, the probgram is only 15 years old this time, and it's a cartoon.
But it's a cartoon I liked, and I was understandably reluctant to see
what Disney had done to it on the big screen.  But my daughter really
wanted to go, and how bad could it be?
Turns out I was right, mostly.  Inspector Gadget, oddly enough,
follows almost exactly the same format as My Favorite Martian, down to
the jive-talking side-kick.  At first I thought it was done by the
same people, but IMDB informs me that IG was directed by David Kellogg
and written by Dana Olsen and Kerry Ehrin, where MFM was directed by
Donald Petrie and written by Sherri Stoner and Deanna Oliver.
This odd similarity between the two movies may best be explained by
the studio that produced it, where "formula" isn't just business, it's
a way of life.  The producers who obviously micromanaged the two
projects should get prominant screen credits.  In some parts you can
just hear them saying "more zany!  I want more zany here -- and --
here."  "Let's have a really painful sexual reference for no reason
right here -- make it really painful.  I want the audience squirming
in their seats."  "Ok, that's fine, but I want you to add bug guts."
"What does this scene do?  Character depth?  But where's the zaniness?
I DON'T see ZANY here.  If you can't make it zany, cut it!"
The latter is the only explanation I can come up with for the absence
of the thoroughly charming Michelle Trachtenberg for most of the
movie.  Michelle (who plays Penny, Gadget's niece)  shines in every
scene she's in, but unfortunately she only gets about nine minutes of
screen time.  My guess is that the rest is on the cutting room floor.
Dabney Coleman's comedic talents are utterly wasted as Chief Quimby.
I kept expecting him to say or do something really funny and somehow
save the film, but instead, he does the best he can with some really
poor lines in a few unexceptional scenes.  He is thoroughly upstaged
by Cheri Oteri as the "gidget bitch from hell" town Mayor.  Oteri's
overly enthusiastic and continually self-congratulatory speech
patterns and mannerisms were so much like Portland, Oregon's own manic
mayor Vera Katz that I had to wonder if the studio wasn't poking fun
at our fair town.  Or, maybe all career politicians are like that.
I must say, Matthew Broderick does not stroll through Inspector Gadget
as he did Godzilla.  He appears to have some fun with the film,
especially as the evil Gadget.  Rupert Everett is entertaining as the
maniacle Claw.
Joely Fisher does fine as the zany scientist and even better as the
zany carbon copy of herself.  Her performance is one of the few things
worth watching in the film.
D.L. Hughley plays the shuckin'-and-jivin' vehicular side-kick, in a
role that firmly sets Emancipation back 20 years.
The dialog is... let's face it, it's pretty bad.  The tag-line after a
major set-piece battle is a faux pas that makes no sense in context.
A lot of the lines (especially Hughley's) appear to be made up as they
go along, by people with little gift for ad-lib.
About three-quarters of the film is a somewhat unnecessary origin
story for both Gadget and Claw.  Gadget then spends the latter third
of the movie trying to locate Claw and having various altercations
(not really "battles") with the evil Gadget.  Penny does about a
minute and a half of the detective work her character did every week
in the cartoon.
Let me rage here just for a minute.  Michelle Trachtenberg was an
excellent choice for the Penny character.  She's utterly charming, and
has excellent experience (Harriet the Spy) for the part of the
pint-size detective.  Why she is so underutilized in this film is a
real mystery.  The film loses a star for casting brilliance coupled
with scripting (or editing) stupidity.
Inspector Gadget is missing the long, long stretches of potty humor
that (among other things) made My Favorite Martian so unbearable, but
it's a very short movie, so perhaps something was cut at the last
moment.
Probably the best scenes in the film occur during the end credits.
The "evil sidekick support group" is especially worth seeing, and has
an amazing number of cameo appearances for the few seconds it's
onscreen.
All in all, another bad live action film from the premere studio for
bad live action films.  I wonder if Disney uses the revenues for it's
generally money-making cartoons to produce these losers.  But if true,
why?  If they're trying for another Mary Poppins, they need to find a
team that can produce one, and then give them a chance to do it.

Title
Review for Pokémon the First Movie: Mewtwo Strikes Back (1999)
Capsule review:  Big build-up at the beginning to a big snore at the
end.   I give it a probably overly generous two stars, only because I
so recently suffered through Elmo in Grouchland to which Pokemon seems
like Shakespear in comparison.
Ok, so like every other kid under eleven, my daughter absolutely had
to see Pokemon The First Movie as soon as it came out.  And so, armed
with our popcorn and tooth-decaying drinks, we sit in the third row
and stare up at 20 foot high animated toys.  Heigh-ho.
The movie is divided up into two segments, a short called something
like "Pikachu's Vacation", and the main attraction Mewtwo Strikes
Back.
The less said about Pikachu's Vacation, the better.  Most of the
pokemon don't speak, you understand, except to say their own names
with various inflection.  I suppose this is so you can tell the
200-odd creatures apart.  I recognized maybe four of them, which shows
how woefully short I am on Pokemon lore.
A long dreary time later, the real movie starts.
The first ten minutes of Mewtwo Strikes Back, before the beginning
credits, are actually fairly engrossing.  The origin of Mewtwo is
interesting, the voice talents are very well done, and the animation
is first rate.
Then, after the credits, we degenerate into rather mundane tv-quality
animation and a very plodding plot.  The action picks up as the
Pokemon trainers attempt to get to an island arena through a heavy
storm, but things get uninteresting again soon after.  We learn that
the villain of the piece is Mewtwo (big surprise) and the plot slowly
builds up to the inevitable confrontation between Mewtwo and his
Pokemon against the Pokemon of the trainers.  Somewhere along the line
a Mew pokemon joins the good guys.
If you saw the commercials you know all of this.  The trailer of the
film covers the entire plot up to the square-off for the climactic
battle.  You sat through an hour of plodding, uneven plot and mediocre
animation to get to this point.  So what happens?  What's the final
pay-off?
What happens is that the film falls on it's flabby animated butt.  No
battle of any consequence occurs.  Instead, all the pokemon are
rendered powerless through Nonsensical Plot Device and must resort to
bitch-slapping each other until through exhaustion they can no longer
move their various appendages.  Then the trainers suddenly decide that
Fighting Is Bad and everyone kisses and makes up.  And the audience is
left with their mouths hanging open going "What the hell was that??"
There's not much else to say, except that I could not figure out the
purpose of Jesse and James of "Team Rocket".  Perhaps there is some
other Pokemon movie that explains their existence and motives.  They
didn't seem to serve any purpose or have any goals.  They just
stumbled about opening doors, sitting on things and getting
frightened.
Pokemon rates a very generous two stars for the very nice Origin of
Mewtwo sequence.  I'm tempted to subtract a star for that nonsensical
ending, but I hesitate only because of a nagging doubt that this was
the real, unedited ending as it came from Japan.  I have to wonder if
the flatness was specifically designed to appeal to what they imagine
that American children want to see.  If so, I'd be insulted.
