Authors
Dale L. Skran, Jr.
Number of Reviews
3

Title
Review for Cyborg (1989)
     CYBORG belongs to a small sub-genre, the Science-Fiction Martial Arts
film.  This sub-genre is larger than might be supposed, since it includes all
those terrible "gladiators in a future arena" movies such as DEATH RACE 2000
and AFTER THE FALL OF NEW YORK.  Another recent example is STEEL DAWN which has
a slightly more substantial SF plot than the various "death races."  A +1 film
that fits into this sub-genre is THE RUNNING MAN which featured Arnold
Schwarzenegger duking it out on a game show with hockey-stick wielding psychos.
These films as a group are poorly made and exhibit low quality, unrealistic
fighting.
     Recently, a number of martial artists have attempted to put on the screen
a higher level of realism in fighting.  The two major examples are Steven
Senegal, an Akidoist starring in ABOVE THE LAW and Jean Claude Van Damme in
BLOODSPORT.  Neither film has a very strong or believable plot, but both
contain excellent fight scenes that are well above the typical Hollywood
slam-bang.  A digression into the world of stunt-fighting is called for at this
point.  Hopefully movie audiences are aware that movie fights are carefully
planned to maximize the breakage to surrounding walls, tables, lamps, etc.  to
increase the drama of the moment.  Another "Hollywoodism" is that scene where
the hero, punched/kicked many times by the villain, draws from deep within
themselves the resources to go on and win.  Another "Hollywoodism" is the
villain gaining the upper hand, and then squandering it to explain their plans
for world domination or just getting the girl (guy).  A final "Hollywoodism" is
that in spite of all the slam-bang, people just dust themselves off, and escape
more or less unharmed.
     Jean Claude Van Damme plans a ninjitsu-trained fighter (Frank Dux) in
BLOODSPORT who enters a secret, illegal, "no rules," all styles contest.  The
framing plot is about -3, the training scenes about 0 level, but the fights are
+2.  They are excellently filmed, diverse, and very well thought out.  Van
Damme is an extremely flexible martial artist who clearly has mastery of an
enviable variety of techniques.  He is pleasing on the screen, and seems fairly
convincing in his relatively simple roll.  Much of the impetus of the story
derives from the knowledge that it is supposedly true: a Frank Dux really
exists who claims to have won just such an underground tournament.  I have read
interviews with Dux, and apparently the fights are fairly close to what he
claims actually happened.  BLOODSPORT was a very low budget film that played
surprisingly well and propelled Van Damme into the limelight.
     With this background, it was with bated breath that a tiny group of fans
of SF Martial Arts awaited CYBORG, a new SF movie starring Van Damme.  It
should be noted that there is also a written branch of SF martial arts, notably
STREETLETHAL and THE KUNDALINI EQUATION by real- life Kung-fu stylist Steven
Barnes, who co-authored DREAM PARK with Larry Niven.  Other examples include
MATADORA and THE MAN WHO NEVER MISSED by Steve Perry, and to some extent all
cyber-punk, but especially NEUROMANCER, JOHNNY MNEMONIC, HARDWIRED, and VOICE
OF THE WHIRLWIND.
     Variety reviewed CYBORG as just a series of futuristic fights.  This would
have been a considerable improvement!  In fact, there is just enough plot to
seriously impede the fights.  CYBORG resembles MAD MAX in that they are both
revenge tales with colorful villains set in a violent post-holocaust world.
Both have boring and ill conceived sets of flashbacks to the bucolic days the
hero spent with a wife/girlfriend who eventually gets wasted by the colorful
villain.  Both have a few good scenes here and there, but overall are very poor
films.
     There are several things that make CYBORG much worse than it should have
been.  One is that Van Damme's female sidekick is totally miscast.  She should
have been played by an unknown but technically proficient female martial artist
who had some minimal acting skills.  Instead, she is played by your basic movie
bimbo.  Her continued survival in spite of her obvious lack of martial skill
and general stupidity greatly decreases the credibility of the film.
     Another problem is that a lot of CYBORG builds up to a big fight between
Van Damme and a colorful villain.  There is nothing wrong with this, but
unfortunately, all the interesting fighting takes place between Van Damme and
various henchmen about mid-way through the film.  Many of these scenes were
fairly realistic and well executed.  Unfortunately, when Van Damme confronts
the main villain, he forgets all the skills he displayed earlier, and behaves
like someone who knows zip about what he is doing.  The same pattern is
repeated in their final confrontation.  Basically both fights are pure
Hollywood and a considerable waste of the audience's time.
     I also should mention that the dialog is not very good, and many scenes
are mis-directed, although production values are higher than in most low-budget
films.
     It is unfortunate that CYBORG is not better than it is, since it may sink
Van Damme's career.  Overall, CYBORG comes in as a low (-1) or high (-2).  The
squeamish are reminded that although CYBORG is not a "splatter" film, it is "R"
rated for a reason, and it is fairly violent.

Title
Review for RoboCop (1987)
     Let us cross pens. Mark and I have a number of long-running debates,
including one on the value of movies like DREAMSCAPE, TERMINATOR, and
ROBOCOP, and another on the adaptability of super-hero comics to film.  If I
may be somewhat cavalier, Mark tends to feel these films are unexceptional,
while I feel they serve the special purpose of bringing standard SF ideas to
a movie audience generally unfamiliar with them.  On the other topic, Mark
tends to argue that super-heros make poor, or at least silly films that are
not good SF or anything else.  As a long-time fan of the super-hero genre,
especially Marvel's merry mutants, I, of course, disagree.  At least, I feel
the super-hero genre could be made into excellent films--if only Hollywood
tried.
     At long last, in ROBOCOP we may have such a film.  Although flawed,
it's a pretty good action picture--better than BLUE THUNDER or WANTED DEAD
OR ALIVE.  It has a nice score by the gentleman who scored Conan the
Barbarian (really another successful super-hero adaptation).  It has lots of
good lines and funny jokes, including "My name is Murphy," "You're going to
be one bad m***er-f**ker," and "You're fired." It is 100% better than the
scientifically silly RUNAWAY (wherein Tom Selleck battles robots).  Like
TERMINATOR, which along with BACK TO THE FUTURE, introduced recursive time
travel stories to the modern audience on a sensible level, ROBOCOP shows us
a lot of wonderful stuff we've read a hundred times, but never seen before.
The  plot is old stuff, but who cares?  Heinlein claimed there were only
three basic plots anyway: boy meets girl, the little tailor, and boy becomes
man.   For those who care, ROBOCOP combines elements from all three of
Heinlein's basic plots.
     Mercifully, the makers of ROBOCOP take their premise seriously, and
spares us cackling villains and silly sidekicks.  This is a clean, mean
story that owes a lot to the THE ROAD WARRIOR's realistic violence and
BRAINSTORM's greedy, militarized, hi-tech corporations. Mark complains a
good deal about the inconsistencies in this future world.  I think he's
holding to an excessively high standard.  ROBOCOP is not BLADE RUNNER, but
its future (a few Merlin phones aside) is far more completely thought out
than the average SF movie.  It is not up to written SF standards, but I
suspect the producers wanted to make a few bucks and couldn't afford to re-
do everything.  It suspended my disbelief far better than 2010: ODYSSEY TWO
which by contrast (except for the spaceships) seemed to be taking place in
the next five years.  The makers of ROBOCOP have at least made a serious
(and sometimes not so serious) attempt to project current trends out 20-30
years.
     The plot has several weakness that tend to make it easier for ROBOCOP
to bring in the bad guys.  In particular, at one point the main henchman
makes a speech to Robocop admitting that he works for the main villain.
This makes things easy for Robocop, but 1) the henchman is getting thrown
through windows and such like, 2) it is clearly established in the film that
the henchman might suppose mentioning his boss's name would save him.  At
another point a bad guy puts down a perfectly good armor- piercing cannon to
use a crane to drop a lot of metal parts on Robocop.  This is stupid, but at
least the movie has the main bad guy yelling at him to "Stop messing around and
shoot."  Mark also complains that the ED-209 (a robot that the cyborg Robocop
edges out of a job) would not be very effective as a policeman, which is amply
demonstrated in the movie, but it is also made clear in the film that the
corporation doesn't care if it actually works as a cop--their plan is to sell
it to the Pentagon.
     I have a beef that I'm surprised Mark missed.  Cops are being killed
right and left.  The crooks are armed like they just came out of the
National Guard Armory.  The cops...well, the cops carry what appear to be
9mm pea-shooters with nary a shotgun or automatic rifle in sight!  Maybe
these are supposed to be some kind of advanced handguns, but if I were on
that future Detriot police force, I'd carry an AK-47 or a Uzi!
     Overall, though, these are just quibbles.  ROBOCOP is more realistic
than many action movies, including most James Bonds and REMO WILLIAMS.  The
plot is not as tightly wound as that of THE CONVERSATION but it exceeds BLUE
THUNDER by a wide margin.  To this it must be added that ROBOCOP continues
the line of "action" heroines started by ALIEN and ALIENS.  We see for the
very first time without any special attention that sexual equality has
reached the point that male and female cops share the same locker room.
There is no gratuitous flesh, and the heroine is not model-pretty.  However,
she has a mean crescent kick.
     ROBOCOP straddles the edge between a realistic super-hero comic and SF.
If one guy is a cyborg or wears a powered-suit a la the comic hero "Iron
Man," we tend to have a super-hero story. If everyone has a powered-suit, we
have Heinlein's STARSHIP TROOPERS.   It is clearly implied in the movie that
fairly soon there are going to be other cyborg cops, marking the beginning
of the transition to a still more fantastic future.
     ROBOCOP also marks a new level in audience acceptance of technology and
human transformation, and may well point the way toward our own "cyber-punk"
future.  Murphy, as Robocop, eventually overcomes his programming and
recovers his sense of self.  Once having done so, he accepts his new role as
a cyborg-cop, realizing that his previous life is over.  Although technology
not under human control is dangerous ("Star Wars" lasers burn 10,000 acres
in California, the amuck ED-209, etc), technology backed by human integrity
is working for the betterment of all. I was amazed at how favorable the
audience seemed as the movie ended.
     In some non-trivial sense we are all Murphy.  We went to sleep and a lot
of technology insinuated itself into our lives.  Now, as before, it is up to us
to use it for good or ill.  Each time we wake, however, there is still more
technology, and like Murphy, we know there is no going back.  Who knows, Mark?
If you get very very lucky, someday you may wake to see the planets forming
around that star you want to visit.  But if you do, you will find that, like
Murphy, you have said more good-bys than it is healthy to contemplate.
     Rating on the (-4) to (+4) scale: (+2).  Keep in mind that Robocop is
rated "R" for a reason--this is not a "kiddie" movie.

Title
Review for Millennium (1989)
     There exist few examples of strong SF stories made into excellent films.
Three recent botches come to mind -- DUNE (Frank Herbert), NIGHTFLYERS (George
R. R. Martin), and NIGHTFALL (Isaac Asimov) - - all based on stories of the
highest caliber, and all seriously flawed on screen.  Now comes MILLENNIUM,
based on the John Varley story "Air Raid" (Hugo nominated, I believe).  This is
the only major SF movie I can remember where the script was written by the
original author without being re-written by several hacks.  And it is a major
film, unlike NIGHTFLYERS and NIGHTFALL, both of which starred mostly unknowns
running around cardboard sets.  Kris Kristofferson plays an air safety
investigator who slowly comes to realize that there is something very odd about
a plane crash.  Cheryl Ladd plays an assault team leader from a distant,
terrible future that is slowly dying.  To save humanity, Ladd and her
associates steal people from the past who are about to die in plane crashes
away to a new life in a distant future, one far beyond their own polluted
world.
     As a time travel story, MILLENNIUM builds on the background provided by
the simpler TERMINATOR and BACK TO THE FUTURE, providing the audience an
introduction to temporal censorship and time paradoxes.  Cheryl Ladd is
surprisingly convincing as  the woman from a dying world, and Kris is
believable as well.  The "stewardesses from hell" scenes as Louise and her team
infiltrate a doomed 60's era jetliner was the highpoint of the film for me.
     I have several complaints, however.  At one point, Louise Baltimore
(Cheryl Ladd) turns to one of her assault team and explains in true
Gernsbackian Lecturese the concept of time censorship.  Louise's "personal
robot" is simply a man in a tin woodsman suit.  The technology of Louise's
future world seems more like that that of 100 years in the future than 1000
years in the future, but this could be explained by a nuclear war or other
disaster.
     While driving to the movie I expressed a hope that the plot and script
would be solid even if the FX were not the best.  While driving away, I did an
about face and claimed that the movie would be substantially improved if an
extra million or so had been put into the robot and the final scenes, which
looked too much like the destruction of every citadel of evil I've ever seen on
film.  A final problem was the literary sounding voice-over at the end of the
film - it might be a great story ending, but a movie needs a visual ending.
     Overall, MILLENNIUM is a strong SF film, an original SF film, and a film
that deserves but will probably not get a wide audience.  It is a complex story
told from various temporal points of view that seemed to leave the audience I
was with somewhat baffled.  I'd rate it a +2, and with another million or two
in FX and the re-shooting of a couple of scenes, it could easily have been a +3
film.
