Authors
Jeff Wallace
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Die Hard 2 (1990)
     The Los Angeles Times recently asked "Where's this summer's
blockbuster movie?"  The answer is: it's finally here and it's name is
DIE HARD 2.
     I loved the original DIE HARD and I fully expected to be
disappointed by the sequel.  Incredibly, this movie is as engrossing and
even more spectacular than the original.  The plot isn't all that
important, but it provides a good foundation for John McClane (Bruce
Willis) vs.  the bad guys as in the original.
     It's Christmas time again and McClane is at Dulles International
Airport waiting for his wife's flight to arrive.  Also due to arrive is
General Esperanza, a deposed Latin American dictator, who is being
extradited to the U.S.  to face drug charges.  Esperanza appears
unruffled by his extradition and we quickly discover why.
     A group of terrorists/mercenaries take control of the airport and
threaten mass destruction if Esperanza isn't released to them.  Of
course McClane figures out that something nasty is occurring before
anyone else.  And, of course, the local police don't listen to him.
     This occurs in the first 15-20 minutes which leaves our hero,
Lieutenant John McClane, now with the Los Angeles Police Department, a
good 90+ minutes to kill bad guys, get shot at and make wisecracks.
     The story isn't highly original and it certainly isn't going to win
an Academy Award for script writing, but you don't go to an action film
expecting an in-depth character analysis.
     Once the basic set-up information is out of the way DIE HARD 2
takes off.  It rolls from shoot-outs to explosions to chase scenes
without letting you (or McClane) catch your breath.  The fast pace is
perfect for this movie and it holds your attention from start to finish.
     The bad guys are very bad.  The good guy is very good (and very
lucky).  The photography is impressive and the stunts and effects are
stupendous.  Industrial Light & Magic is at its peak once again.  ILM's
models can easily convince you that you're looking at a real 747.  This
movie is at its finest in 70mm at a theater with a good sound system.
     It is a perfect put-your-mind-in-neutral-and-kick-back summer
adventure movie.
----
Jeff Wallace, Experimental Computing Facility (XCF), U.C. Berkeley
Internet: jeffw@scam.Berkeley.EDU UUCP:...!ucbvax!scam!jeffw
