Authors
Rian Schmidt
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Belle de jour (1967)
     I have just returned from my fifth viewing of BELLE DE JOUR, and I
am all at once repulsed and disoriented.  My arousal is only outweighed
by my melancholy which is, in turn, in a tumultuous yet jejune
dialectic with my own Oedipal introspection.
     Allow me to digress.  Bunuel's image of a Venusian bourgeoise
masochistic monolith in Deneuve moved me in violent vacillation from
horror to flatulence and back again in a terrifying yet unceasingly
vapid repetition of pseudo-Freudian references to cats and oceans and
lost teeth that was nothing short of brilliant in its nauseating
evocation of intellectual masturbation on a scale not seen since
Tarkovsky.  Even now, I feel woozy.
     The then 66-year-old surrealist director's ambiguous
juxtapositioning of morbidity and sexuality predated 9-1/2 WEEKS by
many years and yet, astoundingly, exhibits the same directorial latent
homosexuality as its filmatic offspring while maintaining a steady
obfuscating flow of neo-intellectual symbolism which is evocative of
collegial debate in which one participant has the teaching note, but
alas the viewer not only lacks the appropriate preparation but is left
feeling as though they might count themselves among the half of
humanity arbitrarily burdened with an IQ less than 100.
     Before the honored reader assumes that the preceding comments are
the harbinger of a condemnation of this erotic classic, this humble
critic must dispel such fallacious (ex post this feeble critic is
self-congratulatory in his avoidance of the Freudian use of
"fellatious" in this context) impressions by pronouncing his
unqualified accolades for Bunuel's work.
     This pinheaded, foul-smelling critic feels comfortable in his
assertion that the exalted, nay holy, viewer shall experience the same
elicitation of childhood incestuous desires for same sex siblings and
parents as did this putrid, moronic, pedophilic, maniacal
postal-employee reject of a film critic.  In the end, it is Deneuve's
experience as Severine that draws one under the metaphoric dinner table
with a broken bottle and packet of seeds to write a letter to one's own
sadistic carriage driver.  "Dear Sir, You may release the cats now.  I
have no death for you today."
