Authors
Robin Redcrest
Number of Reviews
5

Title
Review for Twister (1996)
The URL of this review is 

http://moviereviews.com/janesreviews/twister.html
Ladies and gentlemen, start your engines - the summer
blockbuster season has begun!
And, begun with a bang and a flourish and big gust of wind,
courtesy of the team of Stephen Spielberg, Kathleen Kennedy
and Michael Crichton.  Been a while since a movie has made
me sweat, but I walked out of "Twister" with sore muscles
from clenching the armrests, and some unsightly stains on
the underarms of my sweatshirt.
I've heard it said that the special effects are the stars
of this movie.  No question but what they are spectacular,
and a large part of the reason for the nail biting
suspense.   But a lot of the credit for the intensity of
this film has to go to Helen Hunt.  Willing to ride right
into the eye of the storm, it's her intensity, bravery and
ability to look life square in the face that takes you
places a movie doesn't normally go.
Usually, if a woman is a hero in an action film, she's an
Amazon.  Grace Jones comes to mind - a not quite human
woman, and therefore a cinematically acceptable hero.  Hunt
has none of that.  You learn at the beginning that she's
motivated to be a storm chaser because of seeing her father
swept out of the family storm cellar during a tornado in
the mid-60s.   She's got a core of sadness, but she's
driven and focused and passionate about her work.  Now
that's a reasonable motivation.
Her mission is to lead a motley band of other scientists to
make the first tornado sensor designed to be sucked up into
the funnel for precise data gathering.   The rest of her
team, are guys, who seem to have not one ounce of angst
about working for a woman.   It's clear that they'd rather
be working for her than for the well funded, souless male
competitor who's vans all match and who hogs all of the TV
cameras in his efforts to beat her to the punch.  I don't
blame them.  I liked her.  They obviously do too.  No big
deal.
Enter the sub plot of the fact that she co-invented this
wonder device with her soon to be ex-husband, the highly
appealing Bill Paxton.  He comes to get her to sign the
divorce papers and stays to help her launch the sensor. 
Paxton is equally - and I truly mean equally - as strong a
character.  It's clear why they a) really love each other
and b) have a tough time living together.  Two people who
are this smart and this dedicated have to run into power
struggles.
But the struggles are real.  They aren't some trumped up
guys versus gals type of thing that has to end in the woman
capitulating to the man's sensitive ego.  They're the
struggles of two human beings trying to figure out where
they each belong in life and caring so much about each
other that confronting their lack of ability to work it out
hurts way more than just separating.
Here's a switch - what causes this to work is Hunt's
combination of brains and fearlessness and Paxton's
instincts.   Thanks to Spielberg and his camp for giving us
a female hero with brains and a male hero with intuition. 
And for making that part of the movie no big deal, just
part of a really good story.
It's well written, (mostly) and well acted, by folks it's
very easy to care about.  See this movie for a fabulous
story about people with heart achieving the impossible and
winding up winners.

Title
Review for Truth About Cats & Dogs, The (1996)
The URL of this review is:

http://moviereviews.com/janesreviews/thetruthaboutcatsanddogs.html
I loved this movie for one reason - Janeane Garafalo.  I haven't
stayed up to watch her on Saturday Night Live, but ever since I
saw her as the blind-date-from-hell in the otherwise silly "Bye
Bye Love", I've been anxious to spend more time with her
on-screen.
Garafalo starts in this adaptation of the ancient tale of
Cyrano, as Dr. Abby Barnes, the host of a radio talk show about
pets.  She's supposedly a plain Jane, who, because of the
intelligence and wit she displays on the radio, wins the heart
(sight unseen) of a cute, sexy listener.  Naturally, when he
wants to meet her, she's too intimidated to show him what she
really looks like, so she talks her blonde, willowy and very
ditzy neighbor (Uma Thurman) into posing as her.
This premise might work, if Garafalo were truly plain, and
Thurman were truly beautiful.  But Garafalo is real, human and
way too adorable to be overlooked, and Thurman is really just
pretty messy.
But even if the contrast were greater,  come on folks!  In the
90s, it just doesn't ring true that physical beauty is
automatically the only thing that brings two people together.  I
just saw "Jane Eyre" and watched William Hurt fall in love with
the truly plain Charlotte Gainsburg over supermodel Elle
MacPherson because, frankly, she was a much more interesting
person.  In this movie, Abby is so bright and funny and
delightful, that a guy would have to be crazy not to want to
spend time with her.  And, Thurman is so ditzy and (allegedly)
adorably disheveled that a guy might be tempted to take a second
look, but after a very short time would have serious trouble
sinking an intelligence depth finder.  Zzzzzzzzz....
Garafalo's appeal defies description, because it's all based on
how she reacts in the moment.  She's like that hilariously funny
best friend who can finish your sentences and make you laugh in
that "you-had-to-be-there" way.  See this movie and be there. 
It'll probably make you take a second look at that
less-than-glamorous person in your life, who's presence you keep
gravitating towards even though he or she is "not your type."
A review by Robin Redcrest of USPAN's 
Circle of Critics

Title
Review for Family Thing, A (1996)
The URL of this review is

http://moviereviews.com/janesreviews/afamilything.html
When a movie is a lot like life, it can be startling and thought 
provoking or just plain dull. "A Family Thing" has moments of both.
Robert Duvall stars as Earl, the good old boy owner of an auto shop 
in Smalltown, Arkansas, with a neck as red as a home grown tomato. 
His mother's deathbed revelation to him is that he's really the half 
black by product of her husband's rape of the family cleaning lady. 
Not the kind of news that's going to get you elected Grand Poobah of 
the local Elks lodge in the deep south.
Obediently, Earl cusses out his Daddy, then honors his mother's last 
wishes and sets out for Chicago to meet and put a face to his half 
brother Ray, marvelously played by James Earl Jones. The two men 
dislike each other instantly, but a funny thing happens. It's clear 
that if the pair had been 30 years younger, they would've gone at 
each other until only one was left standing. But Earl is 63 and Ray 
is 69. Try as they might to maintain the hatred that history
and culture should have fostered between them, they just can't. Age 
and maturity have ravaged their once rampant testosterone, and shown 
that life is a lot better handled as grownups. 
One very funny scene does show the two trying to get into a fist 
fight, and ending up rolling over each other and bursting into 
laughter. Oh that every living human being who harbors
anger and hatred against a ridiculous stereotype could have this 
experience! The two form a bond - albeit, a somewhat uneasy one - 
and set out to discover what the new meaning of family might just 
be.
See what I mean? Not a high concept adrenaline rush of a plot, but a 
gentle, matter-of-fact story about how life really is. Parts of it 
were conducive to nodding off. Any part that contained the salty 
Aunt T. (played by the earthy and wonderful Irma P. Hall) was
hilariously funny. 
Mostly, "A Family Thing" was just a simple, reassuring story that 
after all is said and done, the bitterness of life's troubles just 
ain't that big of a deal.

Title
Review for Celluloid Closet, The (1995)
This review is also posted at USPAN's 
moviereviews.com web site, at 

http://moviereviews.com/janesreviews/thecelluloidcloset.html
     I didn't realize how apt the name of this movie was until I called
the MPAA (the Motion Picture Association of America - the folks who
decide what's G, NC 17, PG, R or X) to ask why the preview was rated R.
So that we can make some sense of their response, let me tell you about
the movie itself.
     "The Celluloid Closet" is a documentary about how homosexuality
has been portrayed in the movies over the past several decades.  It's
brilliant, funny, naughty and extremely poignant. It tore at my heart
to watch a gifted lesbian screenwriter explain that, as a rule, gay
audiences hunger for any hint of homosexuality on screen.  Regardless
of how veiled - or how sordid - the presence of a gay or lesbian person
allows others to lessen their sense of isolation and makes them feel as
if they're not quite so invisible as America seems to want them to be.
     The movie itself is rated R - and for good reason. It contains
scenes of bloody, violent gay bashing and graphic, uninhibited, sex. As
with any movie, I appreciate knowing about these things ahead of time,
so I can decide for myself whether to see the movie with a friend, a
date, my 11 year old niece, alone or not at all.
But, that's the movie. Now back to the preview.
     Prior to this film being theatrically released (it was originally
filmed as a documentary for HBO) I had seen the coming attractions
trailer for it at least six times. There was no nudity, no violence, no
bad language, nothing that I could see that would be offensive or
inappropriate for a general audience (okay, Whoopi Goldberg did refer
to someone "boning" someone, but the last I knew that wasn't one of the
seven words you can't say on TV).
Except for a scene of two fully clothed men kissing. Hmmmmm.
     When I inquired about the rating on the trailer, a very nice woman
at the MPAA quoted from "the handbook" that a trailer approved for all
audiences could contain "no homosexuality or lesbianism and no going
down on someone."
     Hello? I was in the office and it was the middle of the day.
Bravely, I pursued.  "I've seen that trailer, oh... probably half a
dozen times," I gulped... "and I don't remember that scene."
     "Well," she chirped. "It's there. Our little eyes are trained to
see that."
No really. In the words of Dave Barry, "I AM NOT MAKING THIS UP."
     They are "trained" to "see that?" When someone who was shocked at
the rating the first time and made a note to watch it carefully the
following five times or so managed to let it slip past her? Gosh, I
certainly don't mean to question the MPAA, or "the handbook". I would,
however, like to suggest that it's they who are in the closet on this
one. And the light ain't good in there.
     But, having seen "The Celluloid Closet," and being one of a
handful of straight people involved in a primarily gay and lesbian
weekly Bible Study (EMail me and I'll give you the details), none of
this was any big surprise. The point of the movie was that
homosexuality,  even in the politically correct 90s, is ridiculously
perceived as a threat to a mostly heterosexual society. A point well
made in this candid and honest film.
     Now, I could go off on the MPAA's ruling that a trailer must
contain "No homosexuality or lesbianism" and ask how that is defined,
particularly in light of some of the things, both sexual and
non-sexual, that I've watched straight people do in trailers. I just
don't feel the need to go there, because it seems so obvious.
     I'll instead suggest that the MPAA re-evaluated their evaluation
criteria. Let the ratings reflect not subject content, like "Sex" and
"Violence". Let them reflect attitude content. In the future, I'd be
interested in knowing whether the movie is rated D for Disrespectful or
S for Stereotyped. Then I'd truly be able to make an informed decision
about how I spent my time.

Title
Review for Primal Fear (1996)
     My date and I both walked out of this movie with the same reaction
- "We wasted a Saturday night on this?" Movies like this aren't filmed,
they're programmed. Here's how it's done:
1. Turn on the computer, call up the software for "star vehicle for
aging sex symbol - male"
2. Plug in the name of Richard Gere, because he can't act his way 
out of a paper bag, but he looks great for 46 and you can generate 
word of mouth by getting columnists to discuss the merits of his 
neck wrinkles over Robert Redford's.
3. Plug in a plot that plays on people's fears of corrupt politics,
corrupt law and Archbishops who diddle little boys in the back room.
4. Finish up with a female lead who can't seem to get over the fact 
that her opposing council on a major trial is an ex-lover who 
treated her badly, and who she'd go back to in a heartbeat, for 
reasons that no one can figure out except maybe a penchant for neck 
wrinkles. I loved her seething indignation when her ex baited and 
manipulated her and how somehow she dissolved into his arms at the 
end because - not in spite of the fact, but because - he completely 
ruined her. It was so distasteful, it might as well have been a rape 
scene where she started to enjoy herself. Hollywood - WAKE UP!
     My date was an attorney, so we at least had some fun dissing the
legal inconsistencies. Testimony is stricken that is later referred to
in court - hello? A sideline of questioning that is relevant to the
plot but - oops! - not the trial is allowed. I watched every "L.A. Law"
episode ever made, and Mike, or Grace or Arnie or Victor would've
gotten hooted out of L.A. County Court for trying some of this stuff.
(http://moviereviews.com/janesreviews/primalfear.html)
