Authors
The Flying Inkpot
Number of Reviews
18

Title
Review for Maximum Risk (1996)
Directed by: Ringo Lam
Written by: Larry Ferguson 
Cast: Jean-Claude Van Damme (Alain Moreau), Natasha Henstridge (Alex Minetti) 
Produced by: Columbia Pictures 
Running Time: About 102 minutes. 
Rating : *** 1/2 out of ***** 
Theatres : Cathay, Golden Village, Eng Wah, Riverside, UA Bugis Junction and Shaw Cinemas 
OK, let's get one thing straight right away: MAXIMUM RISK is no
BATTLESHIP POTEMKIN (although it does have some Russians in it!), but it's
not too bad, really.  It's the new film from Ringo Lam, the latest Hong
Kong filmmaker to defect to Hollywood, and stars that minor league
Schwartzeneggar from Belgium, Jean-Claude Van Damme (who, you will recall,
also starred in John Woo's maiden Hollywood effort, HARD TARGET). 
In Lam's film, Van Damme plays Alain Moreau, a French cop (at
least his accent makes more sense here than it did in Hard Target) who
discovers that he was separated shortly after birth from a twin brother
who was adopted by Russians.  These Russians defected to the United States
and moved into a black neighbourhood in New York (where, I suppose, they
thought they wouldn't be noticed).  This brother, Mikhail Suverov (played
in his few scenes by...well, you know), becomes deeply involved in the
Russian Mafia and the FBI (almost the same thing, I guess), and is killed
in France (in the movie, things happen so fast that you don't have too
much time to think about how weird this all is). 
Moreau does what any good surviving twin brother would do and
goes to New York to find out why Mikhail was killed, and why everyone in
France who knows anything about him is also being killed (we wonder the
same thing; I still do).  
In Little Odessa, he meets Mikhail's girlfriend, Alex (Natasha Henstridge, 
last seen in SPECIES), who helps him solve the
mystery and adds immeasurably to the mise-en-scene (she has very nice
breasts, and we get to seen them briefly in this movie; it was rated R in
the US but is PG here, so they must have seen more of her breasts than we
do). 
This film lacks the gloss and high production values of such
other action movies as BROKEN ARROW, THE FUGITIVE, HARD TARGET, or
anything starring Arnold, but that works to its benefit, I think.  After
all, one thing that's been missing from Woo's Hollywood films is that
certain Hong Kong funkiness that we all know and love (well, some of us
do). Movies like this shouldn't be too pretentious, and that is part of
the problem with some of these other films: they try to be too "big" in
terms of special effects and sheer spectacle. 
MAXIMUM RISK has its share of car chases and explosions, but
they don't overwhelm the movie or detract our attention from the narrative
(not too much, anyway).  The emphasis throughout is on the characters and
their interactions (even if, at times, they don't make a hell of a lot of
sense).  In fact, one of the more interesting aspects of the film is a
minor character, a rather overeager New York cabbie (Frank Van Keeken from
TV's "Kids in the Hall"), who begins as something of a joke but becomes an
important part of the story. Unfortunately, by the time we have come to
really get interested in him, he...well, you'll see. 
The movie also features some set pieces of the type that we have
come to expect from Lam and his Hong Kong compatriots.  One is a fight in
a Russian sauna, with lots of sweaty, muscular male flesh (this one will
appeal to certain parts of the audience more than others), bullets in
heads, and vodka.  Another, my personal favorite, is a fight in a meat
packing house, featuring pig carcasses and a chainsaw.  And even the
predictable car chases are more Hong Kong than Hollywood, as they trash
those quaint French cafes, vegetable carts, and, well, French people that,
we all know in our hearts, deserve trashing just for being so damn quaint. 
Of course, the movie does have its share of silliness.  For
example, while beating the crap out of an obnoxious Russian thug who
obviously deserves what he's getting, Alain stops long enough to look at
his own reflection in the cracked mirror with which he has been whacking
the guy on the head.  In an unnecessarily dramatic moment, he apparently
is shocked at what he sees, at what he has become.  But what has he
become?  A tough cop who beats the hell out of a guy who tried to kill
him?  Doesn't sound too unreasonable to me, considering the genre.  But
let's face it, any time Van Damme tries to be dramatic, he looks silly. 
So MAXIMUM RISK is a little different from most other action
films.  While watching it, I was surprised, and a little disappointed, in
the relative lack of pyrotechnics.  But watching some of these other
action films is sort of like experiencing a sugar rush; after the initial
excitement, there's not much left.  Although it's short on spectacle,
Lam's film leaves a better and more lasting impression, I think.  I'm more
impressed by it now than I was while watching it, and to me, that's a good
sign.  Go see MAXIMUM RISK, but don't expect a typical Hollywood action
movie; expect a sort of funky Hong Kong-Hollywood action movie. 
The Flying Inkpot Rating System:
 * Wait for the TV2 broadcast.
 ** A little creaky, but still better than staying at home with Gotcha!
 *** Pretty good, bring a friend.
 **** Amazing, potent stuff.
 ***** Perfection. See it twice.
 Dr T. White teaches Film at the English Language and Literature Department 
of the National University of Singapore, but we don't hold this against him.


Title
Review for That Thing You Do! (1996)
THAT THING YOU DO, Tom Hanks' first writing and directing effort as
well as his ticket into the Hollywood realm of Actor-Directors, is a
sunny, soul-less psuedo-look at a one-hit band from smallsville and
their meteoric rise to fame.
In Erie, PA., a garage band lead by vocalist and songwriter Jimmy
(Jonathon Schaech) enter and win a local talent contest. This is
entirely due to sit-in drummer Guy (Tom Everett Scott), who joins at
the last minute when their regular drummer breaks his arm, and their
original, catchy ditty that is also the film's title song, "That Thing
You Do!" An appliance salesman at his father's store, Guy digs jazz
rhythms rather than the monotonous, mindless time-keeping that the
three-chord band requires. He increases the song's tempo at the last
minute, and the faster speed energizes the tune enough to get the whole
dancefloor shaking and, erm, twisting, I guess.
The win lands the band a gig at a nearby pizza restaurant near the
airport, and, like all airport restaruant gigs, this obviously leads to
Bigger Things. They make a record for fun, play more gigs, and sign
with a otherwise tacky agent who manage to get the local radio station
to play their song.
*This* then leads to their meeting with a Big-Time Play-Tone Records
agent, played by Tom Hanks, Mr White. White is kind of like those
slick, snakey agents that all successful entertainers in TV-Movies have
to meet and lose their careers to before they learn to value The
Important Things In Life. Once he signs them with Play-Tone, he starts
moulding them. He dresses them all in matching suits ("You look good in
gold, have I told you that? Very good") but develops their individual
"trademarks" (Guy gets a pair of sunglasses), changes their name to the
easier-understood "Wonders" and puts limits on the type of songs they
write.
Meanwhile, they've joined the Play-Tone state-fair tour, with groupie
girlfriend Faye (Liv Tyler) coming along as their costume mistress,
their single is soaring up the billboard charts, and each performance
is increasingly mobbed by the hordes of screaming teenage women that
I've only seen in black and white on Beatles' documentaries.  The
Wonders' popularity eventually leads to the ultimate big-step: their
national debut in a television broadcast.
It's at this point that things, which are  already fraying at the
seams, fall completely apart. Lead singer Jimmy, already prone to
throwing his increasingly esoteric and artistic temper about, abruptly
severs his relationship with the gorgeous Faye (a sure sign that he's
mad) and finally quits the band. Lenny, the most easy-going of the
four, takes off for Vegas and doesn't come back, and the last band
member runs off with newly-found Marine friends to Disneyland. Guy is
left alone in the first "real" recording studio he's ever been in on
the day of taping their new song.
Of course it doesn't end that way. In the same breezy vein that has
navigated the narrative from having The One-ders in their tacky
small-town environment to becoming The Wonders in their tacky big-time
glitzy showbusiness outfits, Guy ends up meeting Del Paxton, a jazz
soloist whom he revers, and makes a studio recording with him. Well
sure, that's what all drummers from Beatles-imitation bands long to
do.
Structurally, THAT THING YOU DO is a string of well-timed punchlines set
to sixties' musical drivel and a couple of more sophisticated riffs.
It's hard to believe that drummer Guy is good enough to replicate
professional jazz solo recordings and jam intelligently with his jazz
idol Del Paxton (Bill Cobbs), yet tolerates and enjoys his mundane
participation in The Wonders' success. Nor is it easy to believe that
the two Wonders bassists, whom Hanks takes pains to point out as finding
the song's basic chords difficult to follow when Guy picks up the tempo
at the contest, easily tread smooth, complicated basslines in the many
variations of the song that follow as The Wonders develop. 
As though to qualify the story's chosen hero, Guy, Hanks has made him a
jazz-lover, someone who goes on to higher musical things once the pop
fantasy diversion is done with. For heavens' sake, we are actually told
that he eventually founds and teaches jazz composition at a music
school. 
Like this outcome, nothing else in the film really makes sense.
Characters enter, and leave, and situations occur without any real
motivation, and the one serious scene in the film where Faye confronts
Jimmy is fraught with maudlin nonsense that undercuts her previously
likeable, sharp yet easy-going character. In the end, there's nothing to
care about in THAT THING YOU DO! because nothing bad, or good, has
actually happened. Like the title song, THAT THING YOU DO! is a shallow
briefing on the so-called lives of teenage pop stars that doesn't bother
with the heavy stuff, and disposes of them in the fastest possible way. 
Still, I guess there are many reasons to like THAT THING YOU DO! Liv
Tyler, who seems to be spreading a little, is probably one of them, and
the catchy, guiless title song is another. I saw this film more than a
week ago and the tune is *still* spinning around in my head. Another
plus is the sheer casualness of everything: like the guiless,
self-contained theme song That Thing You Do! everything in the film is
mostly light-hearted dissin'. No Francis Ford Cuppola (WHEN PEGGY SUE
GOT MARRIED) or Oliver Stone-type angst for Hanks. This movie has got to
sing!
I think this film is worth $7, especially for those who want a little
more believability than local film ARMY DAZE (and much higher production
values), are sick of cop-slash-robber movies with flat jokes like
BULLETPROOF, and aren't all that into the "real-life" suspense of
RANSOM. THAT THING YOU DO! is a happy, happy film.
The Flying Inkpot Rating System:
 * Wait for the TV2 broadcast. 
 ** A little creaky, but still better than staying at home with Gotcha! 
 *** Pretty good, bring a friend. 
 **** Amazing, potent stuff. 
 ***** Perfection. See it twice.
Rebecca">href="mailto:rebecca@cyberway.com.sg">Rebecca Wan is a full-time
turnip at the famed Jardin Des Vertes.


Title
Review for Different for Girls (1996)
BE WARNED.. BRIT LOVE STORY IN THE OFFING.
     Effeminate, mild-mannered Karl is about to take a beatng from
a bunch of ruffians at school as he bathes himself under a shower,
his genitals tucked between his legs in the manner of a posing 
transvestite.  He is only just saved by Prentice, who appears in
all respects barring his protective attitude towards Karl to be your
average street-wise punk-in-the-making.  The ensuing scene ends up
with both boys being ridiculed and then unfairly expelled from the
school. They do not see each other for another eighteen yeas.      
     In that time, Prentice has matured into a somewhat loveable, if
brash and bull-heaed goon who screws up his jobs and relationships
while gamely clinging onto perennial adolescence via lether jackets,
motorcycles and punk rock music.  Karl, on the other hand, has grown 
up to become Kim, a drabby, insecure woman who works as a verse writer
for a greeting card company.  Chance brings the two together, and love,
such as will inevitably blossom in your quirky British romantic comedy, 
is what this skewed little story is largely about.    
     If at this point you think you're going to get any cheap laughs 
with that gender-bending theme (see THE BIRDCAGE, TO WONG FOO..., 
PRISCILLA QUEEN OF THE DESERT), you can just go home and brood on
your own maladjusted sexuality you low-life deadbeat. Kim is a 
post-operative transsexual, thank you very much... a new-born woman 
for all purposes, with confusions and sensitivities that deserve 
treatment with a touch of delicacy.  
     Personally, give me those cheap laughs any day.  I'd rather 
enjoy obvious camp than endure the shallow exploration of a soft-
hearted transsexual love story.  DIFFERENT FOR GIRLS comes up with a
promising enough proposition, but does nothing that surpasses the
merely workmanlike with it.  By refusing to make the audience 
really uncomfortable with the notion of Kim and Prentice's relation-
ship, or at the very least feel uncomfortable for them (Prentice for
example, doesn't seem to give hiself all that much grief when he
becomes attracted to Kim despite being a fight-picking, beer-drinking,
macho kind of guy, and Kim, for all her insecurities and fears is always
saved any truly disturbing victimisation in the film), and instead
drawing them into a basically wimpy love story, the film manages to
lobotomise itself.  
     Lightweight comedy as it's doomed to be, it could've still have
hacked it with the requisitive endearing couple.  But this doesn't
either, since even Mrs Doubtfire is sexier than Steven Mackintosh's Kim
Foyle, and as either sex, he's just plainly a simpering wanker nobody
should like.  Prentice does though, and that's never explained.  But
then Rupert Graves gives us so heroic performance as Prentice, the guy who 
never grew up (and if there is a BAFTA prize for Most Convincing 
Portrayal of a Rabid Fan at a Buzzcocks' Concert, he should win that 
too) that I guess there's no reason to explain why he's so screwed up.
     If oddly enough you grow to like this show, you'll be wanting
your happy ending, and the film won't fail you there either.  Snide 
underling at Kim's office gets her come-uppance.  Misogynistic police 
officer who beats up Prentice gets his come-uppance.  The couple 
prevail against a disagreeable society and come together in Kim's
apartment.  Kim's sister and her impotent sarge-type husband kiss and
make up after a tiff (TV movie sub-plot with incidental juxtaposition).  
And best of all, Kim sheds her insecurities and learns how to ride
the motorcycle and wear leathers, making Prentice ride pilion.  Awwww.
Terrific closure.  Happy ending.  But just what is it that's differnt
for girls anyway?  If you figure that one out, let me know.  
The Flying Inkpot Rating System:
 * Wait for the TV2 broadcast. 
 ** A little creaky, but still better than staying at home with Gotcha! 
 *** Pretty good, bring a friend. 
 **** Amazing, potent stuff. 
 ***** Perfection. See it twice.

Title
Review for Trainspotting (1996)
Directed by: Danny Boyle
Produced by: Channel Four Films (aka Film Four International) / Figment
Films/ PolyGram / The Noel Gay Motion Picture Company 
Runtime: About 93 minutes 
Cast: Ewan McGregor (Mark Renton), Ewen Bremner (Spud Murphy), Jonny Lee
Miller (Sick Boy), Kevin McKidd (Tommy)
Rating: ***1/2 out of *****
Whew. This film oozes energy, the kind of breakneck, no-
holds-barred, in-your-face risk-taking filmmaking that is seldom seen
on screen these days. Like the marginal, motley bunch of
post-apocalyptic youths director Danny Boyle tries to depict,
TRAINSPOTTING veers on the edge of utter mayhem but ultimately
retains its footing and control. The result: a movie that is a
delightful example of how the medium is the message.
The message: a bunch of losers with loser names, Mark Renton (Ewan
McGregor), Spud (Ewan Bremner), Sick Boy (Jonny Lee
Miller), Tommy (Kevin McKidd), and Begbie (Robert Carlyle). Bored,
aimless
and restless, their routine consists of getting drunk at the local pub,
grooving to techno or glam-rock at the local disco and getting shots up
the arm at the local den and procuring cash through a variety of
methods, some ingenious, others plainly dumb and desperate. Not part of
the daily dose if obtained, sex is a bonus.
You can find these characters as they are, foul-mouthed, dirty,
pathetic, ugly perhaps but definitely interesting, in Irvin Welsh's cult
novel of the same name. What makes the film a completely different
experience is how director Boyle uses every tool at his disposal to make
the filmic medium synchronous with the message.
One of the first things you'll notice is how the camera seems to dart
around restlessly. It'll truck into a character's pimple, just as soon
as
it will dolly out to an establishing shot. Distracted and curious, it'll
maintain a character's eye-level or drop right to the ground to show the
doped-out-eye-view. You'll even find characters peering into the camera,
their faces smeared across the wide-angle lens. This film camera is just
another one of the guys.
Tiptoeing that indistinguishable line between fantasy and reality,
Boyle employs a healthy dose of surrealism to get the message across.
Bored kids daydream and bored kids deprived of a heroin fix have
nightmares. I don't want to give too much away, but if you cross Chuckie
from CHILD'S PLAY with some of the wacky fantasies in HEAVENLY
CREATURES, you might have an idea just how fun or pants-wetting scary
the alternate state of consciouness can be. That said, this film
has a good share of drugs - consumed, vomitted, defecated, pissed off,
exchanged, bought, sold, injected, smuggled, enjoyed and regretted. If
that isn't your cup of tea, nobody forced you to see the film. Stay at
home and rent UP CLOSE AND PERSONAL.
And what's a buzz without tunes. From Pulp to Iggy Pop (yes, he's
still alive), the aural landscape is as engaging as the visual energy
permeating the film. Good and bad vibrations tangle like the conflicting
desires and values of the message. Every once in a while, a film comes
along with the kind of energetic filmmaking that matches the intensity
of its characters it hopes to depict. Trainspotting is that shooting
star that burns across a sky littered with static constellations. 
Dom is a part-time filmmaker who graduated from Northwestern
University's Radio/TV/Film programme not too long ago. He has laboured
on various music videos and short films in and around campus and
Chicago. NOWHERE TOWN, a 26min short film that he shot, co-directed and
co-produced recently scooped up the grand jury prize at the Charleston
International Film Festival for best student production. He is currently
finishing a couple of small projects. With his minute amounts of leisure
time, dom does Nell impersonations. 


Title
Review for Chung fung dui ji no foh gaai tau (1996)
Action movies seem generally to have earned the epithet, "What plot?"
While one bemoans the departure from a strong story line, the action
movie continues to survive as long as kicks and punches and bombs and
bullets get more sophisticated to satiate the public's hunger. But to
what end?
EU STRIKE FORCE (better known as "BIG BULLET" in Hong Kong Cinemas)
tries to be impressive in the area of heart-stopping action as well as
plot. Sadly, both areas lose steam after 45 minutes into the movie. Once
the plot becomes clearer and motives are established, there is nothing
much to look forward to. This is forgivable if the action makes up for
it. However, spoilt by the glut of Hollywood and the Jackie Chans of
Hong Kong, one can't help but feel disappointed in this case.
Lau Ching-wan plays Sergeant Bill Zhu, a hot-tempered but dedicated
crime-fighter. He assaults a superior officer Inspector Guan for Guan's
misinformation leading to casualties of his colleagues, but suffers a
disciplinary penalty for the offence and is transferred to the Emergency
Unit (EU). Despite the blow, Bill is encouraged by superior and friend,
Yang (Ng Chun-yu) to work hard to face his new duties. In the
background, an international crime warlord, "Professor" (Yu Rong-quang)
creates havoc after a successful jailbreak. Subsequently, Yang gets
killed while pursuing the "Professor."
Heartbroken at the loss of his close friend, and fuelled by the need to
stop "Professor," Bill goes all out to investigate the case. However, he
is limited by his appointment as Team Leader in the EU. Without consent
from his superiors, Bill manages to win over his team mates and together
they attempt to stop "Professor."
The gripping scenes include power-packed shoot-outs and bomb sequences
along the streets. The car chasing scenes appear promising in the
beginning but begin to look typical by the fourth one or so. There are
also one or two borrowed ideas. One may be reminded of DEMOLITION MAN
when a severed hand is used to open a safe guarded by a palm-reading
device. And while Tom Cruise fights his nemesis on top of a speeding
train, Lau fights "Professor" on top of a plane speeding along the
runway.
Even if the action may not have been thoroughly sustained throughout the
movie, there are endearing moments. Lau's portrayal of the frustrated
cop within imposed limits is compelling. One is quickly impressed with
his keen deductive mind. Lau's character is challenged by straightlaced
team member Jeff (Jordan Chan Siu-chun). Chan's first dramatic role is
that of the potential novice uncomfortable with Lau's unorthodox
methods. Both characters complement each other, working out the tension
between them.
The sub-plots amount to trivialities except for the relationship between
Jeff and his brother, a cop turned bad. Their reunion at the end makes a
better cushioning effect than the little happy endings provided by the
other team mates who celebrate their success with their loved ones. The
resolution on the whole seems too easy, too typical of the countless of
action movies. What is more of a sell-out is perhaps Lau's character,
the lone man at the beginning and the lone man at the end. Everybody is
celebrating with someone except him. Another dimension of his character
could have been explored but an overall feel good factor was opted for
instead.
Despite unspectacular stunts and easy resolutions, the movie doesn't
sink into an abyss. In the beginning it is a vehicle for Lau's acting
but ensemble acting soon takes over in typical Hong Kong style, making
EU STRIKE FORCE rather enjoyable.
Sherrie Lee collects leather trinkets and secretly wishes that
bellbottoms will become fasionable again.


Title
Review for Ransom (1996)
Director : Ron Howard
Screenplay: Cyril Hume (story), Alexander Ignon, Richard Maibaum
(story), Richard Price.
Produced by:  Touchstone Pictures
Running Time: 120 mins 
Cast: Mel Gibson (Tom Mullen), Rene Russo (Kate Mullen), Gary
Sinise         (Jimmy Shaker), Delroy Lindo (Agent Lonnie Hawkins), Lili
Taylor         (Maris Connor)
Rating: **1/2 out of *****
In RANSOM, Mel Gibson and Rene Russo lose their son to a handful of
grungy kidnappers in Central Park and spend the rest of the movie
trying to get him back.
Gibson plays Tom Mullen, a Self-Made Airline Millionaire who's a bit
of a publicity hound, and Rene Russo, who is possibly the only
Hollywood actress capable of smouldering with a huge black bruise on
her temple, is his wife, Kate. While attending a Junior Science
competition in the park, junior Mullen (played by Nick Nolte's real
life son, Brawley) himself disappears and not much later, the Mullen
parents receive a ransom voice message, with a digitized film image
of their son taped and handcuffed, through email.
That's about the coolest and most interesting part of the film, other
than a nice bit at the end involving a lot of cut glass sticking out
of the kidnapper's throat in a police showdown. Director Ron Howard
takes us through the movements of the kidnapping with a good sense of
pace, throwing in a number of nice suspenseful moments, and even
introduces a Plot Twist that I suppose would be exciting if I (and
probably you too) didn't already know was going to happen from
watching the million trailers that have been running in entertainment
previews and the theatres.
Mullen sets out intending to pay the $2 million-dollar ransom
demanded, but a botched exchange situation (mostly due to the
over-eager FBI swat team that always botches things up in films like
these) soon convinces him that the kidnappers actually don't intend
to return his son at all. In a dramatic turn of events, he reverses
his decision and makes use of the one weapon that has served him well
in previous battles--publicity--to combat the kidnappers. Actually
it's only just that one Head Kidnapper who keeps in contact with
Mullen, and with whom Mullen develops an intensely personal,
adversarial relationship.
Eventually, though, things take the expected turn of events. If you
don't believe me, ask yourself these questions and see if you don't
think you already know the answers: will the Mullen son return safely
to the fold? Are the bad guys ultimately made to Pay For Their
Crimes? Will Ron Howard continue to make moving, powerfully emotional
human drama-type of films that make for Gripping Box Office
Successes?
RANSOM is a pretty OK film for S$7, mostly because director Ron
Howard does a good job of keeping the suspense up and there are some
genuinely likable bits in it. There's good dramatic support from both
the kidnapper and FBI-agent posses (played by Delroy Lindo, Lili
Taylor, Gary Sinise, Liev Schreiber, Evan Handler and Donnie
Wahlberg) that keep vigil on either side throughout the entire ordeal
(although there really isn't that much of a difference between either
side; as it turns out, they're all Basically Good People except for
the Evil Brains of the Outfit).  There are also number of nice
cinematographic points made by photographer Piotr Sobocinski, who
beautifully photographed RED.
In the end, though, RANSOM is just boring. The kind of film that
delivers everything it's supposed to, but makes you wonder why it
chose to be that kind of film in the first place. Mel Gibson, whose
face is even blander than Duncan Watt's on a bad day, dutifully runs
the gamut of emotions from determined to almost deranged parent, and
Rene Russo is charming as ever in her frantic, fragile disarray.
Still, watch this in the theatres only if you're into a jazzed-up,
fancifully rendered "Code Red" with production values beyond the
dreams of lowly TCS producers. Otherwise, turn up Jonathan Lim and
wait for the LD to come out.
Rebecca Wan enjoys "Code Red" because it is just like real life, only on
TV. She once kidnapped a relative's top but had to give it back almost
at once when a drastic cutting off of allowance was threatened. All in
all, it wasn't so different from RANSOM.


Title
Review for Pillow Book, The (1996)
Directed by: Peter Greenaway
Written by: Peter Greenaway
Cast: Vivian Wu (Nagiko), Ewan McGregor (Jerome), Yoshi Oida (The
Publisher), Ken Ogata (The Father),. Judy Ongg (The Mother), Hideko
Yoshida (TheAunt/The Maid). 
Produced by : Kasander & Wigman Prods./Alpha Films/Woodline Films
in association with Channel Four Films, Studio Canal Plus, DeLux Prods
Rating : *****
Theatres: Shaw
(Includes English, Japanese, Mandarin and Cantonese dialogue)
The First Book - The Book Of The Uninitiated
"It's not a film, it's an ... experience," said my friend, a confessed
Greenaway devotee. So, if you have never had the benefit of the
experience before, welcome to the weird and wonderful world of Peter
Greenaway.  A world of strange obsessions, of bodies nude and quartered,
of frames within frames and words within pictures.  See the amazing
tableaux-fashioned scenes, with many wondrous things all happening at
once. Hear the sounds of crowds, Japanese chants and French songs,
airplanes roaring and even the soundtrack fast forwarding.  Thrill to
the haunting beginning and the bravura ending.
But what's it all about, sir?  "I have found that there are but two
things in life which are dependable: the delights of flesh and the
delights of literature." This quote from the film is itself a quote from
the Pillow Book of Sei Shonagon, and these then are the twin obsessions
of Greenaway's film.  The pleasures of Body and Text are woven together
in the mind of Nagiko (Vivian Wu), a modern Japanese woman fixated with
the writing of words on skin. As a child, her birthday is celebrated
with a face-painting ritual by her father, marking Gods creation of
human beings from clay figures by writing on them.  As an adult, she
seeks out lovers who will write over her body, exchanging sex for
calligraphy.  And then there is a hateful marriage, a passionate love
with a translator (Ewan McGregor) , a revenge, and the writing of a
series of  eleven "Books" on bodies, which are simultaneously an act of
love and revenge.
Scratching your head, perhaps? And yet, everything in THE PILLOWBOOK
proceeds according to an inner logic as inexorable as astrology.  Submit
to its logic, and everything makes perfect sense. Enter a hall of
mirrors:  the father exchanges sex for calligraphy just as the daughter
does;  a burning of books marks Nagikos departure from Japan just as a
second fire marks her return.  Offhand details all comment obliquely on
the films themes: like the scribbling of a car license plate on one
hand, or the writing out of a cheque on another.
Naturally the film submits also to the logic of the larger Text that
is Greenaway's body of work.  Fans will detect many links with his other
films:  the fascination with multiple foreign languages as in THE FALLS,
the dissection of the body as in THE COOK, THE THIEF, HIS WIFE AND HIS
LOVER, sex as bargain and exchange as in THE DRAUGHTSMANS CONTRACT, 
the use of numbers, lists and patterns as in so many of his films. Most
obviously, the PILLOW BOOK is a continuation of the obsessions of
PROPSPEROS BOOKS, with its similar graphomania, lavish visuals, naked
bodies and streams of words layered thick on the screen.  You can see
whole university courses in the making even as you watch.
The Fifth Book - The Book of the East (Far)
One thing that's new to the Greenaway canon is the PILLOW BOOK's
focus on the Orient.  But in hindsight, it's easy to think of Japan as
an obvious source of Greenaway fascinations: after all, this is a
culture that produced ritual suicide, "comfort" houses, Tetsuo and
un-useless inventions.  The Timeout film guide once described THE
DRAUGHTSMAN'S CONTRACT as "a better exploration of an alien world than
most science fiction films," and to me, the Japanese world seems as
worthy of Greenaway's space probe as any.
There's a lot of it in this film.  Apparently, at Cannes, an American
journalist asked Greenaway why The Pillow Book is so full of naked men.
His response: "Trust you, as an American, to ask such an absurd
question!".
There is indeed a loud and very silly fat American in this film. He
is the Book of the Exhibitionist, and he is naked too, of course.
The Seventh Book - The Book of the Trainspotting Allusion
Ewan Mcgregor dies in a wonderfully melodramatic ritual drug overdose.
The Eighth Book - The Book of Conclusions
A list of splendid reasons to watch THE PILLOW BOOK: for its
beautiful images; for its power to send eyes, ears and brain spinning;
for its moments of emotional warmth (more frequent than some of
Greenaway's other films); because it is extravagantly pretentious and
unashamedly arty; because it is awesome, rich and strange.
The Flying Inkpot Rating System:
 * Wait for the TV2 broadcast. 
 ** A little creaky, but still better than staying at home with Gotcha! 
 *** Pretty good, bring a friend. 
 **** Amazing, potent stuff. 
 ***** Perfection. See it twice.
Julian">href="mailto:clem_lim@pacific.net.sg">Julian Lim is a bonsai
waterer in training.


Title
Review for Tian ya hai jiao (1996)
Directed by: Lee Chi-Ngai
Written by: Lee Chi-Ngai 
Cast: Kelly Chan Wai-Lum (Chai Lam), Takeshi Kaneshiro (Mr. Worm)
Michael Wong (Ted), Cheung Tat-Ming (Ming), Jordan Chan Siu-Chun (cameo),
Josie Ho Chiu-Yee, Hilary Tsui Ho-Ying, Maria Codero, Moses Chan Ho, Henry
Fong Ping, Ma Chun-Wai, Yim Lei-Ming
Produced by : UFO / Golden Harvest
Rating : ***
Run Time: Approx. 120 Minutes
Watching LOST AND FOUND, I was struck by a sense of deja-vu. LOST AND
FOUND feels like a Taiwanese tearjerker caught on the Chunking Express,
only without the latter's edginess. This was partly because of the
film's female protagonist, songbird Kelly Chen , who is a dead ringer
for 70s soap queen Lin Chin Hsia. And the male lead, Aniki Jin, also
acted in the latter film.
The opening paean establishes the subdued, melancholy, slightly
dissipated tone of the film as the camera pans along the dirty streets
and sad faces of the inhabitants to convey the desolation and alienation
of modern life.
Predictably, but engagingly so, the film brightens up with the
appearance of Cheng (Aniki Jin), who bursts upon the screen in a furore
of energy, rummaging through the dustbin for lost wallets and giving
directions on his handphone simultaneously. The loss of his handphone
provides the opportunity for the two protagonists to meet. Kelly
discovers that Cheng specializes in finding lost things, his motto
being "nothing is lost forever." A note of existential angst creeps in
when Kelly asks Cheng to help herfind her "hope."
Cheng then shows his perceptiveness when he asks Kelly whether hope is a
thing or a person. In a series of flashbacks, we are shown Kelly's
recent history from a first-person point of view. Kelly is the daughter
of the second wife of a self-made shipping 
magnate with twelve children. A new graduate from an overseas
university, she is determined to prove herself not only in her father's
firm, but to her father, with whom she has an uneasy love-hate
relationship. Being equally unable to articulate their fee
lings, their stubborn nature drives them to set up an employment
interview for Kelly at the family film. Shockingly, Kelly takes this
public opportunity to break the news of her leukaemia to her father.
Running from her imminent death, and her dysfunctional father-daughter
relationship, Kelly meets Ted, a sailor (Michael Wong) who comes from a
barren rock in the North Sea off the coast of Scotland. It's a place
the natives call "the End of the World," where everybody has left, and
only returns to be buried. In her wretched state, Kelly responds to the
doomed gloominess of the place, and, briefly, to Ted. When her
treatment leaves her too depressed, she decides to give up hope and
face death as romanticism. But Ted has disappeared.
The rest of the plot is predictably straightforward. She hires Cheng to
find Ted for her, and succeeds after an odyssey through the labyrinth
of the city. Ted is about to leave for his grandfather's funeral, but
he invites Kelly to join him once his grandfather's ashes are ready to
be taken home to the island.
Meanwhile, Kelly volunteers to help Cheng. Searching for things ranging
from the most trivial to the most bizarre, Kelly is fuelled by Cheng's
zest for life and upbeat optimism in the face of impossible odds. She
realizes that Cheng is essentially a lonely man whose job is an excuse
to reach out to people by helping them. In between searching for wild
ducks, and accepting the sobering proximity of death, Kelly falls for
Cheng. However,  she decides to leave him in order to spare him the
heartbreak of eventually losing her to the illness, and leaves for
Scotland. Will Kelly find true love? Will they find each other again?
Unfortunately for my patience, the forgone conclusion was dragged out by
Kelly's Scottish sojurn.
The leitmotif behind the film is the constant search for identity. in a
metaphorical vein, Cheng's attempts to define Kelly turn out to be wrong
because only she can decide who she is. Cheng is insistent upon the
correct term of address, that his name is "The Worm," not "Mr Worm" or
"Mr The." Later, in Scotland, we see that Ted's venture into traditional
highland dress is totally commercial, a tourist side-show. Unfortunately
the development of this motif isn't consistent. The ending, where Kelly
is identified through her place in the family she has left, seems to be
a compromise. Instead of an individual decision, social, monetary and
familial constraints have together bound her to an identity she is only
able to escape by virtue of her death.
I enjoyed the film's obligatory singing scene, though it was rather
sentimental. Both Kelly's and Aniki's singing skills were adequately
showcased, and the mood was joyously retro, especially the dancing scene
-- hence very modern. The soundtrack, on the whole, was engaging,
especially the traditional "Griogal Cridhe" in the Scottish scenes. At
some parts, however, I was uncomfortably reminded of SIA and British
Airways advertisements, and I felt that the film was unrealistic for not
only glorifying foreign lands but also in the saving grace of humnan
relationships.
In the end, LOST AND FOUND didn't make me cry, but some time during the
screening, I found myself a little more hopeful about relationships
again.
The Flying Inkpot Rating System:
 * Wait for the TV2 broadcast. 
 ** A little creaky, but still better than staying at home with Gotcha! 
 *** Pretty good, bring a friend. 
 **** Amazing, potent stuff. 
 ***** Perfection. See it twice.
 _____________________________________________________
This movie review was written for THE FLYING INKPOT:  an arts and
entertainment magazine from Singapore. For reviews of the latest films,
concerts, album releases, books and plays in Singapore, swing by
http://webvisions.com/inkpot

Title
Review for Dragonheart (1996)
Directed by : Rob Cohen
Produced by : Universal Pictures 
Written by : Patrick Read Johnson & Charles Edward Pogue 
Cast :Dennis Quaid (Bowen), David Thewlis (Einon), Pete Postlethwaite
(Gilbert), Dina Meyer (Kara), Sean Connery (Draco) 
Rating : **1/2 out of ***** 
Theatres : Golden Village 
BEST DRAGON ON SCREEN SINCE PUFF THE MAGIC DRAGON
Post-Arthurian England: dragons and men share the land as the only
sentient beings around. One thing though, dragons were much smarter,
mystical and their lifespan allows them to outlive generations of human
civilisation. Not since the Disney outing way back in the early 80's,
DRAGONSLAYER, has any studio dared to venture into similar territory.
Now, with the advent of technology that can achieve near perfect
integration of computer graphics with reality, DRAGONHEART was
conceived. With Lucasfilms ILM, creating the special effects for the
film, there is no doubt that audiences will be duly impressed with their
work. While the effects do bite.....the film on whole doesn't.
Bowen (Quaid), a knight which follows the teachings of the Old Code, has
the duty to train the King's son, Einon (Thewlis). Knowing his father's
tyrannical and brutal rule, Bowen is determined to train Einon by the
teachings which he believed in, to ensure that when Einon takes the
throne, he will be a much better ruler than his father. When Einon sees
his father being outnumbered in one of his attacks on the village, he
runs to his aid, only to see him killed by the angered villagers. In a
freak accident, he was stabbed in the heart. Bowen, his caring mentor,
rushes him back to the castle. When all hope of saving Einon was lost,
the Queen (Julie Christie) begs for the help of a dragon, believing in
their magical powers of healing. The Dragon however, made Einon take an
oath that he will be a better ruler and will always abide to the Old
Code and saved
his life.
However, the oath was not to be. Einon went on to become an even more
ruthless ruler than his father. Disappointed in himself, Bowen believes
that the dragon's magic had destroyed all the good within Einon and vows
to destroy it. He becomes a dragonslayer, killing dragons in return for
gold, totally living against the teachings he was brought up to believe
in. All that changed when he meets up with Draco (voice of Connery), the
last surviving dragon in the land. Realising that he cannot make more
gold by killing the last dragon, he befriends it and together,  they
form an acting duo, cheating villages of their gold. 
In an odd twist of fate, they stumble upon Kara (Meyer) who is
determined to avenge her father's brutal murder and free the land of
Einon's tyrannical rule. And the rest, well....the rest is a fairy tale.
The computer-animated dragon, needless to say, is spectacular and very
lifelike, coming from the same creative team behind CASPER and TWISTER. 
Connery's voice accentuated its strength and wisdom. Draco is the star
of this  film. However, the high ratio of investment on Draco takes its
toll on the rest of the film. The action sequences without Draco seemed
bland and unspectacular,  such as the many clashes featured in this
film. Perhaps the filmmakers wanted the film to appeal to as wide an
audience as possible, but whatever they did,  they tried too hard. 
On a positive note, this film is safe for children: though many deaths
are featured, gore and blood stains were kept to a minimum, which may
prove a general letdown to action thirsty audiences today.
Still, every fairy tale has a good message to it and DRAGONHEART does
not disappoint in this department. Kids should love it, adults should be
delighted with Draco's antics. Just don't expect a fairy-tale version of
BRAVEHEART and you'll do  just fine. Great fans of SFX may want to check
this one out.


Title
Review for One Fine Day (1996)
Director: Michael Hoffman Screenplay: Terrel Seltzer and Ellen Simon
Producer:Via Rosa Productions / Fox 2000 Pictures
Running Time: Approx. 108 minutes.
Cast: Michelle Pfeiffer, George Clooney, Mae Whitman, Alex Linz
Rating: ***1/2 out of *****
OK, I admit I had a bad attitude about this film from the start. A romantic
comedy about the trials and tribulations of single working parents? With a
couple of incredibly cute kids thrown in for good measure? Yuck.
But it's not really too bad. It has a lot working against it, for me at
least. In addition to the above, it is typical of a lot of recent movies
in that it is really just a glorified made-for-TV movie, but longer and
with bigger stars, and you have to pay to see it. It does win you over,
though, even if it is painfully predictable.
Just think about it: Two single parents, with their cute kids, are
thrown together due to a missed field trip. Through a day of near
disasters, they cont inually meet, get in one another's way, cause
trouble for one another, and generally insult one another at every
opportunity. In fact, they hate each other so much that we know that
they are, or soon will be, in love. The only people who hate each other
more than lovers are married couples.
So this film is predictable, just as the screwball comedies of the
classical Hollywood cinema were predictable (and the screwball genre is
obviously Hoffman's model for this film). Will they get fired from their
yuppie jobs? Will they make the big soccer game that is so important to
their kids? Will Pfeiffer realize what a jerk her ex-husband, a drummer
for Bruce Springsteen, really is (aren't they all?)? Will they finally
kiss? Well, what do you expect?
But there is a certain amount of satisfaction in having our expectations
fulfilled, especially when it is done with as much humour, along with a
lack of sticky sentimentality, as it is in this film. Pfeiffer and
Clooney have a certain chemistry together that is surprisingly charming,
and the kids are neither shoved into the background nor allowed to steal
the show.
One word of caution, though. This film is being billed in some places as
a "family" movie. Don't let that stop you. However, I think most kids,
especially boys, would be pretty bored by this move. After all, nobody
gets killed and there are no explosions.
All in all, a good, non-offensive date movie.
The Flying Inkpot Rating System:
* Wait for the TV2 broadcast.
** A little creaky, but still better than staying at home with Gotcha!
*** Pretty good, bring a friend.
**** Amazing, potent stuff.
***** Perfection. See it twice.


Title
Review for Substitute, The (1996)
Director: Robert Mandel
Written by: Roy Frumkes Alan Ormsby Rocco Simonelli
Cast: Tom Berenger, Diane Venora, Ernie Hudson
Rating: ** out of *****
Run Time: Approx. 114 Minutes
The premise of this movie is, well, pretty far-fetched. Tom
Berenger plays Shale, a mercenary who is temporarily out of work
(those fools at the CIA have denied his existence just because he and his
buddies botched a job in Cuba). Fortunately, his girl friend (Diane Venora),
a teacher at Christopher Columbus High School in Miami, gets her knee cap
broken by a disgruntled student, creating a job opening for Shale as a
substitute teacher. Not telling his girl friend, who might object on
pedagogical grounds, he creates a number of fake higher degrees for himself
(from Yale, Harvard, Princeton, et al) and begins his tenure as a high
school teacher.
The students (junkies, drug dealers, gang members, sleazy sluts, ice-pick
wielders...you get the picture) don't really take to him right away, so he
hits one in the face with a can and breaks a few fingers. This gets their
attention to a certain extent, so he tells them the story of the Vietnam
War: "See, some homeboys from the North tried to muscle in on the turf of
the homeboys from the South." Oh yeah, now they can dig it; the problem is
just that nobody ever explained it properly before.
But wait! There are drugs being dealt in the school itself! And behind the
whole scheme, in cahoots with the head gang, the KOD (no, not "cod", but
"Knights of Destruction"...really!), is none other than...the upright,
ex-cop principal, played by the forgotten ghostbuster, Ernie Hudson! So
Shale does what any good teacher would do. He gets his buddies together,
they gather together a bunch of bazookas and other major weapons,
explosives, and cool stuff like that, and they have a big showdown against
the drug dealers and KOD at the high school.
OK, so the premise is not just far-fetched, it's downright dumb. If this
were a Hong Kong action comedy, we might just accept it, but it takes itself
far too seriously to be truly fun. Oh, it has its moments; how one can truly
hate a movie in which huge (really HUGE) amounts of cocaine are delivered in
school busses? And to be fair, it is almost never really boring, as the
action is interrupted by only short sequences of actual story.
But over all, this is pretty much a made-for-TV movie with more (and bigger)
explosions and more foul language. In fact, it reminded me of "Miami Vice"
without the production values, babes in skimpy bikinis, and pastels. If you
can sneak into the theater without paying, go for it. Otherwise, wait for
video.
The Flying Inkpot Rating System:
* Wait for the TV2 broadcast.
** A little creaky, but still better than staying at home with Gotcha!
*** Pretty good, bring a friend.
**** Amazing, potent stuff.
***** Perfection. See it twice.


Title
Review for Glimmer Man, The (1996)
I am a Steven Seagal fan. I only say this now because "Mufti Splenetik"
isn't my real name and because I probably need to explain why I went into
this film expecting great things.
Any proud Seagal fan worth his beans will tell you that the Seagal formula
is something you can depend on. Seagal films can always be counted on for
minimal dialogue, heaps of expendable baddies with extemely crunchable
bones (which we'll always hear when Seagal does his limb-twisting thing),
rarely a female co-lead in sight (unless it's a real-life model-wife who
hasn't worked since WEIRD SCIENCE) and, usually the worst possible titles
you can imagine. Not to mention very straightforward plots, generally
all-round bad dialogue and Mr Implacable Leather-Face himself in that same
black outfit he's been in since NICO doing his "my hands are sharp, nimble
knives" thing, Seagal the Stoic, Sir Petrified Ponytail, Duke of Dull.
In THE GLIMMER MAN, Seagal breaks out of this formula: he gets a *sidekick*,
attempts to banter, and puts on a new vest. He's also put on quite a lot of
weight. Small potatoes, you may say, a man should be able to accessorize
and banter if he wants to, but damnit, if it ain't broke, why fix it? (more
on this disappointed person's dashed expectations later).
As Jack Cole, Seagal is a homicide detective with a Questionable Past. While
he and his partner (played by Keenen Ivory Wayans) are investigating a
series of ritual killings, Cole himself becomes a suspect, especially when
a background check run by Campbell reveals practically nothing on Cole.
It turns out that Cole is a former trained government assassin (you just
can't trust these homicide detectives), someone whom victims used to catch
just a glimpse of in the jungle before he pounced on them, and hence, well,
you know, that "glimmer man" thing. An increasingly fishy homicide
investigation in the present soon leads to the gradual uncovering of a
larger, more threatening conspiracy that involves a crooked businessman
(Bob Gunton), Cole's former CIA boss (Brian Cox) and deals involving
chemical weapons.
THE GLIMMER MAN plot is pretty standard stuff, drawing (as with his other
films) elements from the hotter films of the year (eg, SE7EN). It's the
other changes that disappoint.
For example, although there's a fair amount of violence in this movie,
there's also the disastrous pairing of Seagal with Keenen Ivory Wayans,
probably the best known of the Wayans tribe (how many are there, exactly?)
from television's "In Living Colour." Wayans plays whiney straightman to
Seagal's bead-adorned and brocade-draped Cole, keeping up his "are you
crazy" part of the dialogue with wasted zest. As Campbell, Wayans confines
himself to bemoaning his new partner's eccentric habits, but the chemistry
between the two is minimal, and Seagal's wooden comebacks make for painful
watching.
A cook in UNDER SEIGE 2, Seagal is now a Buddhist who speaks Chinese and
wears prayer beads and intricate silk jackets over his normal black
ensemble. He chants, refuses to fight unless truly provoked and introduces
Campbell to powdered deer penis to cure his allergies. Again, a benign (if
trite) plot device except for the fact that these new character traits
require Seagal to speak more than usual. Heck, he has to deliver punchlines
and carry a steady conversation with someone other than himself for a large
part of the film. Is that a lot to ask of the Seague? Too much.
Seagal's best characteristic used to be that he knew his purpose in this
already complicated world of movies: to crunchily snap off bad guy
appendages, and to do it silently, and alone. Not for Seagal, the snappy
one-liners of Arnold and Stallone, nor the attempts to show that he can
act, much less think. No KINDERGARTEN COP, no OSCAR, just simple,
unadulterated deathblows. That's really how it must have started:
like-minded fans who knew what they wanted streamed in to watch The Seague
do his thing, knowing that never in the Seagal universe would they ever
have to see him do anything else. We trusted him. We got to know him. Now, 
betrayal.
I don't know if I can watch another Seagal movie without that little
niggling doubt that he's going to try to be funny again. I'll try, but it
won't be easy. If you haven't watched THE GLIMMER MAN yet, you might want
to wait for the video to come out. It's easier to just fast forward the
dialogue parts and linger on the action sequences. After all, if we can't
depend on our fantasies, what can we depend on?
The Flying Inkpot Rating System:
 * Wait for the TV2 broadcast.
 ** A little creaky, but still better than staying at home with Gotcha!
 *** Pretty good, bring a friend.
 **** Amazing, potent stuff.
 ***** Perfection. See it twice.
  
Mufti Spelenetik is still a Steven Seagal fan. Everybody makes mistakes once
in awhile.


Title
Review for Associate, The (1996)
Directed by: Donald Petrie
Written by: Jenaro Prieto (novel El Socio) Nick Thiel
Cast: Whoopi Goldberg (Laurel Ayres), Dianne Wiest ( Sally Doogan), Eli
Wallach (Fallon), Timothy Daly (Frank), Bebe Neuwirth (Camille Austin
Pendleton)
Produced by: Buena Vista Pictures / Hollywood Pictures / Interscope
Communications / PolyGram
Rating : ***
Run Time: 113 Minutes
For a movie that aims to dispel the prejudicial stereotypes of sexism, THE
ASSOCIATE may succeed in some aspects, but it ends up falling into a
patterned plot and perpetuating other forms of sexism.
What is the role of a woman in the ruthlessly competitive and
testorone-tilted world of Wall Street? She could be a secretary and get
called "sweetie," or she could do all the work and let her male partner take
all the credit. After all, if business deals are to be closed in strip bars,
a woman can hardly expect any respect. Perhaps she should get breast
enlargements. At the very least, she would then be able to get some
attention, proceeding then to sleep her way to the top. Through it all, she
must never show her temper, for it would surely be interpreted as
pre-menstrual syndrome. Such a starkly stereotupical but realistic portrait
of corporate culture is portrayed in THE ASSOCIATE.
It seems as if the only way a woman can break down the
barriers errected by the Wall Street Boys' Club is to
become a man, which is precisely what Whoopi Goldberg's character, Laurel
Ayres, does. As a financial analyst who fails to get the recognition she
deservesbecause of her gender and race, she creates and subsequently dons
the persona of the fictitious Robert Cutty. Using her intelligence and
business savvy behind the persona of this imaginary White, Caucasian
male,she achives exceptional success. her partner in crime is fellow
secretary Sally, played engagingly by two-time Academy Award winning Dianne
Wiest. However, hilarious fixes arise when Cutty's fabricated persona
becomes the target of the insatiable media, makes deals with Laurel's
devious competitor (portrayed with wicked gleefulness by Tim Daly), gets
subpoenaed for fraud, and even "fathers" a child.
Whoopi Goldberg's androgynous appeal, comic talent and intelligence lend
realism and humour to the character of Laurel. As an African-American woman
overcoming discrimination and beating the odds, we champion her cause and
what she represents. However, Goldberg's portrayal fails to illicit sympathy
and audience-identification. As with THE COLOR PURPLE, her steely edge and
street-smarts make her unbelievable as a marginalized and exploited figure.
Furthermore, even as it continues to be a ver real and pressing issue today,
the storline of Black Woman versus White Man seems cliched when dealth with
in comedy, especially since the possibility was raised back in the sixties
of God being a Black Woman. In addition, the disguise strategy recalls films
like MRS DOUBTFIRE and THE NUTTY PROFESSOR, and makes the plot's unfolding
highly predictable.
Finally, even as the movie shatters female stereotypes, it perpetuates male
ones. The mend o not develop beyond being cariacatures of the manipulative
businessman, the fumbling nerd genius and the sensitive new-age man. As such
there is an imbalance in the treatment of issues of prejudice. Directed by
Donald Petrie, known for such hit comedies as MYSTIC PIZZA and GRUMPY OLD
MEN, THE ASSOCIATE merely retells, albeit with the slightest dash of humour,
a well-known tale of sexism in today's society.
The Flying Inkpot Rating System:
* Wait for the TV2 broadcast.
** A little creaky, but still better than staying at home with Gotcha!
*** Pretty good, bring a friend.
**** Amazing, potent stuff.
***** Perfection. See it twice.


Title
Review for 2 Days in the Valley (1996)
Written by: John Herzfeld
Directed by: John Herzfeld
Produced by:  MGM (Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer) [aka MGM-UA] / 
                         Redemption / Rysher Entertainment
Cast:  Danny Aiello, Greg Cruttwell, Jeff Daniels, Teri Hatcher, 
          Glenne Headly, Peter Horton, Marsha Mason, Paul Mazursky,
          James Spader, Eric Stoltz, Louise Fletcher, Natasha Henstridge.
Runtime: About 107 minutes
Rating : ** out of *****
 There are movies that pose a question in its first five minutes
and spend the rest of the time trying to answer it. Then there are
movies that spend the whole time posing questions and try to answer it
all in the last five minutes. Writer-director John Herzfeld's Two days
in the valley falls into the latter category.
Weaving together a grabbag of seemingly unrelated characters,
Herzfeld's tries very hard to keep the audience guessing with a
Altmanesque series of parallel stories. Hitmen Lee (James Spader) and
his partner Dosmo (Danny Aiello) pop a guy in bed while leaving his
drugged wife Becky Fox (Teri Hatcher) lying next to him showing the
audience where on her behind she got nicely pricked. An understandeably
shocked Becky runs out of the house the next morning before hailing down
a couple of vice cops, (Jeff Daniels) and Wes (Eric Stoltz). A murder is
not vice territory, flirting with asian prostitues is, but Wes would
rather play inquisitive detective.
Meanwhile, washed-up director, Teddy (Paul Mazursky) is about to end his
life. But before he can do that, he must find a good home for his dog.
Enter nurse Audrey (Marsha Mason), who takes the dog and Teddy for a ride.
Stuffy art dealer, Allan Hopper (Greg Cruttwell) has kidney stones. While struggling about his fancy house, he switches between moaning in self-pity and dropping condescending hints about his loyal secretary's (Glenne Headly) plain appearance.
Don't be surprised if you find yourself asking more than once just
what the hell is going on. You might like that feeling of cluelessness. 
Herzfeld does answer all the questions in the course of time and pieces
it all rather neatly in the last five minutes.
The jigsaw puzzle assembled isn't stunning by any means though. The
characters lack the stature or moral complexity of Altman's real-life
heroes in Short Cuts, even though they are interesting and funny. Funny,
that is if you aren't comparing them to the likes of Tarantino's Pulp
chcaracters. The tie-up is tidy but nowhere near the squeaky clean
resolution of (director's name? guy who also did last seduction) Red Rock
West.
Two days isn't a bad movie but there isn't much else to it than the
screenplay novelty of the linkage of seemingly unrelated characters.
It'll keep you guessing alright but you won't remember the answers five
minutes after the credits.
The Flying Inkpot Rating System:
 * Wait for the TV2 broadcast. 
 ** A little creaky, but still better than staying at home with Gotcha! 
 *** Pretty good, bring a friend. 
 **** Amazing, potent stuff. 
 ***** Perfection. See it twice.

Title
Review for Emma (1996)
Directed by: Douglas McGrath
Written by: Douglas McGrath (novel by Jane Austen)
Cast: Gwyneth Paltrow (Emma Woodhouse),  Toni Collette  (Harriet
Smith),     Alan Cumming (Rev. Elton), Jeremy Northam (Mr. Knightley),
Ewan McGregor         (Frank Churchill), Greta Scacchi (Mrs. Weston),
Juliet Stevenson (Mrs. Elton), Polly Walker (II) (Jane Fairfax), Sophie
Thompson (Miss Bates)
Produced by : Haft Entertainment / Matchmaker Films / Miramax Films
Rating : ***
Run Time: Approx. 120 Minutes
"Clueless" Emma is Back With A Motley Cast of Fallible Characters One
Cannot Help But Like
In EMMA, yet another romantic comedy based on Jane Austen's satiric
novel, we are transported back to nineteenth-century provincial England.
however, we are never once allowed to delude ourselves into thinking
that we escape Austen's parodic pen, for self-delusion, gossip and
social inadaptablity continue to be relevant to our modern-day
sensibilities. No wonder Jane Austen is "Hollywood's Hottest Writer."
Austen's opening lines of her novel of the same name, 
could well be a description of actres Gwyneth Paltrow, who portrays the
delinquent Emma in the film, and this gives the role an added subtext.
Hailed as one of the most beguiling and talented actresses of her
generation, and continuing to lead a charmed life with Brad Pitt, she
fits perfectly into the role of the self-satisfied and presumptuous
Emma. As she weaves her match-making web and speaks her wry epigrams,
the smile she brandishes is often a shade too pleased with itself,
capturing the essence of a character whose comic flaws are self-delusion
and a desire to play God. Paltrow's combination of golden beauty, grace
and intelligence makes her quite literally shine in this role.
Unfortunately, delightful as her performance may be, her limited range
of expressions is unlikely to garner her any Oscars.
The object of Emma's blundering excursions is Harriet Smith, played by
Toni Collette, who played the lead role in MURIEL'S WEDDING. Collette
scarely looks the part of a naive seventeen-year-old, but her portrayal
convincingly captures Harriet's insecurity, self-doubt and desire for
approval. So influenced is she by Emma's opinions of her grandeur, her
marital sights rise from local farmer Robert Martin, a genteel farmer to
Mr Elton the parish priest, to Mr Knightley, an established member of
the gentry. The unweaving of Harriet's matrimonial web brings scene
after scene of humourous insight into human nature, and of the
difficulty of finding one's perfect match.
Emma herself is caught between the charming Frank Churchill (Ewan
McGregor) and Mr Knightley (Jeremy Northam), who is her special friend,
confidaante, and the gentleman who exudes a wisdom, understanding and
sensuality that Emma is blind to. The turning point in Emma's path to
self-discovery is perhaps the picnic scene where she mocks the endlessly
chattering but kind-hearted spinster, Miss Bates. 
The latter is portrayed sympathetically by Sophie Thompson (sister to
the famed Emma), who almost steals the show each time she appears,
managing to variously convey insecurity and pain through her comic
monologues. She forms part of an impressive cast of supporting actors,
which also includes Alan Cumming and Juliet Stevenson, who portray the
odiously pompous Eltons with a taunting gaiety that *dares* the viewer
to dislike them. As caricatures of snobbery, they are irrepressibly
funny.
This lively and entertaining adaptation marks the commendable
directorial debut of America writer Douglas McGrath, who also wrote the
screenplay. However, when compared with Amy Heckerling's script for
CLUELESS, which saw a radical change to a Beverly Hills setting and the
invention of a MTV vocabulary, this adaptation of "Emma" becomes too
safe, predicatable, and audience-friendly. It is a "sunny garden party,"
where you catch occasional glimpses of yourself that amuse, but do not
disturb. Ultimately, it is satire without bite, wit without derision,
critique without affront, and adaptation without imagination.
The Flying Inkpot Rating System:
 * Wait for the TV2 broadcast. 
 ** A little creaky, but still better than staying at home with Gotcha! 
 *** Pretty good, bring a friend. 
 **** Amazing, potent stuff. 
 ***** Perfection. See it twice.

Title
Review for Jingle All the Way (1996)
Directed by: Brian Levant
Written by: Randy Kornfield
Cast: Arnold Schwarzenegger (Howard Langston), Sinbad (Myron Larabee),
Phil Hartman (Ted zMaltin), Rita Wilson (Liz Langston), Robert Conrad
(Officer Hummell), Martin Mull (DJ), Jake Lloyd (Jamie Langston), James
Belushi, (Mall Santa).
Produced by : Twentieth-Century Fox
Rating : **1/2
Run Time: Approx. 88 Minutes
It's hard not to like comedies starring muscley action heroes denying
their true movie destiny. Watching Arnie painfully flubbing punchlines
instead of throwing satisfying punches, and Sly languishing in a
straightman role, where bad things keep happening to him instead of
easily vanishing when he runs at them with his guns, has become such a
delightful regularity (ohh, about once a year or so these days) that
these so-called comedies are virtually a new genre on their own. 
See, *these* guys, these Action Heroes who mistake breathing for acting,
are funny *by themselves*. They're funny when they're expirating tough
one-liners because they seem to believe so fully in their importance,
but they're even funnier when they're pretending not to notice how
important they already are. On a metadramatic level, it's impossible not
to adore the superhuman bravery involved in the Terminator swapping
places with Emma Thompson in JUNIOR and tying himself genetically to
Danny DeVito in TWINS, or when Rocky Balboa takes off his boxing gloves
to be smothered by his midget mother in STOP, OR MY MOM WILL SHOOT!
And like these others (except OSCAR, which I really kinda liked), JINGLE
ALL THE WAY, with Arnold Schwarzenegger as a momentarily failed father
trying to get back into his son's good graces, is pretty bad. The script
is woefully cliched, the ideas deliberately packaged into cute music
video montages that will only irritate, and Arnold.. well, Arnold is
just Arnold.
He's also Howard Langston, a bigwig at what appears to be a mattress
production company, who misses his son's, Jamie's (Jake Lloyd), karate
ceremony because he's too busy at the office. In a moment of human
conviction he swears to make it up to him by getting him anything he
wants for Christams. Jamie wants a Turbo Man (which Schwarzenegger
pronounces as "tear-bo man") Doll, the hero of his favourite action hero
cartoon.
Of course the Turbo Man doll is an extremely popular item, and has been
sold out since Thanksgiving. Langston's wife, Liz (Rita Wilson), did ask
him to get one weeks ago, but he'd completely forgotten about it. Now
it's Christmas Eve and he has one day to buy the doll as well as return
home in time for the Christmas Parade that same night.
That's the premise of the story, which sends Howard on a self-inflicted
quest throughout countless malls (including the Mall of America) to find
and purchase the elusive Turbo Man doll. At stake is the somewhat
fragile bond with his son, favour with an increasingly unhappy wife
("Damn you, Howard," she whispers when he unwittingly yells at Jamie on
the phone), and the very American need to redeem all past failings with
his son by securing this one triumph. On the way he meets (and keeps
meeting) a fellow parent and mailman called Myron (Sinbad) who also
seeks a Turbo Man for his son, and crosses swords (and loses) more than
once with an irate policeman (Robert Conrad). 
The tribulations are many: store clerks laugh at him continuously in a
silly montage sequence that really tells you what the film's going to be
like from the start, massive parent crowds barrage toy stores and
continually get the better of poor Arnie, even though he's big enough to
eat most of them. In one instance he chases a ballot ball into a child's
playpen and is creamed by mothers in handbags for being a pervert. In
another he is lured by a mall santa (John Belushi) to a huge warehouse
eerily filled to the brim with more merry Santas and fenced toys. He
almost gets his doll here, but a brawl ensues that culminates in a
police raid.
The latter sequence, with its surreal landscape of fluffy, crimson Santa
thugs, is one of the better bits of JINGLE ALL THE WAY. Another nice
part is the Turbo Man action cartoon that Jamie the son idolizes. A
rough imitation of those strange Japanese action cartoon-dramas (Mighty
Morphin Power Rangers, Masked Rider), the Turbo Man cartoon comes with
sidekicks and cool metallic outfits. Coolest, however, is the final
sequence which pits Howard against Myron in a surreal titanic battle for
a special edition of the Turbo Man doll (it's gold-plated!) as both men
play out their roles as Good and Evil personified on the Turbo Man float
at the Christmas parade. I'm going to beat you, Myron crows
convincingly, because I have a bigger brain! He does, indeed. It's
purple and we can see it sticking out of his head in a transparent globe
filled with brainwater. 
For the most part however, expect variations of the same theme from
KINDERGARTEN COP, JUNIOR and even TWINS, that will probably form the
basis of all Arnold comedies: ordinary life is just too *hard*; watch
Arnold grimace and lose out to his perfect, cookie-baking neighbour
(played smarmily by Phil Hartman) who dispenses Christmassy duties with
annoying cheer, watch him get bullied by a real reindeer and flail
hopelessly when it comes to something as mundane as Christmas shopping. 
JINGLE ALL THE WAY is pitched like a mockup of the disgusting
consumerism that rares its head during the Christmas season. But the
flat dialogue and overly sentimental portions go very far towards
smothering all life from this potentially satiric movie. 
The Flying Inkpot Rating System:
 * Wait for the TV2 broadcast. 
 ** A little creaky, but still better than staying at home with Gotcha! 
 *** Pretty good, bring a friend. 
 **** Amazing, potent stuff. 
 ***** Perfection. See it twice.
Rebecca">href="mailto:rebecca@cyberway.com.sg">Rebecca Wan is a full-time
radish at the famed Jardin Des Vertes. In her spare time, she councils
wayward tubers and administers to backsliding carrots. 


Title
Review for Fifth Element, The (1997)
Directed by: Luc Besson
Story by: Luc Besson
Written by: Luc Besson and Robert Mark Kamen
Cast: Bruce Willis, Milla Jovoich, Gary Oldman, and Ian Holm
Produced by: Columbia Pictures and Gaumont Productions
Running Time: 127 minutes
Rating : ** for narrative coherence, **** for sheer fun
It's hard to watch this film without thinking about the fact that 
it's the most expensive movie ever made. Not because it looks so cool 
(and yes, it does look really cool), but because it's just not worth 
it, and obviously so. Sure, it's a hell of a lot of fun, but then so 
is FARGO at a fraction of the cost of THE FIFTH ELEMENT. For the 
cost of this movie, you could make at least ten really good movies...
maybe even twenty or thirty.
The biggest problem with the movie is that it really doesn't make a lot
of sense. Besson's original story was much longer, maybe three or four
hundred pages, and in the process of cutting it down to affordable (!)
length, it has lost a lot of important information. Without reading
about the movie before seeing it, I would have been completely lost. So
anyway...
THE FIFTH ELEMENT, which takes place in the 23rd century, is about a New
York cabbie, Korben Dallas (Bruce Willis), who just happens to be a
former special forces agent (surprise!). Dallas gets involved in a
scenario in which a "dark force" is consuming all that is good in the
universe and can only be countered by the mysterious "Fifth Element".
And the Fifth Element just happens to be...an incredibly cute, spunky
girl (Milla Jovovich) with hair that looks like orange yarn and nipples
that are highly visible regardless of what she is wearing. Standing in
the way is Zorg (Gary Oldman, with the world's worst accent and
haircut), an evil guy who wants the four stones (oh yeah, forgot to
mention those...they are necessary for the Fifth Element to conquer the
dark force; don't ask, I don't understand it either) in order to give
them to the dark force (why?).
So they all end up on a resort ship in space, along with an offensively
stereotyped black disc jockey named Ruby Rhod (Chris Tucker), and all
hell breaks loose as the various characters seek the four stones (hidden
inside a blue opera singer from some other planet) before the dark force
consumes the universe. OK.
So the story make very little sense, but, as I said, it looks really
cool (lots of special effects and explosions), and it is unexpectedly
very funny. Unfortunately, it all seems so familiar. In fact, the film
reminds me very much of Total Recall (not Blade Runner, as Columbia and
Gaumont would have you believe), not just in the special effects but in
its sense of humor as well. Both share a macho main character in a
future world that is confusing to a real, hands-on type of guy who likes
to blow things up and hit people, as well.
This film is important only as an example of what can be done (and the
limits of what can be done) with a hell of a lot of money. It will not
go down in history as a great film, or even as another Star Wars or
Indiana Jones type film (you know, intellectually undemanding but
endearing for largely unexplainable reasons). But everybody's going to
go see it, so go ahead (and you MUST see it on the big screen). You
won't be overly dissapointed, but you won't be all that impressed,
either. Let's just hope that Besson doesn't get so much money for the
production of his next movie; maybe it will make more sense.
THE FLYING INKPOT's RATING SYSTEM:
* Wait for the video.
** A little creaky, but still better than staying at home with Gotcha!
*** Pretty good, bring a friend.
**** Amazing, potent stuff.
***** Perfection. See it twice.


Title
Review for Arrival, The (1996)
Directed by: David N. Twohy
Written by: David N. Twohy
Cast: Charlie Sheen (Zane Ziminski), Ron Silver (Phil Gordian), Lindsay
Crouse (Ilana Green), Teri Polo (Char), Tony T. Johnson (Kiki), Richard
Schiff (Calvin Leon Rippy)
Produced by : Orion Films
Rating : ***1/2
Run Time: Approx. 115 Minutes
Despite having Charlie Sheen as its lead (with a goatee, no less, and as
a radio astronomer. eww!) and a tacky environmental message, THE ARRIVAL
is a nicely paced movie with good special effects that don't yell "Big
Budget" in your face the whole time you're watching it.
Sheen plays Zane Ziminski, an obsessive paranoic scientist who
along with his partner (Richard Schiff) records a clear radio
transmission from space one night. Despite initial rejoicing, things don't
develop the way you'd expect when the authorities receive evidence of this
transmission. Ziminski gets fired, his partner gets killed and suddenly the
whole world's just a heck of a lot more complicated for Ziminski than he
likes.
It's hard to say what else happens without giving everything away. Trying to
track and reconfirm the same signal he received, Ziminski builds a makeshift
satellite while masquerading as a cable man (I guess there are more than
just movie stars on Cable Vision!), and his discoveries soon lead him to an
ominous-looking plant in Mexico. There he meets an environmentalist whose
work is increasingly troubling in its extraordinary reports on the earth's
atmostphere.
The story probably sounds a little cliched, but THE ARRIVAL is a better
movie than usual, and recent, alien fare like INDEPENDENCE DAY, or SPECIES.
This is because it develops, and keeps to, an almost believable storyline,
one that engages the viewer continually as it reveals information in various
steps throughout the movie. Director Twohy, who was a screenwriter for ALIEN
3 and THE FUGITIVE, also does a good job of building and maintaining
suspense, preferring wisely not to just rely on the special effects team for
impressing its audience.
All in all, I'd say this movie's worth its S$7 ticket. Hey, anything that
makes me want to watch it through despite having Charlie Sheen in its lead
role is worth seven bucks.
The Flying Inkpot Rating System:
* Wait for the TV2 broadcast.
** A little creaky, but still better than staying at home with Gotcha!
*** Pretty good, bring a friend.
**** Amazing, potent stuff.
***** Perfection. See it twice.

