Authors
Andy Jacob
Number of Reviews
2

Title
Review for Batman Forever (1995)
S: Val Kilmer, Tommy Lee Jones, Jim Carrey, Nicole Kidman, Chris O'Donnell
D: Joel Schumacher
        I've been putting off watching this movie for a long time. 
When it was in the theater I opted to watch Apollo 13 instead. One reason 
was that many reivews said the film stunk, so I stayed away from it. But 
having watched it, I realized that I had missed a pretty good movie.
The latest Batman flick differs quite a bit from the other Batman movies. 
For one thing, the role of Batman has been passed along from Michael 
Keaton to Val Kilmer. Gothem City has changed from a dark and dreary town 
to a hip, modern town. And once again, Batman's foes have changed. Some 
of the changes were good, but there were some minuses to the movie, too.
On the plus side, Val Kilmer. I think that he made a much better Batman 
than Michael Keaton. But the way he spoke in the film was almost comical; 
he always had a deep, almost fake superhero voice. 
Also a big plus was Tommy Lee Jones (who plays Twoface, Batman's main 
enemy in the film). He was probably the best actor in 
the film. I've seen him in many other films, and this just proves once 
again how diverse of an actor he can be. The way he plays the "bad guy" 
is just right: He acts just right when trying to catch Batman and acts 
just right when he fails. He also (to my surprise) added a lot of humor 
to the film. 
Nicole Kidman (who played Dr. Chase Meridian) was absolutely gorgeous,
as she usually is. Definately a plus on that level. However, she really
didn't serve much of a purpose in the movie other than to drag out a
soap opera of sorts (the saga of herself and Bruce Wayne). She's a very
good actress in addition to her good looks, but she really wasn't given
a very good part to work with. So she was both a plus and a minus.
Jim Carrey (who played The Riddler)  was good, but was a disappointment to 
me. He was given a perfect "Jim Carrey" part and he pretty much blew it. 
There were certainly some funny parts, like the scene where he and 
Two-Face are trying to blow up the Batboat by playing a game of 
"Battleship" that triggers bombs in the water. When Two-Face got a hit 
that destroyed the boat, The Riddler exclaims in a dorky kind of voice 
like the commercial for the game Battleship: "YOU SUNK MY BATTLESHIP!" 
Overall, he wasn't as funny as he could have been.
Chris O'Donnell was the biggest disappointment. He played Robin, Batman's 
sidekick. His acting was terrible, and the plot of his parents getting 
killed by Two-Face was also very corny. There is one good scene were he 
pokes fun at the earlier T.V. series of Batman. He's walking along and he 
says "Holey rusted metal, Batman!", meaning that literally (He was 
standing on rusted metal full of holes, thus "holey").
The plot was different enough from the other movies to be interesting. 
Batman is trying to destroy Two-Face, the Riddler joins Two-Face as 
another enemy to Batman, meanwhile Chase dumps Batman for Bruce Wayne and 
soon finds out that Bruce Wayne is Batman. The bad guys discover this at 
the same time, though, and capture Chase and Robin. Then Batman has to 
save them. Personally, I liked the little bits of humor in the movie the 
best. In addition to the things I've already mentioned, I like the part 
at the beginning when Alfred, the butler of sorts for Bruce Wayne, asks 
him as he's about to leave as Batman to fight a crime: "Could I persuade 
you to take a sandwich with you, sir?" To this, Batman responds: "I'll 
get drive-through.
The special effects both added a lot to the movie and took away from the 
movie. The effects were excellent, but they were used too often. When 
this happens, the whole movie becomes boring because you have Batman 
kicking and punching bad guys and things blowing up as a result every ten 
minutes.
Despite all it's minuses, this movie was pretty good. The little things 
made it ok. It adds yet another chapter onto the Batman story, and there 
will no doubt be another one in a couple years. This is a pretty good 
movie that had the potential to be a great movie but blew it. 
Nevertheless, it's always nice to watch a good old fashioned good guys 
versus bad guys movie. And even after all the changes to Batman, the 
good guys still won.
Rating Scale:
* - Terrible. Don't see it; it's a waste of time
** - Not very good at all, probably not worth seeing
*** - Average. Plusses and Minusses
**** - A very good movie. Worth seeing.
***** - Excellent. Don't miss it!

Title
Review for Mr. Holland's Opus (1995)
     I was not exactly excited about going to see Mr. Holland's Opus.
I probably should have been working on notecards which are due for my
term paper anyway. But I went ahead and saw it.
     After the first hour, I had high hopes for the movie, and even up
to the last ten minutes I had high hopes for it, but then it just died.
Like a person recovering from surgery better than anyone expected and
then taking a turn for the worst. I'll get back to this later.
     One reason why I didn't want to see the movie in the first place
is because it looked so corny. A music teacher taught at a school for
30 years.  He had a son who was deaf. Everyone liked him. The end.
Not my idea of a very exciting movie. However, the movie turned out to
be more than that.
     There were many more pluses than there were minuses to the movie.
Richard Dreyfuss certainly deserves an Oscar for his performance as
Mr.  Holland. Almost all of the things in the movie were realistic,
which added to the serious atmosphere. The way the movie progressed was
great. I liked the little segments where events of the time period were
shown. The portrayal of Mr Holland's deaf son was excellant. And most
of all, you really got the feeling that Mr. Holland loved music.
     However, despite all of the good things about the movie, the two
major bad things killed it. First of all, it was too long. The middle
of the movie was pretty much Mr. Holland teaching three different kids
from three different time periods how to play music. It was nice for a
while, but it got boring. Some time could have been cut out there. And
the part about the girl singer trying to seduce Mr. Holland was way
over the top. It just didn't fit in with the rest of the movie. Also,
in real life, he would have been fired for encouraging her to run off
to New York like he did.
     Finally, the worst part of all, was the ending. For those of you
familiar with tennis, it was like a bad serve. When you "wind up", you
build up a lot of kinetic energy in a coil behind your back. This is
what gives the serve the power. If you effectively transfer the energy
to the ball, you have a good serve. But if you bring your arm forward
too soon, you lose the energy and it is all wasted. Your serve won't go
anywhere. It doesn't matter how good of a windup you may have had, it
doesn't matter in the end.
     That's what happened to this movie. It built up a lot of energy
and had a lot of potential, but wasted it with a bad ending. It was
just not fitting. The movie had a message. It was a message that most
of the time the best people who touch almost everyone's life that
they come in contact with never get any appreciation. At the end, the
school where Mr Holland works cuts the music budget. When he finds out
about it, he talks about how "you think you're cared about, but then
you realize 'Wait. I made a mistake. I'm exspendable.'" Then he makes a
comment while talking to the football coach that "the day they cut the
football budged in this state is the day when culture in the western
world as we know it will come to an end."
     This was great. It was setting up a good ending. Then, he's about
to leave for the last time. He is walking out of his empty band room
after looking around one last time, and he's walking down the
hall. He'll walk out and leave and that's the end, right? No. Instead,
there is a celebration in the auditorium with all of his former
students. In the end he leaves conducting the symphony that he spent
his whole life on. Everyone claps.  Tears are flowing. Can we spell
CORNY? While we're at it, why don't we spell UNREALISTIC.
     The movie would have been much better (even though it still
would've been too long) if it would've ended with him walking out
of the band room alone. It fits the message of the movie. That kind of
ending is much more powerful.
     Despite the bad ending, the movie still brought up some
     points about society. And unlike many films these
days, it had a message. It was actually a little bit serious. But a bad
ending makes for a bad movie, and a bad movie is a bad movie. Well, the
producers can look on the bright side. At least they've made a movie
that band directors across the nation will see at least five times.
Andy's rating of Mr. Holland's Opus: ** 1/2
--------------------------
Rating system:
**** Fantastic! Don't miss it!
***  A good movie. Worth seeing.
**   Ok. Average. Probably not worth seeing until it's out on home video.
*    Bad. Don't bother seeing it.
x    This movie is so bad that it should be burned.
--------------------------
