Authors
irina@IMAP2.ASU.EDU
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Girl 6 (1996)
I would like to add my own review of "Girl 6," the latest film from Spike 
Lee.  Theresa Randle stars as a would-be actress struggling to pay her 
bills and keep her dignity while auditioning for parts.  After a series 
of minor misfortunes, she begins to look for work in the phone sex 
industry.  The company that initially hires her is very professional in 
that it has an office manager and a phone operator, both of whom randomly 
monitor calls.  In the training session for the new "girls," we meet the 
various women who have found themselves seeking this line of work.  The 
multicultural crew is told that, unless requested, they are "white."  
They are encouraged to develop stereotyped personae that men find 
intriguing, such as teenage nymphets, dominatrixes, etc.  (Naomi 
Campbell, as one of the girls, exhibits self-deprecating humor by wearing 
a t-shirt that says, "models suck.")  Theresa Randle's character, Judy, 
steps into this impersonal, role-playing world, and finds it suits her 
current circumstances.  She develops a regular clientele, but begins to 
lose herself in the role that she has created as "Lovely."  She makes the 
understandable mistake of trying to meet a client who confides his 
problems to her, but when he doesn't show, she slips even more into the 
nowhere land of identity loss.  She becomes withdrawn from her co-workers 
and her neighbor, played by Spike Lee, a baseball-mad nebbish (very 
reminiscent of some of Woody Allen's roles).  A phone sex "madam," played 
by Madonna, gives Judy the necessary contacts to set up her own business 
at home, where she can field any and all calls with no inhibitions.  At 
this point, Spike Lee uses a cinematographic method that shows how 
distorted Judy's sense of self has become, as her body moves in the 
opposite direction of the receding/approaching background, which is a 
smear of hallucinogenic colors.  She feels like the little girl that is 
shown on her local nightly news, the victim of an unlocked elevator door 
that allowed her to fall all the way down the elevator shaft.  What snaps 
Judy out of her victimization as a male fantasy object is a phone call 
from a man who threatens her life.  Judy realizes that she has become 
derailed from her dreams, and gets back on track.  Whether or not she 
makes it is of less importance than the fact that she is in control of 
her life again.  I thought that this film was unfairly dismissed by the 
media and movie-going public.  It is subtle and deals with issues of 
self-perception on an emotional level, not as a comedy or even a drama, 
but as the deceptively simple tale of a woman who finds work in a 
business which negates one's humanity.
