Authors
David Wong Shee
Number of Reviews
7

Title
Review for Reality Bites (1994)
As with all stories REALITY BITES can be viewed from a range of 
overlapping vantage points.
*   The dyadic and romantic.  "Friendships" and/or "relationships" 
    between those of opposite gender or the same gender.  The most 
    prominent in this film was the "romantic tension" between Lelaina 
    (Winona Ryder) and Troy (Ethan Hawke) who alternately flirt and 
    fight on the border between friendship and love, and between the 
    casual and the intimate, throughout the course of the film.
*   An ensemble piece.  The culture and psychology of a small closely 
    knit group.  The success to which the culture of the group is 
    communicated as reflected by degree to which the "in jokes" are 
    comprehensible to outsiders (the audience).
*   As "Hollywood".  The perennial debate over whether the latest 
    Beautiful Young Thing can act or whether he or she is just another
    cinematic hood ornament.
*   The cinematographic and nostalgic.  The Past as video, home movies
    or black and white television.  Similar examples which come to 
    mind include: Paul Cox's films MY FIRST WIFE, MAN OF FLOWERS, MY 
    LIFE; the opening scene of TRIP TO BOUNTIFUL; THE SUM OF US; and MY 
    LIFE.  REALITY BITES could be seen as a nostalgic reflection on the 
    seventies is as distinct from that for the fifties and sixties.  
*   The developmental and socio-cultural.
It is to the last of these that the rest of this article addresses itself. 
     This movie examines the transition from adolescence into young
adulthood made a background of accelerating social and cultural
change.  This transition period can be somewhat protracted for, among
others, those engaging in tertiary education.
    In any event, there can be a rather abrupt change in the was
reality is perceived from the view through the rose coloured glasses of
childhood to a much sharper and sometimes brutal "real world" outside
the protective boundaries of the family.  There being a marked contrast
between the experiences the post-war boom of the "baby boomer"
generation of rapid economic growth and full employment with that of
their post-post-war offspring.  The "generation gap" seems to widening
with each succeeding generation this century.
    There are reflections on the fallout of the changes in the Family,
for example, the experience of children who's parents divorced during
their childhood or adolescence.  This runs in parallel with the
disintegration of a uniform value system at the societal level.  That
is not to say that pluralism is a bad thing, however it does for many
hone certain existential issues to an uncomfortable sharpness.
    There is what might be described as the "evolution" of the hippie
into the yuppie.  A change which mirrors a conservative shift among
youth secondary perhaps to anxieties about finding work to "survive" -
if not fulfilling middle-class expectations of a certain standard of
living in industrialised urban societies.
    Examined also are the place (if any) in America of the Intellectual
and of other recognizable stereotypes such as the Yuppie, the Hippie,
the Dropout, and the Homosexual.  Overlaid on these types are the
individual characteristics of the particular person portrayed.  Are
relationships across such subcultural types viable, for example,
between Lelaina and Michael (a yuppie with a Heart of Gold?).
Hippie = A young person who rejects conventional ideas and society and
         adopts and unusual style of dress and habits, etc (OED).
Yuppie = Young Upwardly Mobile Professional
--
 * David Wong Shee * david@zikzak.apana.org.au * Live Long and Prosper *

Title
Review for Huozhe (1994)
     Zhang Yi-Mou's (RED SORGHUM, RAISE THE RED LANTERN, JU DOU) most
recent film is TO LIVE again featuring Gong Li in a principal role.
The film follows the fortunes, and misfortunes, of family that lives
through the communist revolution of 1949 and the later cultural
revolution.  The depiction of both the family melodrama and of the
tumultuous historical backdrop against which it is set, combine to make
this a film of considerable value.
     "Political correctness" is also a theme of sorts.  The characters
constantly struggle to keep in step with the shifting ideological
requirements of those in power, often under threat of imprisonment or
execution.  Ironically while the characters in TO LIVE succeed in this
Zhang Yi-Mou has not.  As I understand it he has been barred from any
further international collaborations for the next five years because
the treatment of the Chinese Communist Party in this film.  This is in
spite of fact that communist party officials in the film are portrayed
as genuinely sympathetic and well meaning individuals.
     The film implies that to those who lived through China's recent
history it is obvious that many people suffered as a result of
imperfections and inconsistencies in Party policy.  This suffering,
even though it may have been inflicted inadvertently, still demands of
that those who experienced it a need to come to terms with it.  TO LIVE
can be seen to be as an attempt to do this.
     The Party however is obviously still sensitive criticism of this
sort and so have put Zhang Yi-Mou in a five-year "time capsule."  The
positive side is perhaps that they did not punish him more overtly and
did not actively suppress the film from international circulation.

Title
Review for China Moon (1994)
     CHINA MOON is an important recent production in the tradition
known as film noir--the cinematic manifestation of the Marlowe style
detective novel.  CHINA MOON reanimates the set piece stereotypes of
the detective story, rendering the classical motifs of the genre
flawlessly: a woman in distress who may or may not be a femme fatale;
the hard bitten homicide detective; bar room conversations rich in
seduction, mystery and promise; and the nesting of conspiracies within
conspiracies, of games within games like that metaphorical set of
Russian Dolls.  These conspiracies are notably as much those of chance,
accident and misfortune as they are of conspiracies of human design and
intention.
     The most striking thing about this movie was the
uncharacteristically touching portrayal of the relationship which
develops between detective Kyle Bodine (Ed Harris) and the beleaguered
Rachael Monro (Madeleine Stowe).  This greatly sharpens the tragic
elements of the story through to the final climactic scene which
unfolds in a style not unlike the closing scene of Hamlet.  Similarly,
in a Shakespearean mode, Rachael exhibited several qualities
reminiscent of Lady Macbeth.
     In general CHINA MOON achieves a accuracy of detail in the
emotional landscape that was well above your average melodrama.  In
particular, the state of mind that might lead a battered woman in an
abusive relationship to seek retribution instead of simple escape the
situation were for me convincingly illustrated.
     The element of film noir not strongly represented in CHINA MOON is
that of a burnt out cynicism toward life and love.  This is in spite of
it's pain staking depiction of the destruction of a "good man" through
the influence of perverse motives such as greed, envy and revenge
operating in those closest to him.
   I will leave the finding of fault in this film to others.  My view is 
that this is a MUST SEE for devotees of film noir.
Directed by John Bailey.
Starring: Charles Dance as Rupert Monro; Benicio Del Toro as Lamar Dickey;
          Ed Harris as Kyle Bodine; Madeleine Stowe as Rachael Monro.
Cinematography by Willy Kurant.
Music by George Fenton.
Written by Roy Carlson.
     Which is worse do you think, taking the movies too seriously, or
taking life too seriously?  What do people think the popularity of film
noir says about the way late Twentieth Century people see themselves
and their destiny?

Title
Review for Fearless (1993)
CREDITS  
Director: Peter Weir (PICNIC AT HANGING ROCK, GREENCARD)
Screenwriter: Rafael Yglesias (author of the novel).
Composer: Maurice Jarre.
Actors: Jeff Bridges (THE FISHER KING), Rosie Perez, Isabella Rossellini,
        John Turturro (BARTON FINK), Tom Hulce.
     A domestic American airliner crash lands after a complete
hydraulic failure.  Most of the passengers and crew are killed but
miraculously about a score of people survive.  One of them is Max (Jeff
Bridges) who experiences the complete disappearance of fear several
minutes before the crash.  Following his survival he is filled with
messianic feelings of exaltation and invulnerability.  These are
further reinforced by the fact that many of the other survivors
attribute their survival to him, and he is acclaimed as a hero in the
popular media.  He returns home to his wife and son changed in some
profound but incommunicable way.  This produces enormous strain on his
relationship with his family which is compounded by a special bond he
develops with another survivor, Carla Rodrigo (Rosie Perez), who is
stricken by the loss her infant son in the accident.  The story follows
his journey back to the world of ordinary mortals.
     I am not sure whether this is a film to be assiduously avoided by
those phobic about air travel, or paradoxically whether it is an ideal
thriller for such people.  There is no accounting for taste, I guess.
     From a psychological point of view Max seems to enter an altered
state of consciousness in the face of extreme stress.  The examples of
traumatic bereavement and cathartic resolution were, I thought, well
executed being both convincing and affecting.  The portrayal of the
psychiatrist Dr Perlman (John Turturro) employed by the airline to
assist the survivors was also a balanced and overall sympathetic one.
At one point Max clips the Dr Perlman across the chin in retaliation
for an invasion of his personal space.
     As a follow-on to this, I spent the rest of the film hoping he
would punch the lawyer, Brillstein (Tom Hulce) who admirably filled the
role of the villain of the piece.  Brillstein was one of those lawyers
who display the phenomenal proclivity of American's for litigation in
its worst possible light.  He pressures the potential litigants to
perjure themselves for financial gain out of some sense of entitlement
and blame on someone else for tragic misfortune.  It is fortunate, or
perhaps unfortunate, depending upon your outlook, that God cannot be
sued for such things.
     From a spiritual perspective there are certainly mystical aspects
to the film.  As in Weir's earlier PICNIC AT HANGING ROCK, disaster is
accompanied by some unaccountable event.  In PICNIC there is the eerie
unexplained disappearance of several schoolgirls, while in FEARLESS,
Max undergoes some strange transformation at, or near the point of
death.  He has a "near near death" experience, so to speak.  These
mystical elements are effectively enhanced by Maurice Jarre's
soundtrack which fosters a transcendent atmosphere throughout.

Title
Review for Arizona Dream (1993)
SYNOPSIS:  The film follows the adventures of Axel (Johnny Depp), a
young man living in New York happy with his job of counting and tagging
fish for the NY Fisheries service who believes that by gazing into the
eyes of the fish they can share their dreams with him and they, his.
He returns to the small Arizona town of his childhood for the occasion
of his Cadillac selling Uncle Leo's (Jerry Lewis) wedding to Millie
(Paulina Porizkova).  Soon afterward he becomes amorously entangled
with a beautiful Elaine (Faye Dunaway), flying enthusiast, and her
daughter Grace (Lilli Taylor), accordion player and mining tycoon.  The
drama proceeds along the theme of competition between Elaine and Grace
for Axel's affections (a la MRS ROBINSON).
COMMENTS:  The delight in the film arose for me, out of its spectacular
surreal and absurdist imagery, e.g., a fish flying down the main street
and the clever use of a balloon in transition from a dream sequence
into "reality."  There is an extraordinary scene where a tree is set
aflame by lightning in the pouring rain next to a house decorated with
lights.  Some of the scenes of conflict between Elaine, Grace and Axel
were somewhat of a test of emotional endurance.  I must admit to having
been particularly struck by Lilli Taylor who reminded me a lot of
Lauren Bacall.
     In terms of comparisons with other films: BLISS is the closest
contemporary film I have seen which resembles it; Wim Wender's PARIS
TEXIS is another illustration of a European director set in against a
backdrop of American urban wilderness.  There are entertaining
quotations/excerpts from NORTH BY NORTHWEST, RAGING BULL, and THE
GODFATHER in the film.  There is a reference to the script of THE
WIZARD OF OZ in the credits which I must have missed during the film.
* Seen at the 1994 Melbourne International Film Festival.

Title
Review for Only the Brave (1994)
     ONLY THE BRAVE a "rites-of-passage" film which follows the
fortunes and in misfortunes of two girls set in the contemporary urban
wasteland of the Western suburbs of Melbourne.  The fundamental problem
for the girls is that there does not seem anywhere for them to go.
Their prospects both economically and socially appear despairingly
bleak.
     The themes of betrayal of trust and abandonment run through the
film at the level of their disrupted families, their tenuous though
highly charged peer relationships, and on a wider scale, the context of
urban decay and social disintegration within which their lives unfold.
The two girls in the film crave on one hand the security that most take
for granted throughout their childhoods and, on the other independence
and self-determination.  Their experiences of parental abandonment
and/or abuse leads them to yearn for stable supportive relationships
with others while also making them extremely wary and suspicious of
others and at other times completely dismissive of any need for someone
else.
     Fire is a key motif throughout, suggestive of an all consuming
destructive rage born of dispair and frustration; directed both
outwards, towards "society," and inwards attacking the developing
personalities and the emergent sexuality of the protagonists.
     The film is a distillation of Australian underclass adolescent
angst fermented by dysfunctional families and future's that promise
only long-term unemployment and poverty.  That Australia, a country
with an average standard of living comparable to any of the best in the
world, should have the highest adolescent suicide rate indicates at the
very least a failure of efforts to pursue social justice however you
define it.
     ONLY THE BRAVE makes no attempt to offer solutions to the
psychosocial traumas of its characters, this is perhaps because it is a
task for the the film's audience rather than its makers.  The film
brings to the attention of those who live comfortably in the lap of our
modern consumer society that there are many who do not share such good
fortune.
Directed by Ana Kokkinos.
Cast in credits order: Elena Mandalis (Alex); Dora Kaskanis (Vicki);
Moudo Davey (Kate); Bob Bright (Rog); Helen Athanasiadis (Maria); Tina
Zerella (Sylvie); Mary Sifarenos (Athena); Peta Brady (Tammy).
Cinematography by James Grant.
Music by Philip Brophy.
Written by Ana Kokkinos and Mira Robertson.
Costume design by Margot McCartney.
Edited by Mark Atkin.
Produced by Fiona Eagger, Rina Reiss (associate).
Also: Georgina Campbell (art director; Craig Carter
(sound); Richard Clendinnen (assistant director); Jock Healy (sound).

Title
Review for Secret Garden, The (1993)
Directed by Agnieszka Holland.
Written by Caroline Thompson and Frances Hodgson Burnett (novel).
Cinematography by Roger Deakins.
Music by Zbigniew Preisner.
Acted by: Kate Maberly; Heydon Prowse; Maggie Smith; John Lynch.
Production designed by Stuart Craig.
Edited by Isabelle Lorente.
     Following the death of her parents in a natural disaster in India
ten year old Mary Lennox (Kate Maberly), newly orphaned, is returned to
the United Kingdom by the colonial authorities.  Her next of kin is a
wealthy uncle, Lord Craven (John Lynch) and she comes to live in his
mansion set in deep the British countryside.
     Arriving at the peak of winter, the huge largely derelict house
stands amongst desolate fog laden moors, in an atmosphere of pervading
despair.  The household live seemingly under a curse, blighted by the
death of Lord Craven's wife during childbirth ten years earlier.
     Undaunted by her surroundings, however, Mary explores the derelict
labyrinth of, she is told, at least one hundred rooms; as well as the
extensive grounds and fallow gardens which surround it.  She discovers
her aunt's favorite garden, sealed off since her death.  She also comes
across a cousin she never knew she had, Colin Craven (Heydon Prowse),
estranged from his father, Lord Craven, all his life due to the tragic
circumstances of Colin's birth.  Colin is an invalid who has lived all
his days confined to bed, destined it appears, never to see the light
of day.
     The film depicts Mary's liberation of herself, and her uncle and
cousin, from the smothering burdens of their shared and individual
pasts.
     A tale for children and for those who remain, as they say, forever
"children at heart".
     The plot contains all the elements one would expect of a
childrens' story set in Victorian times: orphaned aristocratic
children; a tyrannical housekeeper (Maggie Smith); mysterious, hidden
places where seeds of, figuratively, magical rejuvenation are
eventually to be found.  As with all good (children's) stories several
key existential challenges must be faced and overcome:
*   The catastrophic abandonment of parental death.  
*   Mistreatment and neglect by supposed guardians.
     I must say I was surprised that, apart from a little long distance
telepathy, there was no recourse to magic (nor appeal to any other
supernatural agencies for that matter) to bring about the resolution to
bitter realities.  The (s)hero (Mary) survives and rescues those around
her by drawing upon the indomitable resilience of the human spirit; and
its eternal capacity for redemption from despair and for triumphing
over the destructive consequences of death.
* Courtesy of the rec.arts.movies database.
