Authors
Theodore Potter
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Virtuosity (1995)
    And so, two more "cyber movies" invade theaters--VIRTUOSITY and THE
NET--really, two more formula action/thrillers.  There has been such a
saturation of action pictures in the last few years that their plots
seem almost irrelevant; the better ones are distinguished by their
style and the performance of the actors.  With this in mind, VIRTUOSITY
is easily the better ride, as THE NET seems satisfied in simply turning
the same ol' screws and plugging in old cliches.
     Denzel Washington and Sandra Bullock each start off as The
Sympathetic Action Hero, the '90's version of the cocky do-it-all
Stallone/Schwarzenegger type we were treated to in the '80's.
Washington is Parker Barnes, an ex-cop now doing time in a
way-too-futuristic-for-1999 prison (the obsession with the end of the
millenium is getting ridiculous!).  Denzel has to Come To Terms with
the murder of his family.  Bullock plays Angela Bennett, a computer
virus specialist who has to Come To Terms with growing up without a
father, with a mother who can't remember her, and with her own social
phobias.  They're both likeable, sympathetic characters, but the
general blandness of THE NET makes it easier to feel the screws being
turned on you.
     Kelly Lynch and Dennis Miller are Washington's and Bullock's
sidekicks, respectively.  While Lynch's character is there to
essentially move the plot along, Dennis Miller does his very best to
inject some fun into the lifeless "Net".  Every scene he was in had me
grinning, but of course, he is dispatched all too quickly by the
villains and the editors.
    As anyone who's seen a James Bond or Star Trek movie knows, these
movies sink or swim on the strength of their villains.  Russell Crowe
makes a real splash with Sid 6.7, a virtual reality simulation who
comes to life to have his brand of fun with Denzel.  Sid is a real
charmer, even while carrying around the combined personalities of some
200 killers, Hitler and Charles Manson to name a couple.  He knows
exactly which buttons to push on Denzel, and in turn the audience.
Crowe has real fun in the role (look for an Elvis leg shimmy in the
climax of the nightclub scene), while still turning in a multi-layered
performance where a lesser actor might have played it as a one-note.
     There are at least three different villains in THE NET, watering
down the already predictable chase sequences. (The obligatory
merry-go-round chase is here, in fine form.) If the script actually
allowed these "professionals" to eliminate Bullock's character (who
comes across a disk which could foil a corporate conspiracy, if you
really care) as swiftly as they dispatch the other nonessentials, the
movie wouldn't last fifteen minutes.  However, they're prone to what
Roger Ebert calls The Fallacy of the Talking Killer, where the hero is
at the villain's mercy, but the villain procrastinates just long enough
for the hero to figure out what's going on and find a way out.
    Neither of these pictures belong with the year's best, but
VIRTUOSITY wins out on its style and street smarts, while THE NET
almost succeeds in making the computers more interesting than all its
human counterparts combined.
