Authors
Andreas Kutschera
Number of Reviews
3

Title
Review for Hellraiser III: Hell on Earth (1992)
     Well, I seldom get the chance to view a film *before* the US
release, so I'll grab the chance and try to do a review of HELLRAISER
III.  No spoilers before the ^L, I promise.
     One-line-summary: Very little continuation, rather boring.
     Judging from the title, HELLRAISER III, is supposed to be a movie
that fits into the storyline of the other two Hellraiser movies.  Having
watched all three of them in a row, I must say that the most "hell-like"
aspect of it was that I watched it in a theatre without air conditioning
on one of the hottest days in August.  Other than that, the movie fails
to live up to its promise.
     Yes, the Pleasure Cube is back (it still seems to be the only way
to open the dimensional door).
     So, essentially the story follows the same line as did HELLRAISER I
and II.  But while HELLRAISER II managed to evolve the storyline further
(i.e., tell us more about the characters we already knew), part III only
gives us lots of new characters we don't know and who I don't really
care about.  This, of course, gives the authors an excuse to tell us
the same old story we have already seen, the same special effects we
have already seen and to keep it at a superficial level.
     But, what's even worse, in parts I and II, the main characters had
a really strong motive for what they did.  These people actually
*wanted* something out of life (or out of the Cube).  In part III, none
of the characters really wants something, so everything that happens,
just happens accidentally, almost by coincidence, and the characters
only _re_act (instead of *act*).
     While I liked HELLRAISER I, because it introduced a new concept to
me, and also because I get this chill down my spine when pleasure and
pain are mixed (that's all I'll add to the "Barker: Sex & Horror"
discussion), and I also liked part II, because the characters were still
motivated and the film went deeper into the history of the Cenobites,
part III didn't show me anything new.
     So what I recommend is, if you want a good story with character
development and also some good special effects, go see HELLRAISER I and
II (again, if necessary), and wait for III to come out on video.  If you
can't wait, try to see it for as little money as possible.
     Now, there will be a few *mild* spoilers to prove my point about a
weak storyline, but don't worry, you'll probably figure out most of it
yourself by the first ten minutes of the movie...:
     At the beginning of the movie, there is a statue, which is a
leftover from a psychiatric hospital.  The statue looks like a complex
meld of bodies, I-dunno-what and a cute Cube.  Viewers of HELLRAISER I
and II will probably instantly make the connection between the statue
and what it contains.
The answer to these questions follows the other ^L :-)
     Since I told you that it was a bad movie, the answer to all the
above questions is: YES (just as you would expect).

Title
Review for Isä meidän (1993)
Plot synopsis:
     PATER NOSTER is a film about a father/son relationship.  Johani
returns to his childhood home afters years spent "sailing the seven
seas."  It is a desolate house somewhere in the Finnish countryside.
Johani's father lives in a hospital for the elderly, where he is tied
to a wheelchair and generally seems to be unable to understand what is
going on around him.  Soon after Johani starts cleaning up the house,
he takes his father home.  Throughout the whole film, Johani tries to
"come to peace" with his father.
speed rating: *** (recommended, comparable to NAKED)
     This is a very slow-moving film, no action, no car chases, very
few jokes, if any.  So what makes it interesting?  The story flows very
nicely, each tension block is built up slowly (though some are pretty
obvious) and a lot of times it is *after* you watched a certain scene
that you realize the impact it has.  Aaltonen manages to put a lot of
characters on the screen who seem one-dimensional at first but show
more and more diversity throughout the film.  He uses dialog very
consciously and often lets the pictures speak for themselves, which
works due to his good cameraman.  This film is a good example of a
picture being worth a thousand words.  Very often you see something and
you do not need the dialog to grasp what's going on (though reading the
sub-titles does help at times :-).  In fact, just by listening to the
dialog you will miss some major parts of the story.  The movie sets a
depressing tone but also, at the same time, there is always reasonable
hope that things will get better.  And, yes, there are love scenes in
the movie.
     All in all, if you want a movie for a first date, I suggest you
try something else, but if you want something you can still talk about
after you left the theater, something that grabs you somewhere other
movies don't reach, this might be the one.  But since it is a Finnish
movie and it is black and white, I doubt it will even make the video
stores, so look for it at a film festival near you.

Title
Review for In the Mouth of Madness (1995)
Recommendation: Worth paying extra money at a good theatre (7/10)
Production country/year USA 1994, New Line Cinema
Running Length: 95 mins.
     John Carpenter is back.  And my, was I scared.  After a long
absence from the screen, John Carpenter does again what he does best
and that is horror movies.
     The story starts very simple: John Trent is a private eye who is
mainly working for insurance companies until he is hired by a
publishing house.  His job is to find Sutter Cane, their premier horror
writer.  Cane is even more successful than Stephen King, his newest book
is late, fans are going nuts because advance orders cannot be
fulfilled.
     From that premise starts a journey into a nightmare.  Yeah, I
know, that's what they tell you about every horror movie.  In this one,
reality is soon mixed with fantasy as Trent and Styles (Cane's editor
at Arcane Books) try to find Cane somewhere in New England (and no,
they don't even go near Bangor, Maine).  People appear out of nowhere
and vanish again, things seem to be changing constantly, there are even
the obligatory "go back, before it's too late" warnings.  Of course,
there is also the unthinkable horror from Beyond.  It soon gets to a
point when no one knows anymore whether this is reality or not.
     And that is the scary part IMHO.  You have no control over what is
happening because you don't know if you dream or are awake.  Something
is happening to you and around you and even though everybody else seems
to be able to do something, you can't do anything to shape your reality
or your fate.
     "Them special effects is fantastic," but what else would you
expect from ILM? The story is rather consistent (if you accept the
basic horror premises :-) and the acting is very good, except for Julie
Carmen.  She only seems to have one face (except for two or three
scenes) and her voice shows absolutely no emotion.  That was one rare
instance when I wished I had watched the dubbed version.  Sam Neill
continues to impress me.  This is the third totally different role I
remember after THE PIANO and JURASSIC PARK and he still comes out
strong.  He's definitely not one-dimensional.
     I watched this movie in a THX theatre (the movie has DTS, so I
probably got a good estimate) and wholly recommed it for a big screen
with DTS.  It is definitely worth the Ecu 6-8 (1 Ecu ~ 1 $) they're
going to charge you.
I give this movie an 7 on the Movie Ratings Ballot.
- Andreas Kutschera (speed@shogun.ncp.sietec.de)
Oh, and one tiny little personal spoiler:
Charlton Heston does not die at the end of the movie.
