Authors
Frank Ochieng
Number of Reviews
5

Title
Review for Replacement Killers, The (1998)
      Antoine Fuqua, noted music video director, supplies the action
in his latest action thriller cleverly called THE REPLACEMENT
KILLERS. This flashy, action-packed flick comes with some notable
performers: top Asian star Chow Yun-Fat and Oscar-winning actress Mira
Sorvino. THE REPLACEMENT KILLERS is your typical kinetic-kicking,
bullet-bouncing, danger-dodging, Hong Kong-oriented thriller that has
the legs but never manages to run with what you would expect a
distinctive action piece such as this deserves.
      Yun-Fat, who obviously is testing his stardom status here in the
U.S. just like his fellow Asian action stars Jackie Chan and Michelle
Yeoh, plays a wayward assassin from China sent to the United States to
complete a "hit" but his heart isn't in the right mode to do so. As a
result, Yun-Fat is stuck in the country and his only way of escaping
is to utilize the services of Sorvino's document forger. Together,
they scamper through chaotic crazy situations while shooting up the
joint left and right. There are some devastatingly dangerous yet dandy
stunts plus both stars come off as more clever and keen than what is
actually believed given their involvement in these sensational situ-
ations. However, you never really get to see any enthusiasm or robust
reaction to action hero Yun-Fat's character. He seems remote and more
like a shoot 'em up robot.  He doesn't seem to possess the campy high-
flying enjoyment like his action counterpart Jackie Chan does in his
movies. And the duo of Yun-Fat and Sorvino doesn't really click on
screen...their dynamic duo routine somehow doesn't register in the
compatibility department.
       THE REPLACEMENT KILLERS is indeed a crafty and catchy title for
a thriller. But this movie never lives up to its exciting name. Maybe
it is because this film's motivation is from an American music video
director in that of Fuqua who simply lacks the intense, atmospheric
slap-happy exuberance from that of Asian directors like John Woo or
Stanley Tong who can satisfy the needs of the Hong Kong-style action
genre. THE REPLACEMENT KILLERS ands its main star Chow Yun-Fat both
have the potential as a breakout hit and star in the U.S.
respectively but this vehicle needs to be driven by someone with more
charisma and character. A fair action thriller is offered here but
what a difference this movie would make from merely being fair to that
of being a fist-full-of-frenzied fun. A mild recommendation at best.
http://www.vgt.com/atmovies.html

Title
Review for Apostle, The (1997)
starring: Robert Duvall, John Beasley, Farrah Fawcett, June Carter,
Billy Bob Thornton, Miranda Richardson
Director: Robert Duvall
   Oscar-winning actor Robert Duvall has directed, produced, and wrote
what very well may be the most intensifying, gut-wrenching, powerful
and complexed movies that has hit the big screen in ages in that of
THE APOSTLE, a poignant and perplexing portrayal of a man who finds
solace with God despite his own questionable weakness and peace of
mind. This riveting examination of an evangelical preacher Euliss
"Sonny" Dewey asks some bold questions about this tremendously flawed
human being: can a man who is supposed to represent the Almighty also
tackle his own demons?
     Duvall does an incredible job at introducing us to this paradoxical
preacher--a man who consistently battles his instincts, sexual urges,
convictions, and anger. Preacher Dewey is a problematic yet passionate
pariah who needs guidance but is willing to smother this feeling and
become a representative of God, therefore avoiding a cataclysmic
conflict within his own personal pain. A brilliant turn that has
landed Duvall his 1997 best actor National Society of Film Critics
credentials. And thank goodness Duvall and his movie can qualify for
Academy Award consideration for this year because this film definitely
deserves the recognition of being considered one of the best offerings
to potentially be honored.
     Duvall's Preacher Dewey is a lovable soul but his human heart
becomes congested when rage takes over after he discovers his wife
(Farrah Fawcett) and her young lover "in cahoots" with one another.
Disgruntled by the whole affair, Dewey--with the help of a baseball
bat and blatant jealousy, lands his wife's boy-toy in a serious coma.
With this act, Preacher Dewey has no choice but to move on and
discover an odyssey of peace and serenity that will compensate his
desirous and disastrous demons. Coming across a new path of sorts,
Sonny Dewey deems himself "The Apostle" and eventually teams up with a
black preacher (John Beasley) to help collaborate on building a new
church called "The One Way Road To Heaven". Now, The Apostle has
mostly black churchgoers who follow him and is eventually caught up in
the gospel high-spirited soul of these folks' religious rituals. He
actually cares and relishes his black congregation to the point that
he even challenges the racist antics of a passerby (Billy Bob
Thornton). The Apostle even has moments of wooing a separated married
woman (Miranda Richardson) and has no moral qualms about satisfying
that pleasure either.
      This film doesn't ask for sympathy for its complicated
protagonist in that of Sonny Dewey, a.k.a The Apostle, because it's a
much better movie than that. Instead, this film reinforces the notion
that man's consciousness is his own guidance and that he has the power
to choose what to do with it. Whether his intentions are disguised to
suit his soul or give credence to his ambiguous actions, the courage
for man to live and confront his moral code and human decency is
extensively demonstrated in this magnificent movie. What Robert Duvall
accomplished with THE APOSTLE is a brimstone of bravura that will
certainly show just how significant a breakthrough this film really
is! THE APOSTLE is an opulent, natural high!
http://www.vgt.com/atmovies.html

Title
Review for Titanic (1997)
starring: Leonardo DiCaprio, Kate Winslet, Gloria Stuart, Kathy Bates,
Billy Zane
Director: James Cameron
TITANIC is James Cameron's 150 million plus water-logged extravagant
epic set afloat to a tremendous tune involving a touching love story
amid the devastating consequences that dictate this tragic footnote in
history--the sinking of this incredible vigorous vessel. What Cameron
does is essentially give us a history lesson in an empowering, emphat-
ic, entertaining way. This extraordinary flick feels like a big event
with a litany of emblematic scope and impressive visual
vitality. Cameron wants to lose the audience in his elitist approach
to this lavish production.
TITANIC stars Oscar-nominated heartthrob Leonardo DiCaprio as Jack, a
wandering artist who captures the attention (and eventual love) of
Rose (Oscar-nominated actress Kate Winslet), a young socialite who
happens to be involved with a vain suitor (Billy Zane). This early
2oth century love story is as opulent and glossy as the whole film
itself. We digest every elegant nostalgic nuance that is provided in
this breathtaking period piece. The romantic bond that is cemented
between these two lovers serves as an eerie irony because it is their
attachment that proves to be the only thing considered durable,
reliable, indestructible, and resillient...not the mighty ship that
was used as the catalyst to encourage their lovelorn union in the
first place.
TITANIC is perhaps the first 100 million dollar plus film in quite
some time to actually carve a niche for letting its magnificent
special effects and big-budget billing match its human dimensional
heart.  Cameron's effort here is not all plastic and ponderous; he
delivers a humane scale of hope, beauty, and passion. TITANIC does
have that sinking feeling, and it's not because of the iceberg--it's
because of our emotional impulse for this exceptional film.
http://www.vgt.com/atmovies.html

Title
Review for Grosse Pointe Blank (1997)
GROSSE POINTE BLANK review ***1/2
starring: John Cusack, Minnie Driver, Dan Aykroyd, Alan Arkin, Jeremy 
Piven, Joan Cusack
directed by: George Armitage
   
There is something so sardonic and humorously delightful about movie 
hitmen that the big movie screen cannot seem to get enough of them. 
These hitmen seem to invade our cinema psyche. Let's see, there was 
PRIZZI'S HONOR, PULP FICTION, GET SHORTY, and now another twisted 
spin on the "hitmen-are-hip" circuit with GROSSE POINTE BLANK, a quirky
high-caliber dark comedy that is bound to send your cynicism and
funnybone to the same repair shop. GROSSE POINTE BLANK is so effortless
in its relentless send-up of everyday drivel that this film shamelessly
makes a sympathetic point out of becoming a hitman just to spite the
ordinary contrivances of lackluster life.
Martin Q. Blank (John Cusack) is a suburbanite who is sick and tired 
of his life, specifically his run-of-the-mill office job. Everything
seems so bleak to him. On top of all that is incredibly dull for him, he
has to seek professional help from his shrink (a funny Alan Arkin) who
cannot stand Blank and is constantly trying to avoid him at all costs.
Then there's Grocer (Dan Aykroyd), another hitman who is constantly
after Blank because, get this, Blank won't commit to joining a hitman's
union he is trying to establish. As a result, Grocer spends his time
trying to "off" Blank for his defiance. There is even a hilarious
shoot-out scene between Blank and Grocer in close proximity involving a
kitchen counter. This is all very humorous stuff. After awhile, Blank is
convinced by his employee Marcella (Joan Cusack) to take some time off
and go back to his Detroit suburb of Gross Pointe to attend a ten year
high school reunion. The advantage to this would be the pleasure of
reuniting with an old high school sweetie named Debbie (Minnie Driver),
an
ex-girlfriend Blank has never quite gotten over emotionally.
GROSSE POINTE BLANK is so offbeat and uniquely flagrant that one cannot
help wondering why this cunning comedy seems so lofty despite its
touching and tepid appeal at times. Well, for obvious reasons, credit
needs to go to a superb cast led by John Cusack (he helped contribute to
the screenplay). Cusack is such an underrated actor (for proof, witness
THE GRIFTERS) that 
audiences tend to take his acting ability for granted. And the
supporting players, all Oscar-nominated previously, are no slouches
either in the talent pool of Aykroyd, Arkin, and Cusack's sister Joan.
Director Armitage, whose underappreciated film MIAMI BLUES was another
off-kilter study of an individual's intolerance with predictable rut,
manages to assemble a caustic comedic tone in Cusack's performance. Even
the protagonist's last name Blank has a double meaning: emptiness
looking for something to take its place 
desperately. Besides, having a hitman named Blank must present some sort
of prankish paradox. Yes, Martin's life may be "blank" in terms of
fulfillment, but one thing definitely not lacking in this dead-pan funny
film is a sizzling screenplay by writers who know how to deliver a witty
and whooping movie.
Frank rates this film: ***1/2 stars

Title
Review for B*A*P*S (1997)
starring: Halle Berry, Natalie Desselle, Martin Landau, Ian Richardson
directed by: Robert Townsend
Actor-director-writer Robert Townsend first made a big splash with his
lampoon hit HOLLYWOOD SHUFFLE several years back. Of course this film
showcased satirical bits about how Hollywood has ridiculously portrayed
black folks in Tinseltown over the decades. You name it and Townsend
cleverly spoofed it: black pimps, hookers, drug 
addicts, gang members, etc. HOLLYWOOD SHUFFLE was a breakthrough hit
because...well, it was funny, revealing, and sadly true. Now with
Townsend's latest film B.A.P.S, one wonders whether or not Townsend got
the message of his own treasured HOLLYWOOD SHUFFLE 
because BAPS (black American princesses) looks like it stems from one of
those sorrowful "SHUFFLE" skits. Halle Berry and Natalie Desselle ("SET
IT OFF") play two black Southern girlfriends who travel to California in
order to appear in a music video. What appears so unusual about these
boisterous black "soul sisters" is that they are so loud and obnoxious
in their gigantic blonde wigs, gold teeth, five inch finger-
nails, and tight-fitting clothing that one would think these two fashion
delinquents mugged RuPaul on the way to their audition. Because of some
rather awkward circumstances, the two fearless fashion plates end up
staying with a dying wealthy white millionaire (Martin Landau) and his
stuffy and sensible butler (Ian Richardson) only to start enjoying the
plush life that these two "fish-out-of-water" never experienced back in
Decatur, Georgia. Soon the film resorts to the degrading trials 
and tribulations by having these two sassy sweethearts "conform" within
the realm of wealth and its wonder. Who will get their comeuppance?
   Will it be the B.A.P.S or the rich establishment that judges them?
Better yet, maybe these Georgia gals can bring some understanding and
insight to the folks outside their world. Or maybe I should begin by
proclaiming BAPS as the first major flop of the 1997 movie season?
B.A.P.S is an insufferable, hackeyed embarassment of a movie. Its 
vapid approach to showing these loud uninteresting dressed-up dimwit
dolls in this wasted comedy of errors is too much to say the least.
Halle Berry's movie career hasn't exactly been fireworks as of lately 
(witness her in the lame RICH MAN'S WIFE for example) and Natalie
Desselle has the dubious task (besides being in this movie) as
portraying the rotund and ridiculous BAP, especially in comparison to
Berry's svelte 
self. And one has to wonder why in the world is Academy Award winning
Martin Landau doing in such a drawback of a movie? He simply stands
around looking like a fossil who recently escaped from the local museum
archive. And I'm sure BAPS is a long haul from the coveted halls of the
BBC for Ian Richardson. The only thing Townsend accomplished by
assembling B.A.P.S was to show that he had a big budget to work with,
hence the casting of Landau and Richardson. Otherwise, this film has no
direction or redeeming 
qualities other than being offensive, aimless, and having its young
black female leads all dressed up in silly garb with no place to go. 
But there is a place to go---out the exit doors! B.A.P.S---Beware of
Asinine 
Picture that Stinks!!!
E-mail:  qnfr98a@prodigy.com
Website:  http://www.vgt.com/atmovies.html
