Authors
Chris Holland & Scott Hamilton
Number of Reviews
8

Title
Review for Phenomena (1985)
A review by Chris Holland & Scott Hamilton of http://www.stomptokyo.com/
The really challenging part of writing a review of Creepers is not making
a "Jeepers Creepers" joke. Only those with a really strong will could
resist.
Jeepers creepers, in this movie we get to see the world through an
insect's peepers!
Okay, so you would have to have a will much stronger than ours. Creepers
is an Italian horror movie by one of the most popular directors of Italian
horror movies, Dario Argento. Creepers is also an early starring vehicle
for Jennifer Connelly (Labyrinth, Mulholland Falls), and she plays a girl
who loves insects. There is a scene in which she falls into a pool full of
maggots, and another in which she gags herself to induce vomiting. In
other words, it has everything you expect to see in a Jennifer Connelly
movie.
Connelly plays Jennifer Corvino, the daughter of a famous movie star who
is enrolled in a boarding school in Switzerland. It turns out that in the
general area of the school there has been a series of gruesome murders of
primarily young women going back at least a year. And it doesn't so much
seem that the police are baffled, as that the police don't care, judging
by how easy it is for a young woman to end up alone at night.
Jennifer is not happy with her new digs, which is understandable, because
the school is housed in the second scariest building in all of Zurich. The
other schoolgirls make fun of her, and the headmistress is creepy. Worst
of all, Jennifer starts having fits of sleepwalking accompanied by weird
hallucinations. During one of these trips, Jennifer wanders into the lab
of Dr. McGowan (Donald Pleasence), an entomologist. This is a happy
coincidence, because it turns out that Jennifer has the psychic power to
control insects. Oh, and McGowan is confined to a wheelchair, and has a
laser-guided chimpanzee that helps him out around the house.
McGowan realizes that Jennifer might be able to solve the recent rash of
killers. Good idea: send the 12-year old girl out after the killer who has
a proven track record of killing 12-year old girls. The plan involves
Jennifer following a carrion fly around until it leads her to dead bodies.
Somehow this works, but she only finds suspects, not definite answers.
Before anything interesting can happen, Jennifer finds out that her father
has decided to pull her out of the school. Fortunately for the plot, there
are no flights leaving that day, and she has to stay overnight with the
school's Mrs. Bruckner (Daria Nicolodi), who lives in -- guess what -- the
scariest building in Zurich. From this point on, it's one shocking twist
after another (eight -- we counted).
Well they would be shocking twists, if it weren't for the fact that nearly
everything that has gone before has nothing to do with what happens in the
house. The movie keeps laying on all sorts of subplots, but there are no
clues as to the killer's identity until it is revealed. There are some
very impressive visual sequences early on in the film, like Jennifer's
nocturnal hallucinations, but they never seem to mean anything. We got the
impression that the hallucinations might have been brought on by some sort
of childhood abuse, but after the first fifteen minutes of the film they
are never referred to again. Then there is the fact that Jennifer's love
of insects seems to come and go from scene to scene.
And just because this is an Italian movie, don't think that the characters
somehow avoid the American horror movie convention of acting stupid. At
one point Jennifer needs to get the phone which has just fallen into a
hole in the floor of the scary house. She could either pull the phone up
by its cord, or she could crawl down the hole. Which does she choose?
"Let's see. I'm trapped in the scariest building in Zurich, there is an
insect infested hole in the floor, should I go down there? It's danker,
darker, scarier and it's quite likely to empty into some sort of
subterranean pit where the killer lives. Yep, guess I'll crawl down
there."
The film is full of Argento standards: abrupt music cuts, a rock n roll
score, young women running scared through the woods. Plus, there's plenty
of gore and gross stuff, although we probably could have done without the
maggot pit.
The original Italian title for Creepers is Phenomena, and the original
version runs nearly 30 minutes longer. While this may seem like a lot of
cuts, it is our understanding that most of the cuts are to dialogue
passages that don't make a lot of difference to the narrative, such as a
little more explanation as to why it takes so long for Jennifer's father
to get her out of the boarding school. 30 minutes of dialogue in this film
might not be as much as it sounds, because the actors in this movie
converse in a tortuously slow pace usually found only on C-SPAN.
We have long held the opinion that Donald Pleasance (known to most horror
fans as Dr Loomis from the Halloween franchise) has the ability to raise
whatever movie he's in to a slightly higher standard. He always takes his
roles seriously and delivers his lines earnestly. In Creepers, he plays a
Scots, and guess what? He actually has a subtle Scottish accent! Despite
the fact that his sidekick is a monkey, he plays the role with some
dignity.
Connelly is at least trying to do a good job. Some of her line delivery is
a little awkward, but she does have a natural screen presence. It's nice
to see someone as young as she was do a credible job outside of a movie
that stars a basketball-playing dog or trained whale. (No, razor-wielding
monkeys don't count.)
As valiantly as they may try, the actors here can't make up for the fact
that some of the plot details are pretty silly (like the distinct lack of
police presence for most of the movie), or for the fact that the director
made some bad cinematic decisions. For instance, animating a firefly at
normal speed and then playing the scene in slow motion completely destroys
the illusion. In addition, the film's opening decapitation scene is
hilariously sloppy.
As we have mentioned in our review of Cemetery Man, we are not big fans of
European gore films, or giallo, and Creepers did little to change our
opinion. If you are a big fan of giallo, you might want to try this film.
On the other hand, if you are a big fan of Jennifer Connelly you may want
to skip this film. Unless you have really weird fantasies about Jennifer
Connelly, in which case we don't want to know about it.

Title
Review for Temp, The (1993)
For the html version of this review with screen captures, please point
your browser to http://members.aol.com/stomptokyo
Awful femme fatale movies had something of a mini-renaissance in the early
90's, including such noxious titles as Basic Instinct, The Crush, The
Babysitter, Poison Ivy... oh, the list goes on and on. They all feature,
in one form or another, a conniving woman who is initially attractive on
many fronts but eventually reveals her true colors and is nearly
responsible for the downfall of all who put their trust in her. We wish we
could say that The Temp is the worst example of this sub-genre, but the
truth is, most of them are easily as painful as this movie. However, don't
let that deceive you: The Temp is very, very bad indeed.
Peter Derns (Timothy Hutton) works as a marketing executive for the Mrs.
Appleby cookie company. The environment is highly competitive, especially
since Appleby was recently acquired by another company, constantly
referred to as "the boys in New York." When Peter's regular assistant
takes leave to be with his wife during childbirth, Kris Bolin (Twin Peaks
alum Lara Flynn Boyle) arrives to save the day. Not only does she finish
the all-important report due by noon, but she also reorganizes Peter's
entire life in the space of a week.
Kris decides she likes working for Peter so much that when the regular
assistant returns to work, she arranges an "accident" involving a paper
shredder. Personally, we're the types to check the power eight times
before sticking our hands into something with that much destructive
potential, but there it is. A whirring sound, a spray of blood, an
agonized cry, and Kris is sitting pretty in Peter's office again. She even
sends the poor cad a sympathy card.
Unfortunately for Peter, Kris doesn't stop there. She has found that she
likes being upwardly mobile, and so the company undergoes a colossal
series of accidents and firings as Kris works her way to the top, trying
to seduce Peter along the way. Peter, who is just exiting therapy for
acute paranoia, doesn't know whether he imagines that Kris is engineering
these events, or if she's really responsible. What he does know is that
she's not making it any easier for him to reach a reconciliation with his
estranged wife.
>From here, The Temp spirals downward into absurdity. Not only are we led
to believe that Kris can get away with murder (repeatedly), but she can
also engineer a batch of cookies that cause test market volunteers to
cough up blood, hack the company e-mail system, and perform a number of
other highly unlikely activities. We began to think that Kris might
actually be innocent, because her tally of crimes became too massive to
believe.
The script is not completely to blame for The Temp's hemorrhage-inducing
awfulness; the cast does its part to lower the film's quality even
further. Boyle should have gotten some sort of shame award for her
overacting as Bolin. Faye Dunaway (as Derns' boss, Charlene) did get a
shame award for hers -- the Golden Raspberry for Worst Supporting Actress
that year. Hutton chose to go the other route, becoming the most
relentlessly boring screen personality we've seen since Jeff Muldovan in
Trancers 4. Rounding out this roll call of shame is Dwight Schultz, who
should really stick to those oddball characters on TV. His dull executive
role in this movie made us pine for the wacky adventures of "Howling Mad"
Murdoch on The A-Team.
When we see films like this, we often wonder what could have inspired a
movie studio to make a film this wretched. Was the script re-written on
the set? Were all the people involved suffering some mass hallucination
that they were making a good movie? Perhaps the flick itself offers a
clue: maybe somewhere, in an office in Hollywood, a vengeful temp is
secretly greenlighting projects just like this one. Now that's scary.
This review copyright 1998 by Chris Holland and Scott Hamilton of Stomp
Tokyo Video Reviews.

Title
Review for Rebel Without a Cause (1955)
A review by Chris Holland & Scott Hamilton of http://www.stomptokyo.com/
One of our older friends, now fifty-something, once related the experience
of seeing Rebel Without a Cause for the first time:
"I stumbled out of the theater, just in shock... people my age came up to
me and said, 'What's it about?' and all I could say was 'It's about us!'
...In those days, Hollywood just didn't make movies like that. It was
important to suddenly have a movie that was about us."
Certainly, this is Rebel's claim to fame: it was one of the first films to
portray its teen generation of moviegoers in a semi-realistic (if overly
dramatized) fashion. Unfortunately, its success led to a glut of teen
exploitation films which still surface now and again (Switchblade Sisters,
anyone?). But this film itself is not to blame.
James Dean plays Jim Stark, the first in what will be a trio of main
characters with first names starting with J. Jim begins the film nearly
passed out in a gutter, and is brought into the police station on charges
of public drunkenness. There he briefly meets Judy (Natalie Wood) and
Johnny, better known as Plato (Sal Mineo). Jim is new in the neighborhood,
and we guess this is the way he gets to know people -- through the
friendly local law-enforcement offices.
The morning after his parents rescue him from the police (thereby
revealing a whole set of dysfunctional family problems), Jim runs into
Plato and Judy again. Although Plato, an outsider in his own right, is
immediately accepting of Jim, Judy is somewhat harder to win over. She
runs with a rough crowd, and Jim's initiation into that crowd is equally
rough.
During the course of the initiation (a high stakes game of chicken),
Judy's boyfriend is killed, and she immediately bonds with the sensitive
Jim. Meanwhile the boyfriend's gang (including a young Dennis Hopper)
decide that Jim has ratted them out to the police and decide to hunt Jim
down.
The rest of the movie documents what happens that night.
Today, a lot of the movie seems pretty silly. An early scene takes place
during a planetarium show, and the show itself appears to be narrated by
some wierdo who broke into the observatory, started the show, and is just
making it up as he goes along. This is the kind of film where even the bad
kids wear ties. There is also a lot of painfully self-aware dialogue, but
that's pretty much par for the course in any serious film from this time
period.
However, what viewers watching the film today will notice above anything
else is that Plato is gay. Now, Rebel was made in 1955 and there was a
self-censorship board in the U.S. that didn't allow the subject of
homosexuality to be portrayed in films, but Plato is about as gay as a
character could be in a 1950's movie. Besides Sal Mineo's constant
come-hither looks at James Dean, there is also some very interesting
dialogue. Here are some of Plato's best lines, delivered in a rush to
James Dean:
"Hey, you want to come home with me? I mean there's nobody home at my
house and heck, I'm not tired. Are you? See, I don't have too many people
I can talk to... If you want to come, we could talk, and in the morning,
we could have breakfast like my dad used to. Gee, if only you could have
been my dad."
Okay, at the end it gets into kind of a weird area, but you get the idea.
A lot of Plato's problems (his alienation from his family, his ostracism
from the school crowd, his urges to kill small animals) can reasonably be
traced back to the fact that he is gay and from society's reactions to
that. He's completely smitten with Jim, probably because Jim is so
self-absorbed that he doesn't realize that Plato is gay or even what gay
means. But hey, this is all just theory, right? No one actually comes out
and says that Plato prefers the company of men....
Rebel Without a Cause is, if nothing else, a fiercely honest movie (on
points other than Plato's sexuality). Dean's portrayal of Jim is both
vulnerable and defiant, and the disparities between Judy's sex-kitten
school persona and confused, rejected daughter-self at home reveal a lot
about the amount of information withheld from teenagers in the 1950's.
Jim: Nobody talks to children. Judy: No, they just tell them.
We suspect that Rebel Without a Cause (and other films like it) had a lot
to do with the changes in Hollywood that were soon to happen; it was
certainly a harbinger of the change in American culture looming just over
the decade's horizon. In any case, it's a wonderful movie if you can
adjust to the time period and realize that if the lines seem cheesy, at
least the feelings behind them were real.

Title
Review for Shakes the Clown (1991)
A review by Chris Holland & Scott Hamilton of http://www.stomptokyo.com/ 
Here's a situation we've all been in: You want to rent a movie about
alcoholic clowns. But when it comes to alcoholic clown movies, how can you
tell the good ones from the bad ones? What is the yardstick by which we
judge alcoholic clown movies? Luckily we have an answer for you. According
to the Boston Globe, Shakes the Clown is "the Citizen Kane of alcoholic
clown movies." Well there you go! Rent this movie! What more do you need
to know?
What you need to know is that there's a moment in this film when Stenchy
the Clown slams his head down into the bar and cries, "Who made this
planet?!" Our immediate response was to yell "Goldthwait! Bob Goldthwait!"
in the hopes that Stenchy might then do something amusing, like beat the
hell out of Goldthwait's character, Shakes. He certainly deserves
something of that sort for writing and directing Shakes the Clown.
The movie starts, naturally, with Goldthwait throwing up. Actually, it
starts with a dog eating pizza, but the vomit scene is mere seconds after
that. Funny stuff, huh? Yeah, we thought so too. The general thrust of the
picture is that Shakes is an alcoholic and, despite the fact that he's a
pretty good clown, the booze affects his work. He's passed up for host of
the local kids' tv show, much to the disappointment of his pals Stenchy
(Blake Clark) and Dink (Adam Sandler -- yes, *that* Adam Sandler), both
clowns who expected to be included in the show when Shakes got the job.
The clown who does get the hosting job is Binky (Tom Kenny), a
self-proclaimed jerk who doesn't get much respect from the other clowns.
With his lackeys, Boots and HoHo, Binky not only takes Shakes' job, but
also frames Shakes for the murder of the local clown talent agent, Owen
Cheese (Paul Dooley). So Shakes' job is this: clear his name, kick the
hooch habit, and find true love with Judy (Julie Brown), a waitress at the
clown bar named the Twisted Balloon. Gee, so far this sounds like a
Tolkien novel.
If you're one of those people who is scared of clowns to begin with,
Shakes won't do anything to convince you otherwise. In fact, if you
generally appreciate clowns, this movie may change your mind. The clowns
presented here are some of the scariest people we've seen in a long time.
The comments from the barflies at the Twisted Balloon made us squirm
uncomfortably in our seats. For most of the film, Shakes himself is a
frightening apparition with a beer-soaked wig and drool-stained makeup.
It's not a pretty picture.
One of the only things we liked about Shakes the Clown is its depiction of
the different castes of clown society. Whether these castes exist or not,
we don't know, but they're darn funny to think about. Mimes, of course,
form the lowest class of clown, at least in the eyes of the "party clowns"
like Shakes. Then there are the horrific rodeo clowns, who terrorize the
party clowns and brag of being kicked in the head by bulls. We really wish
Goldthwait had done a little more with this idea than simply mime-bash,
but it did make us smile when he thrust a cardboard container over a
mime's head and said, "Get outta this box!"
If the story and characters are bad, then the acting is reprehensible.
Although Goldthwait is completely believable as Shakes, keep in mind that
he's playing a drunken slob who can't do anything right. It's not exactly
a hard role to play. Julie Brown spends the entire movie talking like
Elmer Fudd, slurring her R's and L's, which is weawwy -- uh, really --
annoying. It makes you want to bweak her widdle neck. Amazingly enough,
the best performance came from Adam Sandler as Dink. Dink was the only
person on screen for whom we felt any affection at all.
At this point you're probably saying, "Well at least no one more
'talented' than Adam Sandler got roped into this outhouse of a movie." Oh,
how wrong you'd be! Robin Williams actually appears in this mess. True,
he's billed in the credits as "Marty Fromage," but he's here, playing a
high-strung mime instructor. He's not just a mime, he's a mime on the
edge! This sounds a lot funnier than it actually is.
Perhaps the most amazing thing about this movie, after all is said and
done, is that Bobcat Goldthwait has been talking about making another
Shakes the Clown movie. What makes him think anyone would want to watch
more of this unamusing and even repulsive schtik?

Title
Review for Eyes of a Stranger (1981)
For the html version of this review with screen captures, please point
your browser to http://members.aol.com/stomptokyo
If we told you that this film is a horror movie starring Lauren Tewes
(Julie from The Love Boat) and a very young Jennifer Jason Leigh as Tewes'
deaf and blind little sister, you'd probably moan a little bit while your
eyes rolled into the back of your head. Certainly, when we rented this
film for 99 cents, we weren't expecting much.
That's why it was a nice surprise to be treated to the supsenseful,
above-average horror flick that Eyes of a Stranger turned out to be. While
not cinematic history by any means, Eyes is a good piece of entertainment
for horror buffs and manages to avoid some of the classic problems that
plague the genre.
Tewes plays Jane, a local newscaster in Miami, where a new serial killer
has begun to take the lives of young women. Before we learn that Jane is
our main heroine, however, we are treated to a couple of grisly death
scenes. The killer's modus operandi is familiar by now: he rings them up
on the phone, tells them that they're about to die, and then viciously
rapes and murders them. In the first murder scene we witness, a woman is
not only victimized, but is greeted by the sight of her boyfriend's head
floating in the aquarium first. Eyes of a Stranger owes a lot to makeup
and effects artist Tom Savini for some solid, shocking images.
Jane is extremely concerned about the killer, and with good reason: her
younger sister Tracy was assaulted when they were both children. For some
unknown reason, Tracy went blind and deaf as a result. Now they live in an
apartment together, much to the disappointment of Jane's attorney
boyfriend, who wants to start living with Jane. Jane, meanwhile, is so
distracted by the events that she starts to rant during the nightly
broadcasts, to the consternation of the show's producer.
One night, Jane notices one of her neighbors perform a strange ritual in
the parking garage. He changes his shirt and disposes of the old one,
which has mysterious stains on it. This begins her quest to discover if
this man, whose apartment is across the courtyard from hers, is indeed the
killer. If she's right, then she'll gather evidence to expose him. If her
producer thought she was nuts before, this clinches it.
Eyes of a Stranger works because Jane is neither completely stupid nor
helpless. She sets upon a course of action and completes it, although her
insistence on getting complete proof of the killer's identity before
reporting him seems a bit silly. One anonymous phone call to the police
and her troubles could be over, but Jane prefers to break into a scary
murderer's apartment to search for clues. Fortunately, she hands the
evidence over to someone who can actually check up on it.
The climax of the film comes in one of the more imaginative endings to a
horror film we've seen in some time. In a scene reminiscent of Rear
Window, Jane looks into her own apartment from the killer's during one of
her clue-finding missions and sees... the killer! His method of
terrorizing Tracy is downright creepy. Thankfully, the screenwriter also
gave Tracy some guts as well, but we refuse to give away much more.
Suffice it to say that the ending gives Savini sufficient opportunity to
display his makeup prowess.
Above all, we were thankful that Eyes of a Stranger managed to give its
characters some common sense. Unlike most horror films even today, the
protagonists in Eyes know when to hide, when to watch, and most
importantly, when to run like hell. No one goes to investigate the strange
noise while in full possession of the knowledge that the killer is near,
and no one tries to attack the killer when it's not absolutely necessary.
And that's a bit of a relief, really.
This review copyright 1998 by Chris Holland and Scott Hamilton of Stomp
Tokyo Video Reviews.

Title
Review for Are You in the House Alone? (1978) (TV)
A review by Chris Holland & Scott Hamilton of http://www.stomptokyo.com/
Just a warning right up front: Such is our disgust at this movie that we
are going to spoil the only twist that this movie has. So if you don't
want to know, or if you're really offended by spoilers, you may not want
read any further.
We picked up Are You in the House Alone? in the horror section of a local
video store. That turns out to be false advertising, because Are You in
the House Alone? is not really a horror film. It plays more like a twisted
ABC after-school special, only with a really disgusting moral.
Are You in the House Alone? was made for TV in 1978, which is pretty
amazing considering the subject matter. The movie opens with young Gail
(Kathleen Beller) being wheeled out of a house on a gurney. She has been
raped, but she will not identify her attacker. "No! No one will believe
me," she protests.
The movie then flashes back to before the rape, and we get to see how this
came about. While trying to make it through the trials of everyday life as
a high school student, Gail finds a threatening note stuck in her locker
door. Up to this point it could be a slasher flick: we have a high school
student being stalked by a psycho. Then the movie follows standard
protocol by introducing a round of suspects. Is it the swarthy, Harvey
Keitel-ish ex-boyfriend who dumped Gail because she wouldn't sleep with
him? Is it Steve (Scott Columby), her new boyfriend? By far the creepiest
candidate is Gail's photography teacher. He keeps telling Gail that she
needs to look "sexier" when she models for her self-portraits.
Meanwhile, Gail's home life is falling apart. Her mother (Blythe Danner)
wants to return to her old job as a real estate agent, but dad argues
vehemently against it. This plot thread is later magically resolved
without the inclusion of the audience. Then dad loses his job and spends
his days boozing at a bar across the street from his office, without
telling Gail. Why are we subjected to this? Apparently to fill out the
movie, because none of what happens at home has anything to with what
happens at school until the film finishes its flashbacks and we return to
the present and learn the rapist's true identity.
Here comes that spoiler. The rapist turns out to be Phil, the well-to-do
boyfriend of Gail's best friend, as played by Dennis Quaid. Quaid is
appropriately revolting, so much so that we were amazed that of all the
young actors here, he is the only one who went on to a successful career.
This is the second movie we've reviewed that features an up-and-coming
actor playing a psycho rapist. The other is The Lonely Lady, with Ray
Liotta.
The fact that Phil is Gail's best friend's boyfriend, of course, leads to
all kinds of juicy character conflict, because Gail has labeled Phil, the
most eligible bachelor on campus and son of a wealthy family, as a rapist.
Here's where the movie starts to get really frustrating. Phil doesn't even
try to deny that he had sex with Gail. He claims it was consensual.
Everybody believes him, apparently because Gail is known to have had sex
with her boyfriend, Steve. So the moral is, "Don't have premarital sex,
because if you're raped by a psycho, even one who leaves lots of evidence
behind, beats you so badly you end up in the hospital, and even admits to
having sex with you, no one will believe it was really rape because
obviously you asked for it." The movie spends a little while drumming this
moral into us, and then sort of backs away from it, by saying the real
reason Phil won't be arrested is because his father is friends with a
judge. So what, is this movie now trying to be a scathing indictment of
the justice system? Or is it actually embarrased by its own crudity?
In the real world, Phil would have denied that any contact had ever
happened and gotten himself a decent lawyer. In this TV movie, however, he
provides Gail with ample opportunity to gather evidence that he is indeed
a rapist. When Gail discovers that another girl in school is beginning to
get the same notes, she sets up a trap using a Previously Mentioned Plot
Device: her talent as a photographer. Using a timed shutter and rolls and
rolls of film, Gail catches Phil in the act of leaving a note in the
girl's locker. He then discovers Gail's trap and proceeds to attack her,
allowing plenty of time for the eyewitnesses to arrive. Roll credits.
The thing that most disgusted us about this film is the way the movie
lingers over Gail's trauma, especially during the rape scene. We are
spared nothing within the limits of television censorship, and the
resulting emotional distress, while perhaps an accurate portrayal of the
feelings of a rape victim, is stomach-turning to watch. Perhaps it hits a
little too close to the mark, as if the director simply turned on the
camera and said, "Okay, Dennis, now go *rape* her." Some things are better
left off camera, especially since this scene brings nothing to the film
but some tawdry shock value.
Our final complaint about Are You In The House Alone? is its billing as a
horror film. Certainly, it uses horrific elements, but from the opening
moments of the movie it is clear that this is a rape drama, not a horror
movie. Perhaps it was retooled to seem more like a horror movie after the
success of Halloween that same year. Add to that the fact that it is a
poorly scripted, made-for-TV high school rape drama, and a one-lava lamp
rating is born.

Title
Review for Addiction, The (1995)
For the html version of this review with screen captures, please point
your browser to http://members.aol.com/stomptokyo
Way back in 1995, we went to the newly built 20 screen cineplex-a-rama to
take in NADJA, a black and white avant-garde vampire movie that was doing
the rounds at the time. Before going in, a nice usher asked to see our
ticket stubs, so as to make sure that we actually had a ticket to see
NADJA. We thought, "Hey, NADJA must be amazingly popular if they're
checking tickets to the midnight show!" It turns out this is not why they
were checking stubs (we hear the roving gangs aren't much a problem there
anymore) and we were totally alone in the theater. We could have heckled
the screen all we wanted, but instead we sat quietly and watched NADJA,
the boring vampire movie. It was pretty darn bad, with a slow plot and
weird camera effects that wore out their welcome about two seconds after
they started, and lots of pretentious dialogue. The only thing that made
NADJA even slightly watchable were some fairly funny lines, like when Van
Helsing (Peter Fonda) explains why he did Dracula a favor by killing him.
"He was all bloated and surrounded by zombies," he explains, "kinda like
Elvis at the end."
Two years older and wiser, we rented THE ADDICTION, 1995's other black and
white avant-garde vampire movie. We think Santiana said something we
should have remembered, but we're pretty sure it will be repeated if we
really need to know it.
KATHLEEN: The old adage from Santiana, that those who don't learn from
history are doomed to repeat it, is a lie. There is no history. Everything
we are is eternally with us. Our question is therefore, what can save us
from our crazy insistence of spreading the blight in ever widening
circles?
Oh, right. Thanks. In THE ADDICTION, the main character is a doctoral
student in philosophy named Kathleen who is walking down the street one
night when she is attacked by a vampire (Annabella Sciorra). Only in New
York City. OK, vampires could attack people anywhere. But only in New York
City would the cops react with the amazing indifference that we see in
this film. In any case, the doctors think that the traumatic experience
has aggravated a minor case of anemia that Kathleen didn't know she had,
and she is released.
Of course it isn't really anemia. Kathleen is now a vampire, a creature of
the night, nosferatu. Which means she wears sunglasses and becomes
unbearably pretentious. She goes to her classes and rants against the
concept of free will, while her friends worry about her.
And then comes the blood lust. At first, Kathleen gets the blood she needs
by using a hypodermic to take blood from street people and shooting up
with it. Remember, the name of the movie is THE ADDICTION. Get it?
Soon Kathleen moves on to living targets, sucking the blood out of mentor,
a jive-talking youth, and some random anthropology student she meets in
the school library.
KATHLEEN: Oh, the stench here is worse than a charnel house. This is a
graveyard. Rows of crumbling tombstones, viscous libelous epitaphs. And
we're all drawn here like flies.
Wow! So you don't like the library, already! For some reason, all the
vampires in this movie have to demand that their victims tell them to go
away. This way, when they get bitten, it's the victim's own fault, the
victim's own free will, or so the argument is presented to us. We suppose
that the heavy dose of Cypress Hill on the soundtrack, with their message
that consenual crimes (i.e. using drugs) are OK, is probably supposed to
underscore this theme. Profound, huh?
KATHLEEN: Sure, it's easy to spot in people like me. The cancer's grown
obvious. But you're as terminal as I am, you know that? You're as addicted
as I am. It's the nature of the organism.
Zing! You showed us what for, Kathleen. On to the actors. The biggest name
in the cast is Christopher Walken, no stranger to either horror movies or
bad horror movies. He shows up for about ten minutes, suggests Kathleen
read NAKED LUNCH, and calls her 'nothing' about twenty times, apparently
because he can defecate and she can't.
Lili Taylor, as Kathleen, gives a pretty standard performance for this
kind of role. She gives a painfully self aware performance, but she is
playing a painfully pretentious character so we guess it fits. She also
amused us because of her resemblance to Gen X spokesperson and comedienne
Janeane Garofalo, so we guess you can say we were happy with her in
general.
What annoyed us so fully about this film is that it has no entertainment
value. It is totally obsessed with its 'message.'
KATHLEEN: Some things are more important that others. Besides, aren't you
the one who eschews speculative philosophy? 
Large portions of the movie seemed like a lesson in philosophy, with
people quoting Sartre and reaffirming that Kirkagaard was right. This goes
on forever. Didn't director Abel Ferra (BAD LIEUTENANT) realize that this
was a vampire film? And vampire films should be either scary or fun?
Instead we get LOST BOYS 3: THE DISSERTATION. It's EXOTICA with fangs. Or
considering that the Janeane Garofalo look-a-like's best friend is tall
and blonde, maybe it's THE TRUTH ABOUT BATS AND FOGS. It would be the
second vampire movie Janeane Garofalo has been in, the other being REALITY
BITES.
The only entertaining moment in the film is when, after obtaining her
doctorate, Kathleen sucks the blood out of one of the professors on her
dissertation committee. We're pretty sure she meant this act as social
commentary on her student loans, but the rest of the movie showed us
nothing interesting.
JEAN: So you what, ur, you want an apology for ethical relativism or something?
THE GUYS AT STOMP TOKYO: No, just an apology for this movie.
This review copyright 1998 by Chris Holland and Scott Hamilton of Stomp
Tokyo Video Reviews.

Title
Review for Spitfire (1994)
A review by Chris Holland & Scott Hamilton of http://www.stomptokyo.com/
There are times in a person's life when you feel the calling of a higher
power, when the universe reaches out and brushes your cheek to get your
attention. At times like this, a person is compelled to do whatever it
takes to satisfy their place in the universe. To put it another way, it's
Destiny.
That is why, if anyone asks, we decided to watch the movie Spitfire. We
didn't just wander by this film in the video store like so many you read
about here. Oh no, we saw the preview for Spitfire on another tape and we
were driven to see it. Driven in the same way a moth is driven to a
flame... and boy, did we get burned!
The most compelling thing about this movie is the cast. Among the people
we saw in the preview:
Lance Henriksen: He played Bishop in Aliens, and he can now be seen in Fox
TV's Millennium. He is an excellent actor, though he has appeared in a lot
of straight-to-video junk.
Tim Thomerson: If you've been reading our site for any amount of time, you
know who Tim is. He played Jack Deth in all five Trancers films, he played
one of Mel Gibson's cronies in Air America, he was the Blur in those Baby
Ruth commercials. He is the king of B-actors, a consummate performer, and
a good friend.*
Brion James: Brion is known as the "time to die" guy from Blade Runner.
More recently he appeared in The Fifth Element. Also a b-actor
extraordinaire and a childhood friend of Thomerson's.
Sarah Douglas: She was Ursa in Superman II. She's been in a lot of bad
movies since then.
There are not many movies out there that could correctly utilize a cast
like this, and Spitfire doesn't even come close. For instance, Henriksen
plays a James Bond-type character named Richard Charles, complete with a
wardrobe made of nothing but tuxedoes, cool cars, and a jet pack.
Unfortunately, Henriksen's performance in this film makes even riding a
jet pack look boring. Our theory is that ol' Lance had some boat payments
to make, because he's not even paying attention to his fellow cast
members.
The film opens with Charles enjoying a quiet tryst with a lover. He's in
full tuxedo, but somehow she manages to be topless in the first two
minutes of the film (not including the standard "naked dancing girls with
guns" opening credits). Learn from this: nudity in a film's first scene is
not a good sign. Mercifully, this love scene is interrupted by the
appearance of an old arch-enemy, Carla (Douglas), who wants something that
Mr Charles has: a career.
No, no, just kidding. She wants the computer disk which holds some
Ukranian launch codes, so she can wield nuclear power. Mwaaaa-ha-ha-ha-ha!
Once again, we're treated to the old saw of the search for the computer
disk/secret file (see Mute Witness and Hitler's Daughter) and the bad guy
who wants to steal some nukes (see Broken Arrow). Brion James makes his
(only) appearance in this scene and utters his famous line: "Time to die."
The lover takes her cue from this and, in the ensuing
martial-arts/gunfight scene, kills several men before dying herself --
topless all the while. What a woman! Before dying, of course, she reveals
to Charles her deepest secret: he is the father of her daughter, Charlie.
Richard makes his escape and flies away with the aformentioned jet pack.
That is the director's cue to change scenes, and so we meet Charlie Case
(Kristie Phillips), Richard's daughter and world-class gymnast/martial
artist. Rex Beechum (Thomerson), an opportunistic reporter, latches on to
Charlie in an attempt to expose the seamy underside of women's gymnastics
(which, if you believe this film, involves such competitive practices as
spiking the powder bin and dosing your rivals with seizure-inducing
drugs). After one such competition, Charles approaches Charlie, stashes
something on her person without her knowledge, and is quickly captured by
Carla and her minions.
A merry chase begins once Carla figures out that Charlie has the disk (or
actually another tired plot device, the key to a safe deposit box that
contains the disk), and they pursue her gymnastics tour group across
Europe and Asia in an attempt to retrieve it. Beechum follows suit, and
Charlie spends the rest of the film changing accents from scene to scene
and occasionally punching someone (mostly Beechum). In an attempt to ape
(or perhaps parody) the Bond movies, Spitfire features many international
locations.
Spitfire was directed by Albert Pyun, which really ought to tell you
something. Other Pyun masterpieces include Alien from L.A., Cyborg, Hong
Kong '97, and Brain Smasher: A Love Story. Given this track record,
Spitfire is exactly the kind of film you'd expect it to be: bad. How this
man manages to continue making movies, let alone movies with budgets as
relatively high as his recent Adrenaline: Feel the Rush, starring
Chritopher Lambert and Natasha Hensbridge, is a mystery to us. He must
work really cheap. Or maybe he has lots of dirt on certain stars, so they
will appear in his movies for free. If this last theory is true, we don't
even want to know what Tim Thomerson did to appear in so many Pyun films.
It probably involved nuns and sheep, and Pyun must have it all on film,
complete with Dolby digital sound.
As with other Pyun films, the director pretty much points the camera at
the actors, has then do a scene, then movies on. Nobody in this movie ever
milks a joke or does a delivery that serves the material. Perhaps the
worst casualty of this treatemnt is one of Spitfire's running gags, that
is that Charles has left a string of illegitimate children all over the
world who have gone into the intelligence-gathering service. This could
have been an amusing subplot, but every time it's brought up, it falls
flat.
Spitfire may have some historical significance as the first movie ever to
be built around the presence of a gymnastics star. And while we can't say
anything bad about Kristie Phillips as a gymnast, she isn't much of an
actress. Through most of the movie she tries to do some sort of accent,
but darned if we could tell what it was. A couple of times it sounded kind
of Valley Girl, other times it sounds Austrailian, and some other times it
sounds like a Southern drawl. Exactly what her heritage might be is
completely up in the air. It should also be added that she has a mean
right hook, which she uses on Tim Thomerson several times. We enjoyed
those parts of the movie way too much.
Spitfire is just another stupid direct to video action movie, by now
familiar to anyone who spends any amount of time in a video store. Unless
you are a big fan of several of the actors who appear in this film, you do
not want to see Spitfire. You've been warned. This movie is not so bad
it's good. It's so bad it's bad.
---------------------------------------- 
* Two of the statements in this sentence are completely false. We're
investigating how they got by our fact checker.
