Authors
Blake French
Number of Reviews
8

Title
Review for Rush Hour 2 (2001)
I enjoyed the original Rush Hour, the 1998 action comedy that grossed
more than $250 million worldwide.  Through its central characters,
played by Chris Tucker and Jackie Chan, the film provided audiences with
a fresh, exciting combination of action and outrageous comedy.  Although
not a great film, and certainly not worthy of a sequel, director Brett
Ratner admirably stitched together two immensely different characters,
finding a charismatic delight in the diversity of Tucker and Chan.
Unfortunately Ratner does not find the same joy in Rush Hour 2, an
occasionally amusing comedic adventure that leaves us with a profoundly
annoying Chris Tucker fighting for attention while Jackie Chan fights
one-dimensional Chinese villains with his bare fists.  The film contains
some neat action sequences, a great third act, and the most hilarious
outtakes I can remember - but the clash of genres feels intrusive and
awkward.  I wanted more excitement, more character dimension, and a
whole hell of a lot less of Chris Tucker's irritating mouth.
In this sequel, Chan and Tucker reprise their roles as Chief Inspector
Lee of the Royal Hong Kong Police and the all-American LAPD detective
James Carter.  As the movie opens, the two buddies arrive in Hong Kong
for a much needed vacation but receive the biggest case of their careers
almost immediately.  An explosion has killed two U.S. customs agents who
were investigating producers of counterfeit money, and the police
suspect the mastermind behind the scheme to be Ricky Tan (John Lone, in
a very effective performance), the head of the deadliest gang in China.
Although it pisses Carter off, Lee accepts the case -- for personal
reasons, perhaps.  Enter the seductive secret service agent Isabella
Molina (Roselyn Sanchez), billionaire hotel owner and Tan associate
Steven Reign (Alan King), and a sexy but dangerous Hu Li (Crouching
Tiger, Hidden Dragon's Zhang Ziyi), and you have the unpredictable
formula for Rush Hour 2.  Jumping from one locale to the next, Carter
and Lee find adventure at a local massage parlor, a bar, a casino, an
extravagant hotel, and even a luxurious yacht.
Good action sequences and energetic performances don't fuel the movie's
plot, which is often rambling and meaningless.  Rush Hour 2 tries to
pass its plot off as serious, but it's hard to play along when Tucker
can't even play roulette without making a fool of himself.  This is not
supposed to be a stark drama, but after a while, we want relief from the
nonstop comic relief.
Tucker doesn't steal his scenes; instead he steals our attention away
from them.  Chris Tucker is a talented, energetic comedian.  In
moderation, he can be very effective.  Unfortunately, in Rush Hour 2, he
appears in almost every scene and quickly outstays his welcome.  In Rush
Hour, he was an appreciated comic relief.  Here, I just wanted him to
shut up.
Director: Brett Ratner
Producer: Roger Birnbaum, Jonathan Glickman, Arthur Sarkissian, Jay
Stern
Screenwriter: Jeff Nathanson
Stars: Jackie Chan, Chris Tucker, Chris Penn, Don Cheadle, John Lone,
Ziyi Zhang, Alan King, and Stephen Sable
MPAA Rating: PG-13
http://www.rushhour2.com/intro.html
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com

Title
Review for Training Day (2001)
How will the tragic events of September 11, 2001 influence violent
movies?  The box office results of Training Day should answer that
question.  Warner Bros. did postpone the film's release date for two
weeks, but is that enough time for audiences to be ready for such a
brutally violent movie?
I think so, although this is a time where audiences may seek romantic
comedies over disturbing, awakening dramas.  I screened two movies
today, this and the juvenile Max Keeble's Big Adventure.  The theater
was twice as full for Max than Training Day, which proves that people
want uplifting comedies right now.  If you're one of those people,
Training Day is definitely not for you.
Unquestionably convincing, disturbingly realistic, and unflinchingly
honest, Training Day details the events of one day in which a young,
rookie narcotics cop named Jake Hoyt (Ethan Hawke) must show his stuff
to veteran detective Alonzo Harris (Denzel Washington) in order to land
the job he wants.
Jake has a loving wife and a beautiful little baby, both safe and sound
at home.  By the time Jake returns to them that night, he will be a
different person.  He will see things he has never wanted to see, learn
things he does not want to know, and look evil straight in the eye. 
Although the myth states when you dance with the devil, you don't change
the devil, the devil changes you, this experience might actually make
Jake a stronger individual, or it might morally change his standards
forever.
Jake will never forget his training day, and this is a day I won't soon
forget, either.  The film explores a world uncompromisingly barbarous, a
world I never want to see again.  But it does exist in the vast majority
of cities.  Training Day reminds us of that, and sometimes the justice
department is no better than the villainous thugs it patrols.
The film, brilliantly directed by Antoine Fuqua, is fueled with
powerhouse performances.  Denzel Washington displays a side of himself
we have never seen before; I feel he has earned an Oscar nomination for
his sincere, vicious portrayal of a man who was not strong enough to
withstand his dance.  Ethan Hawke invites the audience to stand inside
his cringing shoes.  We're as startled as Jake because we experience the
day through his eyes.
It's a scary world out there.  Training Day shows us the brooding terror
that could exist just blocks away.  It's altogether one of the year's
most thought-provoking films.
Director: Antoine Fuqua 
Producer: Robert F. Newmyer, Jeffrey Silver
Screenwriter: David Ayer
Stars: Denzel Washington, Ethan Hawke, Scott Glenn, Eva Mendes, Tom
Berenger, Snoop Doggy Dogg, Raymond J. Barry, Cliff Curtis, Dr. Dre,
Macy Gray
MPAA Rating: R
http://trainingday.warnerbros.com/cmp/popup.html
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com

Title
Review for Joy Ride (2001/I)
Ever make someone else the brunt of a practical joke -- only to learn
the joke is really on you?  The characters in Joy Ride have, and after
the lessons they learn, you can bet they'll never, ever tease anyone
else again.
Joy Ride has clearly learned from similar, high-octane road thrillers
like Breakdown.  It calculates every move, but seldom do we see the
surprises coming.  The film explores the misadventures of a college
student named Lewis (Paul Walker).  Lewis is a nice guy, having just
bought a used car to travel all the way across the country to help a
friend in need (Leelee Sobieski).  Along the way, he also stops to post
bail for his troublemaking brother, Fuller (Steve Zahn), and give him a
ride as well.
Fuller buys a CB radio at a gas station to chat with the truck drivers
who cruise the deserted highways of Nevada, and soon they receive a
signal from a man with a deep, scruffy voice who calls himself Rusty
Nail.  Fuller thinks it would be funny if Lewis pretended he was a woman
and sexually teased Rusty Nail.  Lewis reluctantly agrees and eventually
invites him to a hotel.  They will stay in room 18, while they tell
Rusty Nail to visit room 17, where a fat, grumpy man will rest for the
night.
Not a very nice thing to do, and Rusty Nail doesn't particularly
appreciate the prank.  So little that the police find room 17's lodger
on the highway the next morning, lying in a permanent coma with the
lower half of his jaw ripped off.  And this is only the beginning,
because Rusty Nail wants revenge, and he'll stop at nothing to get it.
Joy Ride builds an incredible amount of tension, then releases it with
some startling violent encounters.  This works, but eventually becomes
somewhat redundant after the third or fourth time around the track. 
That does not terribly injure the film, however, for several reasons. 
We don't know who is behind the voice of Rusty Nail or the steering
wheel of that massive semi, as the mystery and suspense always keep us
guessing.  We also care about the characters; the actors' performances
are believable, as is the terrifying reality of the situation.  As well,
the story continually raises the stakes, introducing new conflicts and
characters, and exploring new environments, thanks to a well-written
script by Clay Tarver and J.J. Abrams.
Thankfully, the film doesn't go overboard with needless gore and
violence.  The cinematography is also some of the year's most effective
work.  The characters' faces dimly lit by red neon hotel lights or the
soft glow of a fire, the mood contributes to the tension of the film.
Sadly, the ending an abuse of the old deus ex machina contrivance. 
Sure, we're on the edge of our seats, but really, it's a bit lazy.
Director: John Dahl
Producer: J.J. Abrams, Chris Moore
Screenwriter: Clay Tarver, J.J. Abrams
Stars: Paul Walker, Steve Zahn, Leelee Sobieski, Matthew Kimbrogh, Jay
Hernandez
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com

Title
Review for Scary Movie 2 (2001)
The original Scary Movie was no cinematic masterpiece, but Scary Movie 2
isn't even on that par.  Keenen Ivory Wayans directs this shapeless,
excruciating mess of a movie that delivers exactly what we expect, just
not in a funny way.  While I admire the risk it takes in pushing pushing
the envelope, I don't admire Scary Movie 2 as a whole.  Tasteless,
raunchy humor is expected -- but does anyone want revolting and
nauseating humor?  There's a fine line between funny and just plain
sick; this movie goes way beyond that line.
The original was imaginative with its send-up of teen slasher flicks. 
Although relentless in its humor, it contained a definite purpose, a
true central character, and motivation.  Not that I liked it, but it
offered a lot more than this sequel.  Here, setting replaces story, and
that leads to an assortment of problems.
Screwball humor works best when it is situation based.  Scary Movie
spoofs recent movies such as Hannibal, What Lies Beneath, The House on
Haunted Hill, Charlie's Angels, The Haunting, and many others. 
Unfortunately this movie rarely captures the attitude of a screwball
comedy.  It's a bitter festival of perversion; the sequences feel
distant, unrelated, and seldom do they advance the plot.  Well, if you
can call it a plot.  The first film loosely followed the structure of
Scream, but SM2 has nothing.  It just fires off a lot of rounds, but
they rarely hit their targets.
Why's that?  It took seven screenwriters to create Scary Movie 2, and
it's almost as if the only guidance given to each writer was that he be
locked in a room and forced to concoct his own gross-out situation in an
attempt to outdo the others.  The product of those efforts gives us a
few early laughs, notably a hoot of an opening scene, wherein James
Woods stars in a memorable parody of The Exorcist.  But after the title
sequence, everything plummets downhill.
Scary Movie 2 contains plenty of creative jokes that evolve from
sexuality, drug use, intestinal difficulties, a vulgar talking bird,
reproductive organs, homosexuality, race relations, bodily fluids... oh,
and once in a while there's a gag about a ghost.  Any semblance of this
being a "scary" movie is lost altogether.
Of course, I sigh in surrender, as nobody will see Scary Movie 2 for a
thought-provoking story, well-developed characters, or a solid
narrative.  In fact, they'll come for the exact opposite reason --
because it doesn't have those things it will offer a cheap laugh.  While
this is no critics' picture, I can find pleasure in slapstick and
screwball humor, and I treasure the creativity it takes to spoof serious
material.  The problem comes when there is absolutely no humor and no
creativity in the end product.  Now that's scary.
Director: Keenen Ivory Wayans
Producer: Eric L. Gold
Screenwriter: Alison Fouse, Greg Grabianski, Dave Polsky, Michael
Anthony Snowden, Craig Wayans, Marlon Wayans, Shawn Wayans
Stars: Anna Faris, Jon Abrahams, Shawn Wayans, Marlon Wayans, Tori
Spelling, Christopher Kennedy Masterson, Regina Hall, James Woods, Chris
Elliot, Natasha Lyonne, Tim Curry, David Cross, Keenen Ivory Wayans
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com

Title
Review for French Connection, The (1971)
The French Connection puts the majority of contemporary action movies to
shame.  It proves how potentially smart this genre can be, and how dumb
recent action films really are.  Unlike many modern-day thrillers, this
film is an exciting, taut, and realistic portrayal of urban police life,
but it does not fill its running time with gratuitous violence, nonstop
profanity, and copious amounts of sex.  Character motivation and story
drive the film forward--not a needless excess of violent, antisocial
behavior.  It's a standout cinematic achievement that won five Academy
Awards including Best Picture, Best Director, Best Actor (Gene Hackman),
Best Film Editing, and Best Writing.
Ernest Tidyman's story follows the adventures of two New York narcotics
cops, "Popeye" Doyle (Hackman), and his partner, Russo (Roy Scheider). 
They track a lead about a large drug delivery that develops into a plan
that could entirely destroy the marijuana trade between Paris and New
York.
The movie contains convincing, memorable action sequences.  In an
unexpected, timely scene, Doyle walks down the street when suddenly a
sniper hiding on top of his apartment opens fire.  The sniper misses and
hits an innocent bystander.  Doyle finds cover behind a tree.  More
pedestrians rush to care for the injured victim.  Doyle tells them to
run.  This sequence convinces us that the threat of the sniper is real,
which leads us to one of the most thrilling chase scenes in film
history.
Most modern action scenes involve massive gunfire from both the good and
the bad.  It's almost as if the bullets have read the screenplay,
hitting their targets only at the plot's discretion.  The French
Connection gives us convincing situations without the plot contrivances
and predictable shoot-outs.  The story flows smoothly because everything
that happens is character driven.
Recent action movies contain special effects that make The French
Connection look like child's play.  Nowadays, a film can contain
enormous explosions, amazing car chases and crashes, impressive computer
generated images, and enough gunfire to impress the Army.  But it's not
the special effects that make The French Connection a true classic, it's
the quality of the performances, the enticing direction by William
Friedkin, the brilliant editing, and the intensity and selectivity of
the action sequences.  Today's filmmakers can throw almost anything into
their movies, but there's one thing that they often forget that The
French Connection hits right on the nose: action itself doesn't drive a
story forward, character does.  In today's world, that's almost a
novelty.
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com

Title
Review for 61* (2001) (TV)
Billy Crystal's 61* explains why baseball is more than a sport -- it's a
legacy.  I've always seen sports as simple games people play.  Sure,
those guys out there on the field have talent, but why do athletes get
paid more than doctors, teachers, and scientists?  Do teachers spend a
large portion of their lives hundreds of miles apart from their loving
family?  Other professions are indeed more important, but seldom do they
get this stressful or demanding.  Now I have a new appreciation for
baseball and sports alike.
Good movies about baseball make the game look like a lot of fun, sharing
the enthusiasm and energy of the players.  61* doesn't do that.  It does
contain intense sequences of ball playing, but the main goal here is
examining the overworked life a ballplayer must live in order to receive
his short 15 minutes of fame.  This movie allows us to take part in that
experience, both positive and negative.
It's 1961.  New York Yankee teammates Roger Maris (Berry Pepper) and
Mickey Mantle (Thomas Jane) are both challenging Babe Ruth's 60 home run
record.  Mantle, outspoken and reckless, begins the season with a bang,
but Maris, quiet and focused, doesn't look so promising.  Fearing he
might be traded during his first season, Maris starts cracking homer
after homer, while Mantle's excessive lifestyle begins to slow his
game.  After moving in with Maris, Mantle begins to concentrate on
taking care of himself and breaking the baseball record.  The two soon
converge and become "The M&M Boys."
Regardless of how close the score became, Mantle remained the public's
favorite baseball player.  Will Maris overcome the negative media
coverage and discouraging public image and break the record, or will
Mantle take home the honors.  And regardless of who wins, will their
friendship survive?
Billy Crystal directs with sincerity and passion, never losing his
amiable sense of humor.  The style, costume design, and the performances
capture the 1960s well.  Thomas Jane makes clear the contrast of his
character at the beginning and end of the story.  Berry Pepper proves
that he is indeed a talented actor when he's not in Battlefield Earth. 
His performance is humble, soft, and lovable, although he creates an
effective intensity underneath the quiet, compassionate character.
Touching and insightful, 61* not only displays the ups and downs of
being a sports legend, it also proves that the best performance in a
film doesn't have to come from a human actor.  The film's Yankee Stadium
scenes were shot at a disguised Tiger Stadium in Detroit.  The
filmmakers painted infield seats green, and a partial third deck and a
1961 Bronx skyline were digitally added later.
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com

Title
Review for Pootie Tang (2001)
After a hard, busy day, I'm sitting in the movie theater waiting for the
projectionist to start Pootie Tang.  I become relaxed, comfortable, with
a notepad in one hand and a pencil in the other.  The lights dim.  The
movie starts.  But the image is out of focus, then it goes black.  The
house lights shine brightly.  The theater is experiencing technical
difficulties.  This is a warning from God: "Run for your life while you
still have the chance," screams a little voice in my head.  Then the
lights dim once again, and the movie restarts.  I regret not dashing for
the door.
I cannot remember any other movie without subtitles that creates a
language for its characters, but never teaches it to the audience.  The
main character in Pootie Tang utters phrases like "I'm gonna sine your
pitty on the runny kine" and "Sipi-tai!"  But what does that mean?  Not
that it matters -- you won't even try to follow this hopeless,
incoherent story.  Instead I wondered about the cologne on the man next
to me, if that lovely cashier was wearing a wig, and what I needed at
the store later that night.  Anything to clear my mind from the painful
occurrences transpiring on screen.
Adapted from a comedy sketch on HBO's The Chris Rock Show, a major
motion picture should have been the perfect platform for the nest of
talent at the acclaimed Rock, but these filmmakers prove, like the folks
at SNL do every other week, that a five-minute, one-character TV sketch
just doesn't transfer to the big screen.  Pootie Tang is just over 70
minutes long, shorter than your average Pokemon movie.  And I would
rather watch all the Pokemon movies, back to back, than waste my time
watching this production for a second time.
Here's the painful setup: We first learn that the entire movie we are
about to watch is actually a movie clip playing on a talk show featuring
an immensely popular celebrity named, you guessed it, Pootie Tang (Lance
Crouther).  Pootie Tang is an African-American, an international crime
fighter, a kung-fu master, a superstar singer, and an actor.  Children
adore him.  Women idolize him.  He speaks in a language of his own
(Pootie-nese, if you will).  Everyone in the movie understands him, but
the audience can only follow occasional remarks.  He uses his late
father's belt to eliminate crime.  (A terrible accident killed Pootie's
father back in the late 70's when a wild gorilla mauled him to death
while he was working in a factory.  We can literally see the zipper on
the gorilla costume.)  We witness all kinds of incidences in a corny,
maundering, sarcastic style that is just not funny.
Even bad movies usually contain a few redeeming factors, but not this
one.  Each and every shot is agonizing in its own ways -- not just in
one way, in many ways -- the fanatical actors appear disjointed, the
painful scene transitions feel awkward, the terrible dialogue wreaks of
desperation, the poorly written screenplay seems unfinished, the
soundtrack gives us a headache.  Pootie Tang stinks as badly as
possible.  Regardless of how much you paid to get in, it's worth double
to get out.
Director: Louis C.K.
Producer: Cotty Chubb, Chris Rock, David Gale, Ali LeRoi
Writer: Louis C.K.
Starring: Lance Crouther, Jennifer Coolidge, Chris Rock, Wanda Sykes,
Robert Vaughn
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com

Title
Review for Max Keeble's Big Move (2001)
Good news!  Max Keeble's Big Move is the greatest movie ever made... if
you are 12 years old.  Its depiction of junior high is surprisingly
enlightening; kids from all over can identify with these simple
characters.  There's plenty of preteen gossip, wacky school staff
members, and drooling over attractive girls.  Thus it is a sure-fire hit
for its unabashed target audience.
Unfortunately, I'm not 12 years old, and I really didn't need to be
reminded of those times I spent fighting with teachers, standing up to
bullies, and getting poor grades.  So if you're not in the 11- to
13-year-old target market, this film is only remotely amusing.
Not that Max Keeble's Big Move is painful to watch -- it's actually
pretty light-hearted and, at times, quite funny.  Considering the nature
of the beast, this movie isn't half bad.  The performances give a
relevant story energy and life, and the slapstick humor often makes you
laugh.  Guiltily, but you still laugh.
Alex D. Linz from Home Alone 3 plays the title character, who, as the
movie opens, enters junior high.  He's got friends, enemies, and a major
dilemma -- his father's business is moving.  The Keebles need to be out
of town by the end of the week, and Max doesn't want to leave his
hometown.  But wait!  If he doesn't need to worry about the
consequences, he has one last chance to settle a few scores.
Sadly, the film ultimately serves up a bunch of preachy boloney, stuff
about standing up for yourself, facing bullies, saving animals, and
every other lesson you can learn as a kid in middle school. 
Screenwriters Jonathan Bernstein, Mark Blackwell, and James Greer make
this such a silly, simple story, that when it finally does try to
provide the audience with a real moral, it comes off as just another
missed target.
The soundtrack defines each scene by filling the movie with the latest
in kiddie pop music.  This isn't a terrible idea since kids don't really
look for effective mood development, anyway -- instead the film is much
more interested in its own shallow sense of humor.
http://disney.go.com/disneypictures/maxkeeble/index.html
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com
