Authors
Caleb J. Howard
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Wax, or the Discovery of Television Among the Bees (1992)
     Hi there.  I just thought I'd share a small thing.  Last night I
saw a movie by the above title at the Bloor Cinema in Toronto as a part
of the Festival of Grand Illusions.  The film is 85 minutes, produced by
Independent Electronic Cinema, and consists of a powerful mixture of
computer imagery, military footage of weapons guidance systems, state of
the art video post-production techniques, and a *lot* of Babylonian
subterranean bees.
     I'll use the terms I'm familiar with to describe the movie as it
appealed to me, because that's my option.
     The plot of the film traced the karmic journey of the protagonist,
a designer of targeting sights on flight simulators and beekeeper,
through his links backward through time to his grandfather, and forward
through time to his destiny.  The concept of time was illustrated as
fluid and malleable at the spiritual level.  The use of video processing
and computer techniques to smoothly move the viewer from the spiritual
perspective of the protagonist to the perspective of a huge hive of bees
to the perspective of the dead souls held on reels of magnetic tape that
contain the landscape data of the flight simulators.  This is intended
to convey the flavour of the film rather than as an in-depth review, so
I will leave it as such.
     Concepts of interest to me especially well illustrated in the movie
include the state of consciousness of the hive of bees taken as a whole
and how this state of mind reflects the global state of mind of humanity
and all life taken as a whole.  Also well illustrated are the
interactions of mind, television, reality and virtual reality.
Especially neat was the exploration of the state of mind of a
semi-intelligent guidance computer in the nose of a tank-killer missile
in the Gulf War.  
     As far as I'm concerned, the movie is absolutely inspired, and is a
precursor to the future of media events.  I was consumed by the imagery
and enlightened by the vision of the film and the mastery with which it
was executed.  I also felt at the end of the film that perhaps a half a
dozen others in the theatre were similarly enthusiastic, and that the
majority were left completely cold.  Several people left the theatre
during the film (one man was really angry at having wasted his money on
the film).  At the end, there were only about six or seven of us
applauding, and the rest were looking at us, puzzled.
     I thought it was great, but would only recommend it to people with
an appetite for the surreal and the symbolic.  
