Authors
Janet M. Lafler
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Switch (1991)
     SWTICH is a sexual role-reversal comedy directed by Blake Edwards
and starring Ellen Barkin which has funny and insightful moments, but
also has a great many holes.  
     The premise is simple:  Steve Brooks is an inveterate womanizer
hated by women everywhere.  After being killed by three former
girlfriends he lands in Purgatory, where he is told that he is a
borderline case; he has done enough good to be eligible for heaven, but
has behaved so horribly to women that he's also a candidate for hell.
To resolve the difficulty, he's sent back to earth to find one female
who likes him.  Thanks to a suggestion from the Devil, he goes back as a
woman.  
     The bulk of the movie deals with Steve (in his female persona,
Amanda) trying to get by as a woman for long enough to find a woman who
likes him.  As Amanda, Barkin turns in a great performance.  Tottering
on her high heels, tugging at her unfamiliar female finery, walking,
talking and gesturing in masculine fashion, she performs just broadly
enough to be funny without being ridiculous.
     The movie deals with the various possibilities inherent in this
switch with uneven success.  Steve's reaction to his female body,
including his persistent habit of acting as if it were someone else's
body, is well-handled, and often quite funny.  ("Did you get a look at
my legs?"  s/he asks best friend Walter, played by Jimmy Smits.)  His
sexual adjustment is also handled well; there is no easy way for him to
slide into either lesbianism or heterosexuality as a woman.
     There are problems, though.  I found myself wondering whether a man
who had just turned into a woman would dress like that.  There's no
reason that Steve/Amanda immediately has to put on four-inch stiletto
heels.  Then there's the question of just what's good about Steve
Brooks.  Walter mentions that he's done many kind things, but we're
never told what they are, and I find it hard to understand how someone
who's supposedly so good could really be such a jerk to women.  All
women.  (Either his mother's dead or she hates him too; at any rate,
she's never mentioned.)  And there's at least one glaring continuity
error.  (Hint:  I don't know anyone whose hair could grow eight inches
in five months.)
     On a more serious and subtle level, the movie-makers seem to be
assuming that spending a few days or months as a woman can make a man
really understand what it is like to be a woman, a premise I find
unconvincing.  (A similar transformation occurs in TOOTSIE.)  Only a few
days after the switch,  Amanda complains about how an ad doesn't really
reflect women's experience; in fact, once Steve becomes a woman he
pretty quickly begins spouting feminist rhetoric.  While I would like to
believe that any man who woke up one day in a woman's body would become
a feminist, there are limits to what makes sense.  When Amanda starts
holding forth on date rape, it doesn't ring true.  In the end, the
movie's feminist pieties strike me as rather cheap.  As a comedy, this
movies succeeds, but when it tries to get serious about the differences
between men's and women's experiences, it's often frustrating and
shallow.
     SWITCH is an engaging movie, worth going to see simply for Barkin's
performance.  (Supporting performances are competent, but not exciting.)
Pacing falters somewhat in the last third of the movie, but in general
Barkin's energy keeps things moving.
