Authors
Sam Sloan
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Cruel Intentions (1999)
Sebastian (Ryan Phillippe) and his stepsister, Kathryn (Sarah Michelle
Gellar), are teenage step-brother and sister, whose parents are
married to each other, although, we are told, their father is diddling
the Vietnamese maid. They are filthy rich and live in a mansion on
Central Park West in New York City, while their parents, who are never
seen, are elsewhere.
Sebastian's mission in life is to deflower virgins. He wants a serious
challenge, because he is bored with plucking the easy ones. He is not
content merely to take a girl's virginity. To complete his mission, he
must humiliate her by dumping her the next day. Thus, the title:
"Cruel Intentions".
His step-sister is equally if not more diabolical. Pretending to be
squeaky clean and virtually a virgin, she publicly wears a cross,
which has a secret vial of cocaine inside, and plots with her
step-brother the deflowering of the various available incoming
freshman virgins in their high school.
She says that she does this because every time she goes to bed with a
man, he immediately dumps her for a younger girl, an innocent virgin.
This is a problem which all women have or at least fear, but it is
noteworthy that a beautiful 18-year-old is jealous of the competition
from younger more virginal women.
Kathryn therefore wants to get revenge against virgins, by assisting
her step-brother in their deflowering and subsequent humiliation.
This theme, in a different context, is in another new movie: "The
Rage: Carrie 2". In "The Rage", the high school athletes keep a
scorebook where scores are awarded for their conquests. However,
things get out of hand when one innocent girl gives her virginity to
an athlete and then kills herself the next day when he dumps her.
There seems to be a trend here: In the films of yesteryear, the female
lead successfully fended off suitors and almost never went to bed.
Early on, you could tell which girl was going to turn out to be the
star of the movie, because she was the one who did not do it.
However, in the new movies, every significant female has sex with a
man, including even Queen Elizabeth I, the most famous virgin in
history, in "Elizabeth".
Of course, in real life, almost all women do have sex with men and
almost all women do eventuality give up their virginity to a man who
often turns out to be a cad. Probably, there are few women in the
world who have never had the experience at least once in their life of
giving sex to a man, with high hopes for the future, only never to be
contacted by him again. This is why mothers properly advise their
daughters to keep their virginity until marriage, even though they did
not so themselves. Thus, we can say that the new movies probably more
accurately depict real life than the old, in spite of their extreme
references to sexuality.
My main complaint with "Cruel Intentions" is that although it is
supposed to depict teenage high school sex, all of the actors and
actresses are too old, in their early twenties. One supposedly
16-year-old virgin must be at least 22 in real life.
Of course, one reason for this may be fear of the so-called "child
pornography laws", even though there is no actual nudity, only
simulated nudity, in Cruel Intentions.
My other complaint is the obligatory moral lesson at the end. Of
course, this movie about the deflowering of the endless supply of
virgins must somehow end. Here it ends with the death of Sebastian,
who is hit by a New York City taxi driver (we all do that), followed
by the humiliation of his step-sister, who is publicly exposed to the
school for what she really is.
When I saw this I realized that I had seen this movie before. The
former name of this movie was "Dangerous Liaisons". The plot is the
same. The only difference is that "Dangerous Liaisons" is about the
corrupt upper class in18th Century France, whereas "Cruel Intentions"
is about the equally rich but contemporary Americans.
One good thing about sex and about the relations, fears, loves and
rivalries between men and women is that, throughout history, they have
never changed.
Finally, in one other way I find this movie to be unrealistic.
Although the seduction skills of Sebastian are much touted, in reality
he is put in slam dunk situations. For example, his supposedly major
triumph is the deflowering of a transfer student, Annette (Reese
Witherspoon). Yet, he has the perfect set-up. He is lodged with her
virtually alone in a huge mansion on Long Island. He has access to her
day and night, goes swimming in the pool alone with her, sits on the
lawn with her, holds her hand, drives her in his car, and yet it takes
him two whole weeks to relieve her of her virginity. If I or just
about any non-gay man were put in his situation, her virginity would
not survive more than a few hours, or a day or two at the very most.
I drive a taxi in New York City and what I found refreshing about this
movie is that I go to all the places and do all the things that these
rich kids do, and for free. Like them, I too drive across the
toll-free Queensboro Bridge. I too sit on the steps of the New York
Public Library or next to a lake in Central Park. Every street, every
block and every building in this movie is familiar to me. One of the
advantages of New York City is that even the poorest can enjoy the
pleasures of the super-rich.
The above has been posted at http://www.ishius.com/cruel-in.htm
http://www.cruelintentions.com "Cruel Intentions" official web site
http://us.imdb.com/Title?Cruel+Intentions+(1999) International Movie
Database: Cruel Intentions
http://www.reel.com/cgi-bin/nph-session.exe?COBRAND=129Q&OBJECT=moviepage.asp?MMID=44914"
"Cruel Intentions"
