Authors
Jon Lawrence
Number of Reviews
2

Title
Review for Iria: Zeiram the Animation (1993) (V)
Do not get Zeram. It is a live action movie, which they turned into a
anmation just recently called IRIA: Zeiram The Animation.
The basic plot of the movies are the same. IRIA is a bounty hunter, with
her computerised partner BOB, who is after the universes most dangerous
live being, the Zeram . But in the live action, the place is on
modern day Japan, where you have these 2 electricians (Japanese equivalent
to the Mario Bros.) who bump into Iria, and get sent to the Zone 
But in IRIA: Zeiram The Animation, it starts of on a the planet Mynse, with
BOB (he is human), Glen (Iria's borther) and Fujicrow (another Bounty
Hunter) doing a rescue mission on this space station where the Zeiram is
making mince meat of every one and any one. Glen disappears the explosion
of the space station. Afterward, Bod dies and get is conscience tranfered
to a computer. And Iria is now hunting the Zeiram, or is the Zeiram hunting
her? And what has happened to Glen? 
Zeram is really stoopid. Gun Hed was far better. Zeram could be discribed
at Mario Brothers Meets ALIEN. As where IRIA: Zeiram The Animation is alot
better.
The review above was posted to the
rec.arts.movies.reviews newsgroup (de.rec.film.kritiken for German reviews).
The Internet Movie Database accepts no responsibility for the contents of the
review and has no editorial control. Unless stated otherwise, the copyright
belongs to the author.
Please direct comments/criticisms of the review to relevant newsgroups.
Broken URLs inthe reviews are the responsibility of the author.
The formatting of the review is likely to differ from the original due
to ASCII to HTML conversion.

Related links: index of all rec.arts.movies.reviews reviews

But in IRIA: Zeiram The Animation, it starts of on a the planet Mynse, with
BOB (he is human), Glen (Iria's borther) and Fujicrow (another Bounty
Hunter) doing a rescue mission on this space station where the Zeiram is
making mince meat of every one and any one. Glen disappears the explosion
of the space station. Afterward, Bod dies and get is conscience tranfered
to a computer. And Iria is now hunting the Zeiram, or is the Zeiram hunting
her? And what has happened to Glen? 
Zeram is really stoopid. Gun Hed was far better. Zeram could be discribed
at Mario Brothers Meets ALIEN. As where IRIA: Zeiram The Animation is alot
better.

Title
Review for Kaze no na wa amunejia (1993)
THE WIND OF AMNESIA is a Japanaimation. It about in the year 1999, a
wind swept across the world erasing every one's memory, hense Amnesia.
Every one forgot every thing, the could not even remeber how to speak
even. The mains story is about this guy, Wataru (not is real name, he
forgot that one) who learns everything again,. He was helped by Johnny,
a kiddy with cybernetic brain that the wind did not affect. After John
died, Wataru starts his quest in to rebuild humanity. They first thing
he come along is a Guardian Robot, which he piss's off, so for the rest
of the movie, the robto whats Wataru's head. Then he means Sophia, a
woman who can talk, but will not tell Wataru why. Sophia need to get to
new york. So the rest of the movie is about these 2 making it across
american, meeting other people, and doing what they can to help. In the
end, the reasons for the following are resolved-
        * Why Sophia can speak when ever you else can't.
        * Why the wind happened?
        * Who cause the wind?
        * The guardian robot, who keeps on repairing itself, finally get
                destroyed.
THE WIND OF AMNESIA reminded me of Steven King's The STand becuace the
place was a waiste land, but still alot of civalisation was still
standing, unlike in those after the bomb moives. I was very obvious
that the orginal story was a lot longer (Like some other japanimations)
because it took most of the film to get From L.A. to Los Vegas, and
after that, every thing most very quickly.
