Authors
Jim Freund
Number of Reviews
2

Title
Review for Beetlejuice (1988)
     BEETLEJUICE is a surprisingly enjoyable flick.  The story (somewhat
reminiscent of Thorne Smith's writing) follows a recently deceased young
married couple (Alec Baldwin and Geena Davis) who haven't been dead long enough
to properly follow their "Manual for the Recently Deceased."  They may not
leave their house for fear of the netherworld they find outside, complete with
Arrakis-like sandworms.  Ere long, an obnoxious (living) couple (well-played by
Jeffrey Jones and Catherine O'Hara) move in, and immediately begin to wreak
havoc with the afterlives of our protagonists.  They also have a teenage
daughter (Winona Ryder) who is straight out of Charles Addams' cartoons.  Due
to her morbidity, she may communicate with the ghosts, who otherwise have
trouble making themselves seen or heard.  Consulting their manual, the couple
seek help on their situation by going to a case worker at Spirit Central for
advice.  All suicides become bureaucrats (love it!), and they find little
relief after waiting in line for two months.  However, they have seen ads for a
"bio-exorcist" (he exorcises the living) named Betelgeuse (Michael Keaton),
whom the case worker has warned them about.  He is a ne'er-do-well, and only
adds to their problems.  Now they must rid themselves of him as well as resolve
their situation with the living family and their spiritualist friends.
     The film is fast-paced and genuinely funny.  Much better than I'd
expected.  It does slow down near the end, and it is also evident that some
important plot-telling moments were edited out of the finale in an attempt to
pick it up.  I have also heard that there were other post-production changes,
including the original premise that every time the couple leaves their house,
the Netherworld is different.  Apparently some found this too confusing, and
the producers dumbed it up.  I'd have preferred it left alone.
     The performances overall work, but are not extraordinary.  Robert Goulet
(who has a minor part) must have an aging portrait hidden away--he looks
younger here than he did in Atlantic City.  Michael Keaton carries himself
adequately (a la original Saturday Night Live) in his only good role since
MR. MOM.
     BEETLEJUICE was credibly directed by Tim Burton (Pee-Wee's Big Adventure).
The score is by Danny Elfman, and is a cross between Danse Macabre and his work
with Oingo Boingo.  I enjoy his work more and each each time I come across it.
Four classics by Harry Belafonte are featured, including a *funny* sequence in
which some dinner guests (Dick Cavett among them) become possessed, and find
themselves singing and dancing to "Day-O".  The art direction makes this film
worth seeing on a large screen, (the sound is noteworthy as well,) and the
upscale special effects are very good (though there are minor flaws).
     The film is rated PG which indicates that there is no on-screen splatter
or blood, but I would not advise taking a young child.  There are a few scary
moments, and a lot of disembodied and mutilated characters.  (Such as the case
worker who puffs on a cigarette--and the smoke comes out her throat.)  While
they are not gross, a youngster would be likely to get genuinely frightened.  
This should have gotten a PG-13.  Nevertheless, I definitely recommend this
one.

Title
Review for Willow (1988)
     WILLOW is the latest release from Lucasfilms, and their best since RAIDERS
OF THE LOST ARK.
     George Lucas' first solo story since STAR WARS: A NEW HOPE is about a
would-be mage halfling, Willow (Warwick Davis, who played Wicket in RETURN OF
THE JEDI at age 11), who has adopted a baby found floating on a makeshift raft
in the river.  It becomes apparent that she is the object of an intensive
search set by the evil sorceress, Queen Bavmorda (Jean Marsh), and Willow is
sent out with some reluctant companions by their local mage (Billy Barty) to
bring the baby to safety.  On their way they encounter a rogue, Madmartigan
(Val Kilmer), as well as the Faerie Queen, who informs them that their charge
is the prophecied Princess who will bring their lands into better times, and
adds two 9-inch-tall brownies to their companions (though these prove as much
hindrance as help).  Impeding their journey are hellish hunting hounds, an evil
barbarian general, and the evil Queen's beautiful daughter, Sarsha (Joanne
Whalley), who is a great warrior herself.  Add to this formula a benevolent
enchantress, a troll-beset castle, and many of the classical trappings of
faerie-based sword & sorcery, and you have WILLOW.
     If the plot (and characters) more than superficially resemble those in
Star Wars, that's OK; those created for A NEW HOPE *were* faerie-tale
archetypal characters to begin with.  They seem just as home, here, if not more
so.  The story-line is fresh (for Lucasfilms) though, and a welcome change.
What WILLOW is missing, however, is not so much the required sense of wonder,
as a sense of *awe*.  (Remember the first time you saw the Imperial
battlecruiser pass over your head?)  But the story and action build very nicely
indeed, and it works.  Needless to say, ILM and Sprocket Systems have again
outdone themselves (except for some minor quibbles I have, which may be edited
out or changed for the release prints that will go to theatres later this month
when the film opens.)
     With WILLOW, Ron Howard becomes the current premier director of science
fantasy films, and his direction is just fine.  (There was talk that Lucas had
taken over direction at one point during the Directors' Guild strike last year,
but I don't think that counts for too much.  Anyway, the two have been close
friends ever since Howard starred in Lucas' second feature, AMERICAN GRAFITTI.)
The photography by Adrian Biddle is lovely--his work on ALIENS and THE PRINCESS
BRIDE must have prepped him well for this effort.  Bob Dolman's screenplay is
witty.  Outside of writing for WKRP in Cinncinati, and the recent cable series
POISON, I doubt he has too many credits behind him.  (The production notes
don't even take the time to fill us in on him.)  James Horner's soundtrack is
little more than a John Williams rip, (which is a redundancy in and of itself,)
and that's too bad--I expected a little more from him.  Still, I suspect he was
working to order.  The incidental music in WILLOW's village festival sequence
is written and performed by Ian Anderson and Robin Williamson, and is
delightful.
     Overall, I enjoyed WILLOW very much, and could see it a few times (an
important criteria for Lucasfilms' productions.)  Despite the reported $40
million expense of making this film, I don't think they'll have too much
trouble making it back.  The ranch is saved.
