Authors
Michael R. Thompson
Number of Reviews
3

Title
Review for Chasing Amy (1997)
(SHORT) 
A movie about falling in love.  Specifically, dealing with the brave
and daring things people are willing to do to fall into love, and the
cowardly and stupid things the same people can do to bollix it up.
It treats these subjects with a GREAT deal of HUMOR and poignancy. 
The characters include gays, and the humor is VERY RAUNCHY, so if 
these things offend you stay away.  The only part of the movie I 
disliked was the ending, where I felt the characters lost their 
way.
(ONLY A LITTLE LONGER)
Two single men, Buds, if you will and business partners are moving
somewhat aimlessly through life living in New Jersey.  They both 
like girls, although they can't seem to get enough, and they're (comic
book) geeks, but successful geeks.  Then, one of them goes and falls 
in love.  Never mind that this girl doesn't like guys, we know that 
love will prevail, ... or will it. Further, what's going to  happen to
the friendship between the two guys?
This movie asked a ton of questions in a very funny way, and I really
enjoyed this aspect of the film.
Several of the questions addressed include, in no particular order:
is love bigger than sexuality (can a lesbian go straight, if she 
has found her soulmate), are all great friendships truly plutonic or is
there always some hint of sexuality (or is three just a crowd), is oral
sex a dangerous habit, can we really love someone who is different or do
we need a metaphorical mirror of ourselves.
Getting all of these issues out on the table took up the first three
quarters of the film, and it was very funny and intelligent.  Of course,
being an artiste and needing to have an ending, Kevin Smith had to try
to answer these questions for us, and that is where I started to dislike
the film.  In fact, I just didn't believe what the primary characters
did to deal with any of these issues, especially based upon their
introduction and development.Still based on the fact I was laughing my
head off for the first hour, I heartily recommend the film.

Title
Review for Air Force One (1997)

For More Info:
http://www.spe.sony.com/Pictures/SonyMovies/movies/AFO/index.html
Rating(out of 10): 8.5 (10 if you live for action flicks)
I think that every summer there are a lot of disappointments in the
big budget action/thriller movie genre. It even gets a bit tedious
to go to a bunch of films, only to say, "Well, at least the air-
conditioning worked."  Fortunately, some good nail-biters come along
to make the summer a bit more exciting.  I wanted to endorse AIR FORCE 
ONE as being the best action/adventure film I have seen this summer.  
The action seens were good, the pace never slowed down, and the actors
were decent in their respective roles.  In fact, at one time, I thought
that starring in an action flick did not require all that much acting
talent (just look tough, stay out of the way of the special effects, and
deliver one catchy line).  However, I am starting to think that Harrison
Ford is a brilliant actor who can make us believe that he is scared 
sh**less one second, and then a moment later believe that he has 
forgotten that he could get killed if he attacks the guy with the gun.
Other reviewers may tell you that this material has been done, the
actors a and b were stiff or over the top, etc.  I don't disagree with 
them, but as a package, if you enjoy action films (like Die Hard), and 
don't care if this is the 3rd airplane thriller this year, then you will 
enjoy AIR FORCE ONE.  It is the best action film I have seen this year, 
not the best film overall, but easily the best of its genre.

Title
Review for Lost World: Jurassic Park, The (1997)
The Lost World is the sequel to Jurassic Park, and let me start by
saying that it is not as good a film as the original.  A return is
made to a different island populated by dinosaurs brought back to 
life through modern science, and a big melee ensues as 20th century
man starts to interact with the Dinos.  The thing is that in the 
original movie, although it didn't have terrific acting, the action
sequences with the dinosaurs were tense and smart, the special effects
were incredible and novel, and there was a fairly coherent story
line.  In The Lost World the special effects are the only solidly 
positive thing I can point out about the movie, but they really
aren't worth the price of a ticket, even with THX.  This film
might still be very entertaining/scary for kids, but I doubt you
would enjoy it if you are an adult.
I left Jurassic Park knowing there would be a sequel, and
already hoping that it would be like Aliens was to Alien, 
a surprising improvement.  Unfortunately, The Lost World 
is not an improvement on, or even comparable to Jurassic Park.  
I was particularly surprised by this because I read the novel
The Lost World awhile ago, and was pleasantly surprised by it
(You might read it; it bears little resemblance to the movie),
and felt it would make a very passable sequel.  The reason that
The Lost World is not very entertaining, in my opinion, is that
(a) the story is convoluted and gratuitous (did a T-Rex really 
need to make it to shore in the US), and (b) the action
sequences were not up to what I usually look for from Spielberg.
The following discussion doesn't give away any of the movie's plot,
but is probably more interesting to someone who has seen the film, 
and recalls the specific action sequences. Many people say that you
need to suspend your belief when you walk into a movie like The 
Lost World, and I do up to a point.
I accept that I'm going to see movie where dinosaurs come back
to life, but not where people get to defy the Laws of Physics 
for the sake of big pyrotechnics.  
Let me give an  example of the types of action sequences I find 
good and bad.  In Jurassic Park there was a scene where
a Velociraptor chased a kid into a kitchen, and the child gets the
Velociraptor to run into a reflection of itself in a stainless 
steel door, knocking the raptor out.  I could believe this sequence, 
and it was extremely tense.  In The Lost World, in a similar 
scenario a velociraptor breaks into an equipment shed, and then
waits patiently while Jeff Golblum's daughter performs a parallel
bar routine before kicking the raptor through the wall.  It was the
longest setup for a joke that I have seen in a while.  
The trailer over the cliff scene in The Lost World was similarly
implausible, if someone had gotten a piece of their clothing 
caught on the trailer as it slid over the cliff after they 
climbed up, and then got pulled halfway to oblivion, I would have 
liked the scene a lot better than seeing three people hanging on one
rope slide through the center of the trailer.  Anyways, I have
ranted enough, suffice it to say that I expected the kind of
action I've seen in Indiana Jones and Jurassic Park, but got the
kind of scenes that seem to be proliferating in movies like
Mission Impossible, The Rock, etc.
