Authors
Perry Mercer
Number of Reviews
2

Title
Review for Saint, The (1997)
It is safe to say that when all else fails, the simple thing to do is
go back to those days of yesteryear where a good concept for a movie
means invading the vastlands of television graveyards. The latest (and
certainly not the last) big screen adaption from the novels and boob
tube show of the same name is the glossy, gadget-driven,
chameleon-coated THE SAINT. For those of you old enough to remember the
Roger Moore version of THE SAINT on television (1967-69) or Ian
Oglivy's version (1978), some of you might appreciate the simplistic,
charismatic antics of Simon Templar's dashing persona on the small
screen. However, THE SAINT featuring brooding star Val Kilmer as an
elegant mastermind high-tech thief out to capture a cold fusion formula
for the Russians only to realize his love for his intended target Dr.
Emma Russell (Shue) seems all rather convoluted, overwrought, and
confusing. Kilmer's Simon Templar is supposed to be mysterious to us,
to his discovered love Dr. Russell, to his adversaries...even to
himself.  However the film tries to convey this so-called mystique by
constantly burying Kilmer in all these wacky wigs and disguises in a
clumsy effort to show us that Simon Templar really does not know who he
is or where his identity lies. His only reference in life is to rob and
swindle for big lucrative bucks and compare his empty soul to that of
revered Catholic saints. The question is who is going to identify with
what the coherency of this film is about?  THE SAINT has everything
going for it: scenic locations in Moscow and London, satisfying action
sequences, a beautiful lady here and there, and a colorful host of
villains out to destroy our beloved rogue Templar led by a scheming
Russian industrialist (Rade Serbedzija).  Then why the reservations?
Well, just because a film has an intriguing, espionnage-type premise
doesn't necessarily mean that it has to be complex to be fascinating.
If anything, THE SAINT could have been an effective thriller had it
bothered not to indulge itself so much into all the cliched' gadgetry
and repetitive suspense stunts that we have all seen a thousand times
before. A film like this can be smart, enjoyable, crafty, and cunning
without having to be abstract and preposterous. And yet audiences had
the nerve to scratch their heads over the premise of MISSION:
IMPOSSIBLE? Ironically, Val Kilmer seems even more transparent and
uninspired as THE SAINT than he ever did as his short stint as the
aloof BATMAN. His disguise get-ups are somewhat amusing I must admit,
but I'm afraid at this point his Templar doesn't even rise to the
occasion as being good enough to be James Bond's
wannabe-cousin-spy-in-training.  Elisabeth Shue's Dr. Russell is
intelligent enough especially when women roles are suppose to be
seductive and spicy but not cerebral in these types of films. Still,
when it all comes down to it, she is window-dressing as a pseudo Bond
girl who never is convincing as a brilliant scientist. Instead, Shue's
character comes off as an over-achieving cheerleader on the sidelines.
THE SAINT, much like a world atlas, is all over the map. This film is
so riddled with inconsequential vagueness and typical overblown spy-
yarn gimmicks that one has nothing to look forward to but seeing Simon
Templar dress up as a toothy, hair-challenged geek. If only he and the
movie bothered to impersonate a decent coherent action thriller that
made sense then that would have been a "saint"-ly thing to do.
Visit his review site at:  http://www.vgt.com/atmovies.html

Title
Review for 8 Heads in a Duffel Bag (1997)
EIGHT HEADS IN A DUFFEL BAG *1/2
starring: Joe Pesci, Andy Comeau, Kristy Swanson, David Spade, George 
Hamilton, Dyan Cannon
directed by: Tom Schulman
If the filmmakers thought that the film's title "EIGHT HEADS IN A DUFFLE
BAG" was a catchy and cute one, then give them points for being
distinctive. However, if you want to reward them for the premise and
value of this same movie, give them 3-D points: distasteful, decadent, 
and dumb. Instead of calling this awful film EIGHT HEADS IN A DUFFLE
BAG, how about renaming it appropriately "EIGHT BRAINLESS HEADS WHO
WROTE A MOVIE SCRIPT THAT NEEDS TO BE BURIED IN A BARF BAG". This newest
offbeat flick tries its best to be dark and comedic but ends up daub and
corruptibly contrived.
   Just as one would expect to see sunshine when the sun rises, Joe
Pesci yet again plays his redundant role as a feisty New York mob hitman
out to deliver a bag of "cut up craniums" of former wiseguys to Los
Angeles. When the hacked-up-hitmen-heads are taken by mistake from an
unknowing medical student (newcomer Andy Comeau), Pesci's frustrated
hitman character Tommy Spinelli must follow him to Mexico and retrieve
that decomposed duffle bag. Of course we follow our peculiar
protagonists to Mexico where our poor med student Charlie must meet and
greet the parents of his 
girlfriend Laurie (Kristy Swanson).  As if the movie characters and
situations are not preposterous enough,  Kristy's mother is an alcoholic
who jumps off the wagon after inadvertently seeing the heads in
Charlie's duffle bag. And her father (George
Hamilton) is an overbearing baffoon. And how convenient that the film
ships all this farce-driven excitement to Mexico where we can see yet
another barrage of Mexican 
stereotypes amongst the zaniness of these American airheads.
   EIGHT HEADS IN A DUFFLE BAG wants to be exceedingly irreverent and
naughty with its forced taboo comedy of hitmen, high jinx, and
haplessness. Unfortunately, all this film does is to remind us how
irascible one can get watching all this moronic mayhem. Writer-director
Tom Schulman has done amusing work before with funny material such as
his previous film "WHAT ABOUT BOB?". However, in EIGHT HEADS IN A
DUFFLE BAG, he overdoes his outrageousness in this film with lame and
insipid results. "HEADS" is Schulman's directing debut I must point out.
Let's hope that Schulman has better luck in the future trying to
overcome this atrocity. If you're 
going to do a dark comedy about body parts and kooky characters, make
sure your premise is fresh and unpredictable. Having Pesci do his
"gangster" goon bit for the umteenth time in the movies not to mention
featuring that smug-looking, smartalecky David Spade with his Saturday
Night Live sarcasm routine does not instill any confidence in a film
that's supposed to be unsuspecting and viciously vibrant. All the ones
responsible for this mockery of a movie need to bury their heads in the
sand, never mind in a duffle bag!
