Authors
Clara Duong
Number of Reviews
2

Title
Review for Snow White (1997)
The Grimm Brothers' Snow White, The (1997) - Review by Clara Duong
Produced by: Interscope Communications / PolyGram Filmed Entertainment 
Effects by: Fantasy II Film Effects (special visual effects) 
Directed by Michael Cohn
Written by Jacob Ludwig Carl Grimm and Wilhelm Carl Grimm
Screenplay by Thomas E. Szollosi and Deborah Serra
Cinematography by Mike Southon
Music by John Ottman
Production Design by Gemma Jackson
Costume Design by Marit Allen
Summary:
Also Known As "Snow White in the Black Forest" and "Snow White: A Tale
of Terror" with the catch phrase "The Fairytale is Over".  You all know
the story - beautiful Queen wishes for a daughter with skin
as white as snow, hair as black as ebony, lips as red as blood.  The
Queen dies, the husband remarries a beautiful and incredibly vain woman
and both Snow White and Evil Queen loathe each other on sight.  Snow
White flees into the forest to escape from death and the Evil Queen is
dogged in her attempts to annihilate her beauteous step-dauther.
Review:
I've always been a sucker for fairytales and their retellings.  If
you've read Robin McKinley's 'Beauty', 'Rose Daughter' or 'Outlaws of
Sherwood' you realise that a good story can be told again and again in
many different ways.  While I'm one of those people who isn't ashamed to
admit loving the Disney versions of fairytales, in light of the fact
that Disney always changes the ending, I've always considered them to be
their own sub-category.  It's always intriguing to get back to the
original 'darker' roots of a fairystory.
"Snow White in the Black Forest" manages to capture the 'traditional'
telling of the story while reflecting the decidedly evil and bleak
undertones of the original story as told by the Grimm Brothers.  The
film begins with Lilliana who is riding with her husband Fredrick (Sam
Neill).  Lilliana is pregnant and appears to be in labour, evidenced by
Sam Neill feebley attempting to comfort her.  When the carriage is
overturned due to chance misfortune or Dark Fate, the dying Queen can
think only of her child and pleads with her husband (in a manner
reminiscent of the folk song 'Queen Jane') to save the unborn child.
Sam Neill is playing the character he seems to have been lumped with
lately - limp, ineffectual and vaguely pathetic. He was the same
character in that hideous movie 'Event Horizon' until the point when he
became psychotic, scarred and eyeball-less.  He doesn't contribute much
to the film as a whole except to make it credible that he would become
enslaved by the charms of the evil Claudia.  
Sigourney Weaver is outstanding as Claudia.  Beautiful, enigmatic and
haunted, Sigourney brings a depth to the role of the Evil Queen which
has been lacking in other versions of the story.  Weaver portrays the
Queen as
sympathetically as is possible considering the constraints of the role.
In the beginning, she appears to make genuine efforts to make Lilli
(Snow White) like her and she appears to be tortured by the memory of
her mother who was reviled by the society in which she lived.  Another
bonus is being able to hear Weaver singing beautiful operatic arias in a
pure voice - I had no idea that she could could sing.
All that being said, Claudia is Evil and after giving birth to a
stillborn son, her sanity takes a turn for the worse and she is
convinced by her Mirror that Lilli is the source of all her
misfortunes.  It is never clear whether the mirror is an independent
source of evil, whether it is a reflection of Claudia's inner evil or
whether it is a sinister spectre of Claudia's dead mother.  Driven by
the Mirror, she seeks Lilli's death, sending her mute brother Gustav out
to murder the unsuspecting Lilli.
Monica Keena as Lilli is exquisite, innocent and a trifle bland.
Nonetheless, Snow White isn't supposed to be a towering spokeswoman for
women's emancipation.  Symbolically she is the personification of
innocence and beauty and Keena does this well with wide-eyed
bewilderment and helplessness.  Lilli stumbles into the forest and
instead of meeting 7 cherubic dwarves, she encounters a group of
unwashed, surly criminals (one of them is a dwarf though).  Her arrival
brings nothing but misfortune onto the gang of criminals who have
already endured a great deal as a result of the harsh laws in force at
that time.  
An interesting twist is the 'hero' character.  'Prince Charming' in this
piece is Peter Gutenberg, a young doctor played with stiff, pomposity by
David Conrad.  Peter seems to be sexually attracted to Claudia and we
never really get a sense of any genuine connection between his character
and Lilli's.  Lilli on the other hand is drawn to one of the criminals
in the forest by the name of Will and the two of them share a number of
very eloquent and rather romantic staring sessions.  
The characterisation of the criminals in the forest was one of the
things that I didn't like.  I thought that they were the most
interesting aspect of the film and yet the time spent on their stories
was extremely brief and tantalising to say the least.  I realise that
it's the story of "Snow White" and not a Canterbury Tales in which each
character is given a large amount of time to recount a story, but it
would have been interesting to find out more about each of the
characters.  Will's character with his scarred face and back had a story
that was only hinted at briefly.
This is a very beautiful-looking film.  It captures the essence of
darkness perfectly, but I think it would have been better if it had been
longer.  The ending was a trifle abrupt, stories remained untold and the
little glimpses we receive into various characters was slightly
frustrating.  With the exception of Sigourney Weaver's singing, the
score and soundtrack is unmemorable.  Despite the shortcomings, I do
believe that this film is worth watching and very aborbing while it
lasts.

Title
Review for G.I. Jane (1997)
Synopsis:
As a response to accusations of sexual prejudice in the armed forces, a
female naval intelligence officer is chosen to be a test case.  If she
can survive the demanding S.E.A.L. training, she will open the way for
other women to be permitted to follow in her footsteps.  Throw in a lot
of political machinations, sabotage, brutality, water and sand and you
have an entertaining movie.
Review:
The title of this movie turned me off at first.  I mean 'GI Jane?'????? 
The other titles which were considered were more promising - In Pursuit
of Honor or A Matter of Honor would have been acceptable although Navy
Cross or Undisclosed are a little meaningless as far as I'm concerned.
I went into this movie not liking the title and being one of those
people who thinks that Demi Moore is absolutely ghastly as an actor.  To
my surprise I really enjoyed the movie.  Moore as Lieutenant Jordan
O'Neil is much more likeable than her washed out excuse for a gusty
woman in A Few Good Men. 
The storyline is simple.  Anne Bancroft playing Senator Lillian Dehaven
is a ruthless, machiavellian politician with an agenda to push.  Using
feminism to achieve political mileage, she forces the military powers
that be to backdown and permit a test case to enter the highly intensive
Navy S.E.A.L. training.  Jordan is selected due to the fact that she has
it all - looks, brains and strength.
The training is gruelling and the indignity almost painful to watch. 
Nonetheless, it's one of those movies that makes me want to cheer out
and encourage the hapless hero/heroine along in his/her endeavours. 
Sure, there are the stereotypical elements - inhuman treatment, sexual
innuendo, resentful peers, pained boyfriend and sexist commanding
officer.  Stepping away from the stereotypes though, Viggo Mortensen as
Master Chief John Urgayle tries to get away from being nothing more than
a brutal screamer.  His character exercises a little more intellectual
rigour than you would normally expect from such a character.
Jordan's boyfriend Royce is also in the military.  Although they both
started at the same time, due to the fact that he has seen active
service, he has advanced through the ranks much more quickly than she
has.  Royce (what is his surname? Do we care?) almost resents Jordan's
attempts to advance herself, although he quickly settles down to being
doe-eyed and supportive.  His character seems to have been thrown in so
that we know that you don't have to be a lesbian to want to be in the
military.
In parts, this is a very silly movie, with gratuitous lines and scenes
thrown in for effect which are so blatantly obvious or contrived that
it's hard not to cringe.  I still liked it though.  Weaknesses in the
script aside, this is a film which captures a heroic and reckless mood.
As we watch Jordan's battle, it's increasingly clear that it is a
personal battle.  This is an individual's fight for self-advancement. 
We don't have to have our teeth set on edge by didactic preachings, we
don't have to feel uncomfortable because we're having ideology thrust
down our throats.  It's enough that we can sit back and hope that this
one person gets what she wants and we can admire her tenacity and
determination without coming out and saying whether we believe women
should go into combat or not.
