Authors
Eric Robinette
Number of Reviews
6

Title
Review for Crucible, The (1996)
Now here's a tricky situation. Here's a film I really enjoyed and thought
was very well-crafted, and yet something about it somehow still seems to
be missing. What could it be? Let me go through the various elements.
The Story and Screenplay: Certainly little if any problem here.  The story
about religious fervor and wrongful persecution still packs a wallop in
this day and age, even though it maintains its Puritan-age setting, as
many have admiringly pointed out. That said, I'm not all that surprised it
worked; Arthur Miller remains a great writer. Maybe, just maybe, it might
have been a bit more challenging if in fact had moved the story to a
modern setting and perhaps kept the theatrical acting. Just a thought.
The Performances: Again, solid all around, though again that's not a
surprise with these actors. I especially liked Paul Scofield as the
imposing judge and Joan Allen as the wounded but strong wife. Winona Ryder
is also strong, if a bit overzealous in her role, as the catalyst,
Abigail. Only Daniel Day-Lewis is a little bit disappointing. Though
generally strong, he seems for the first time to be straining in certain
scenes, especially toward the emotionally intense ending.  Never a good
thing when you can "see" someone acting.
The Direction: Also very good. Nicholas Hytner avoids the "filmed play"
trap and very successfully opens up the action, and I especially liked how
his swooping camera suggest the "evil spirits." Only complaint: the
direction gets a little too busy and cluttered toward the end and confuses
the action, especially during that first multi-hanging.
So let's see. As it is, we have a film that's overall very powerful and
affecting, with distinct weaknesses in all the major areas. I guess the
main problem is the lack of surprises or any fresh devices in this movie. 
Many have marveled at  how effective the play is even in its historical
setting, but it always has been and always will be so long as irrational
fear and persecution exist. The menace doesn't have to be red, and there's
no news in that.
All in all, I expected a good retelling of a good play, and that's exactly
what I got. Nothing more, nothing less, and I was glad to have experienced
the film. But that lingering question remains--with a cast and crew this
talented, something even better might have been achieved. 

Title
Review for Star Wars: Episode I - The Phantom Menace (1999)
Turmoil has engulfed the movie-going public. The worth of "Star Wars: Episode I
- The Phantom Menace" is in dispute.
Hoping to resolve the matter with a sensible, clear-eyed review, the errant
knight, Sir Phil M. Critic, endeavored to offer his own opinion, even if he was
a little late with it, to help settle the conflict.
As far as Sir Critic could see, it was like a period of civil war amongst the
moviegoers. A handful blindly loved the movie, having been starved of a "Star
Wars" film for 16 years. Another surly and disgruntled group tried to score a
victory against what they called "The evil Lucasfilm empire" by leveling
accusations of racism at the film. A third large and unruly group complained
that the movie was all flash and fire, with no true sense of heart or emotion 
Sir Critic immediately dismissed the racism claims of the surly group,
believing its arguments had enough foolishness to embarrass an entire
profession.  Alarmed by the group's cynical tone, the knight branded them as
the sort of charlatans who like to spend time looking for messages that simply
did not exist, with their real purpose being to draw attention to themselves.
"What utter nonsense!" the knight declared. The Trade Federation aliens speak
in a Japanese accent, I believe, because this is homage to the Japanese films
of Akira Kurosawa, who inspired the "Star Wars" series in the first place. As
for the sidekick Jar Jar Binks' Jamaican overtones, that is because this is the
accent that the voice actor, Ahmed Best, actually uses."
Evading the dreaded racist claims, Sir Critic tried to begin his proper review.
However, the other critics, obsessed with shooting the film down, dispatched
hundreds of angry barbs at the film, in particular assailing the sidekick
character of Jar-Jar, whom they labeled as a constant nuisance.
Sir Critic conceded that Jar-Jar's pidgin English, which sounded like a warped
form of Pig Latin, was off-putting and unnecessary, but aside from that, he
found the character amusing in the role of a clumsy oaf, which gave the film
many lighthearted moments of humor.
The unruly group then changed tactics, focusing on a new, pointed attack even
more powerful than their first. They argued the film was nothing more than an
overstuffed visual feast, with plenty to look at, but little to care about and
no depth of character or storytelling to be found.
Sir Critic had to concede this argument, but only up to a point. He agreed that
the movie was basically two-hours plus of setup for the darker chapters in the
saga that were to follow, and this particular episode had little in the way of
emotional heft.
Even so, Sir Critic predicted that when the entire series was completed, "The
Phantom Menace" would fit in nicely with the entire series. He found it
especially interesting that Obi-Wan Kenobi trained Anakin when he was an
inexperienced Jedi, which makes for some ominous foreshadowing.
"But do not forget the most important point," Sir Critic advised the others.
"When all is said and done, the most important question is 'Was the film an
entertaining, exciting time at the theater?' My answer is yes, very much so.
'The Phantom Menace,' is, like the other films, an adventure story at heart. 
As an adventure, it succeeds grandly with great set pieces like the pod race
and the final battle with Darth Maul, which are worth the price of admission by
themselves.
"Could it have been better? Yes, it could have, but no movie could possibly
live up to the expectations that had built up behind it. 'The Phantom Menace'
may not be the best of the series, but it has one thing in common with the
other films: it is a lot of fun."

Title
Review for People vs. Larry Flynt, The (1996)
Starring:  Woody Harrelson, Courtney Love, Edward Norton, Brett Harrelson.
Written by Scott Alexander and Larry Karaszewski; directed by Milos
Forman.
"The People vs. Larry Flynt" is gross. That's why it's so great.
Okay, so the choice of words, is, well, a little blunt. But hey, since
we're talking about the infamous Hustler founder who won over the Supreme
Court, someone whose middle name might have been "blunt," I figure it's
only appropriate.
Anyway, back to this gross thing.  Things that are gross tend to be great
movie subjects. Take "Vertigo," for example. It's about a man unerringly
obsessed with a dead woman, "A Clockwork Orange is about a man who goes on
violent sprees just for kicks.  These people at heart, are really
repellent, and yet, for better or worse, the audience is made to like them
and side with them because we hate the forces against them worse than we
do the one being maligned.
Along these lines, the fact that "Larry Flynt" very obviously sides with
its hero is not, as some people have indicated, a flaw.  Focusing only on
the pro-and-con of free speech could be boring and obvious.  In fact, I
would argue that the free speech debate, while powerful, isn't the most
compelling part of the movie. It was  a much more impressive  feat to take
a repugnant character and make the audience side with him even if they 
might not personally like him.
First and foremost to credit in this feat are the actors.  Woody Harrelson
turns in a veritable tour de force that ranks, I think, as the most
powerful of 1996..  As Flynt veers from smug bar owner to devout,
born-again Christian to crestfallen paraplegic to defiant crusader, we see
a man put through an emotional wringer that literally almost killed him. 
The fact he keeps standing up despite all his enemies, despite his
confinement to a wheelchair, is what makes him such a compelling figure.
No less astonishing is Courtney Love as Flynt's flamboyant wife, Althea
Leisure.  No, it's not so surprising that she can play a scraggly,
strung-out prostitute, but how sympathetic she makes her.  The image of
her gripping the barrier separating herself and Flynt while he's in prison
burned into my memory.
And caught in the middle of this Constitutional whirlwind is that rising
star Edward Norton, who remains the calm of the storm as he dazedly tries
to hash out all the craziness around him and becomes the clear ringing
voice in support of free speech that even repellent trash like Hustler is
right to practice. 
Ultimately, the tricky balancing act this movie pulls off is what makes it
one of the best films of the year. I've heard people argue that it's
drama, while others insist it's a comedy.  A case can be made for both;
after all, a movie that has about a man despised by many who gets shot and
paralyzed with a wife who irrevocably spirals to doom wouldn't seem to be
a barrel of laughs.
And yet the picture is acidly funny. Screenwriters Scott Alexander and
Larry Karaszewski, who also penned "Ed Wood" have a gift for making
guttural characters seem both funny and human. They have an ideal partner
in director Milos Forman, who has his own gift for taking larger-than-life
characters (like Mozart) and making them seem more human by revealing how
humorous and vulnerable they are.
So, at heart, The People vs. Larry Flynt, is a dramatic comedy, and a
great one at that. I know that it's cheating by having my cake and eating
it too, but it's the best description I could come up with about this
story of a man who is so gross he's fascinating.

Title
Review for Austin Powers: The Spy Who Shagged Me (1999)
Having dealt with the major issue at hand, Sir Critic's attention turned to
another film closely associated with "The Phantom Menace"-"Austin Powers: The
Spy Who Shagged Me." Since the trailer suggested "If you see only one movie
this summer, see 'Star Wars.' But if you see two movies, see 'Austin Powers.'"
Sir Critic decided to take that advice.
"How on earth do you review a film that defies criticism like this one does?"
the other critical types asked the knight.
"It's very simple. You simply ask, 'Is it funny?' and since this is a sequel,
"Does it live up to the original?" My answers are 'yes' to both questions.
"Simply put, if you liked the first movie, you are bound to like the second. It
is more of the same juvenile/pop culture humor, done on a slightly larger scale
since they had a slightly larger budget. The scenes with Dr. Evil and the
crowd-pleasing Mini-Me are especially funny.  Mike Myers ought to be careful,
or Austin himself may fade from the picture.
"The major flaw of the film is that it relies a little too much on toilet
humor; the character of Fat Bastard was not amusing, but simply gross. I would
have run him through with my sword given half the chance. Gross by itself is
not funny, although I did like the series of jokes using different nicknames
for a certain unique part of the male anatomy."
The other critics cautioned, "Wait Sir Critic. You must imitate the language of
Austin Powers in a review. That is required by law."
"Oh behave, my friends, I'm far above that sort of thing."
And with that, Sir Critic had one of his few defeats.

Title
Review for Evita (1996)
Starring: Madonna, Antonio Banderas, Jonathan Pryce
Written and directed by Alan Parker; original treatment by Oliver Stone;
based on the musical by Andrew Lloyd Webber and Tim Rice
And all I had to do was look at this visually stunning, engrossing
rendition of "Evita" to know that it lived up to its advance hype. In
fact, about the only problem with the movie is that its a little too aware
it lives up to its advance hype.
Many people had reason to doubt that it would work, not least of which was
that Hollywood had not made a suuccessful musical picture in years, much
less one where almost the entire film is sung. What these naysayers failed
to take into account were two names: Alan Parker, and yes, Madonna.
Parker has been publicly quoted as saying he wants to make a movie in
every genre before he days. If Iwere him, I would stick to musicals,
because it is in them that he most proves that he is a master of visual
storytelling. In "Pink Floyd: The Wall" he took a ponderous script and
breathed life into it with scores of memorable images. In "The
Commitments," he took a thin story and strengthened it by letting the old
soul songs tell paert of the story.
Now, with "Evita", Parker has pulled out all the stops and let the songs
completely take over, and it greatly helps that he has some great
performances to work from, not the least of which is Madonna's.  I, for
one, had no doubt she would be able to pull this off.  As derided as her
acting ability has been, even her detractors may admit she delivers the
goods in a musical forum, and she certainly does here. Not only is her
vocal range improved, but so is her emotional range. She effectively
expresses both theconniving manipulation and emotional vulnerability of
Eva Peron, which helps keep the character appropriately enigmatic.  
For all Madonna's success, though, the most vital performance in the film
is the one given by Antonio Banderas, who appears as Che', the film's
sardonic, omniscent narrator.  What surprised me was not Banderas' vocal
ability (I remember "The Mambo Kings"), but the confidence and ease with
with which he delivers Tim Rice's cynical  lyrics.  He effectively cuts
the proceedings down to size when they threaten to become overbearing. 
Unfortunatley that overstuffing is the picture's biggest detriment,
especially in Webber's score. While his melodies are more often than not
affecting, too often they're undermined by dated arrangements featuring
synthesizers and guitars that sound like they're stuck in 1979.  
Unfortunately, Jonathan Pryce's performance as Juan Peron is stifled, too.
 While he provides a solid center as Juan Peron ,he tends to be
overshadowed by all the showy proceedings surrounding him.
Even Parker's normally assured direction gets caught up in the pomp and
circumstance. Early on,Parker's staging  is too self-conscious,  too aware
that its  creating a big spectacle..  It's only after Banderas gets going
that Parker relaxes and lets the material speak for itself.
In the end, after Evita has "entetered mortality," Che contemplates her
memory, fully aware that Eva was not all she seemed, but admiring all the
same her gift for putting on a show. I found myself agreeing with him
about "Evita," the movie.

Title
Review for Portrait of a Lady, The (1996)
Starring Woody Allen, Alan Alda, Drew Barrymore, Lukas Haas, Goldie Hawn,
Gaby Hoffman, Julia Roberts, Natasha Lyonne, Edward Norton, Natalie
Portman, Tim Roth
Starring Nicole Kidman, John Malkovich, Tate Donovan, Barbara Hershey,
Mary-Louise Parker, Shelly Winters
Adapted by Laura Jones, based on the novel by Henry James
Directed by Jane Campion
I can hear the question already. What on earth do these two movies have in
common? To most people, not a lot, except that both are by renowned
directors.  As I saw them, however, both movies have flawed romantic
scripts wrapped in distinctive packaging of lavish visuals musical
numbers.  
But oh, how differently the packages affect their films.  While
"Everyone's" production numbers make an otherwise ordinary Woody tale
something special, Jane Campion's imaginative visuals only serve to
emphasize how pompous and uninvolving Laura Jones' script is. I left
"Everyone Says I Love You" not remembering a lot about who loved whom, but
its infectious happiness put a grin on my face.  I left "The Portrait of a
Lady" not remembering a lot about who loved whom, and I could have cared
less.
"Everyone" features  nothing Allen hasn't done before storywise. Woody is
again desperately in love with a beautiful woman (Roberts), and against
the odds they manage to click for awhile before Allen is left wondering
what went wrong--again.  Similar situations happen to his family and
friends. Some of the more outlandish comedy scenes even hark back to his
"early, funny" films. The scenes between Tim Roth and Drew Barrymore could
have come out of "Take the Money and Run," his directorial debut.
However, nothing Allen has ever done prepared me for this one-of-a-kind
display of sheer good spirits. In fact, in this movie, the feeling itself
is what's most important. Yes, the movie would have been better--among his
very best, I think--if it had a meatier story. But what it lacks in
substance it makes up for  in feeling.  And what better way to express
feeling than through music? Love is often best expressed in a song, and
the numbers the cast break into here cut straight to the heart. Some are a
tad too goofy, such as the number where a lot of ghosts prance around in a
funeral parlor, but I admired Allen for even putting them in there.
It also helps that as usual, Allen has a top-flight cast working with him.
Their singing voices range from quite good (Goldie Hawn) to not quite good
(Allen) to literally unlistenable (Barrymore, whose real voice was dubbed
by a professional).  But while their vocal abilities differ, all the
actors do a great job of putting joy up there on the screen, and making it
rub off on the audience. Granted, some people will simply never accept
characters singing in movies, but for those attuned to it, this film
should work wonders. 
Jane Campion, too, has a top-flight cast working for her in "Portrait of a
Lady," too, but even their considerable skills can do nothing to keep the
film from being a stilted, virtually lifeless mess, albeit a visually
interesting one.
Campion and her cinematographer Stuart Dryburgh come up with a great
variety of eye-filling images that linger in the mind.  Unfortunately,
what didn't linger in the mind for me was the story the visuals were
supposed to be reflecting. I remember very well shots of a train with its
light beaming and shots of men vanishing around Nicole Kidman, but I can
remember very little of what happened between all these people.  Even
worse, I don't find myself feeling bad that I've forgotten.
The problem, I think, lies not with the cast, which seemed to be trying
very hard for the material.  It was the script that couldn't convince me
to care about anyone. The characters were putting out all kinds of
emotion, but I found no reason to connect with any of them. I understood
that the story was about cold, emotionally vacant characters, but for me
to care about them, I have to identify with them somehow and want them to
inject feeling into their lives. Jones' script never simply gave me that
opportunity.
In the end, it almost seemed as if Campion was trying to inject some life
of her own into the proceedings with her visual flourishes. 
Unfortunately, as she kept painting these dazzling pictures, they only
served to push me further away from the material and remind me that there
was no connection between me and the film. In the end, the movie's one
strength ended up hurting it. 
So here we have two films with pretty uninteresting plots, and yet I was
able to truly enjoy one of them. Why? With both films, my head cared about
neither story, but only "Everyone Says I Love You"  was able to make my
heart sing.
