Authors
Vince Waldron
Number of Reviews
7

Title
Review for Unhook the Stars (1996)
A very pleasant surprise from writer director Nick Casavettes, son of the
founding father of american independent cinema, a genuinely heartfelt
character study that features an immensely satisfying starring performance
from the director's mom, Gena Rowlands (who proves once again that she is
without question one of the American cinema's most gifted and intelligent
of any age or gender.)   There aren't a great deal of shattering
breakthroughs in the movie's straightforward screenplay, but the film
offers its relaxed and extremely capable ensemble enough privileged moments
that I was more than willing to forgive the story's occasional pat turns.
If nothing else, this film should be required viewing for its depiction of
an intelligent, sexy older woman who sacrifices not a wit of her dignity,
intelligence and believability along the way.  Highly recommended.

Title
Review for Jing cha gu shi IV: Jian dan ren wu (1996)
It isn't being billed as such, but this is actually the fourth installment
in Jackie's popular Police Story series--and the good news is that it is
indeed a worthy successor to those earlier action gems.   Actually, it's
not surprising that the film's stateside distributors have been downplaying
the films lineage to the earlier police story series, since most of the
earlier police story adventures have yet to recieve widespread distribution
in the united states.  Besides, with a spy versus spy plotline that exists
largely to drop Jackie into a string of life threatening action sequences
spread out across the globe, this film owes as much to the james bond films
of the seventies as it does to Jackie earlier police story action comedies.
This is also one of the first Jackie vehicles that seems designed to
appeal to the western market from its inception--and it is by far the most
successful of the jackie movies to gain widespread distribution in this
country.  Like Rumble in the bronx, this one moves the action from Hong
Kong to a vaguely recognizable western location--in this case a pacific
resort in an australian metropolis.  
But unlike the inferior "rumble," in which Jackie seemed somewhat
constrained by the limited action potential of that film's bogus new york
locations, the star is let loose in a string of
breathtaking set pieces in snow, sea and air.  There are a number of
superbly choreographed fights scenes, including a splendid set piece in
which Jackie employs an aluminum painter's ladder to dazzling effect--I
don't think an inanimate object has been as thrilling since Fred Astaire
stepped out with that hat rack back in Hollywood's golden age.  Best of
all, the film's breakneck plot allows Jackie plenty of opportunity to
demonstrate his deft sense of physical comedy--which is a quality that's
been somewhat lacking in most of the star's previous stateside releases.
Highly recommended to Jackie's fans, I think this would also serve as the
perfect introduction to Jackie's magic for those of you wondering what the
hub bub is all about.

Title
Review for Secrets & Lies (1996)
British director Mike Leigh's latest examination of class and the human
comedy in his native land may well be his most successful film to date,
which--in a long line of esteemed comedies that includes Naked, Life is
Sweet and the justifiably lauded High Hopes--is saying something. 
Beatuifully modulated performances and a deceptively complex screenplay
make this Leigh's most satisfying and accessible film yet, a work of
unassuming ambition, this one will sneak up on you.   Highly recommended,
go see it (or--sigh!--rent it if indeed that's the only way this worthy
film is distributed in your home town.)

Title
Review for Funeral, The (1996)
The Funeral finds B-movie director turned indie auteur Abel Ferrara
returning to the gangster film, the genre that provided the setting for
his barely-noticed 1990 B-movie masterwork, "King of New York."  But
despite the presence of Christopher Walken at the center of both films,
Ferrara's latest meditation on murder, morality and the nature of sin
bears a much stronger kinship to the director's more recent philosophical
tracts, "The Addiction" and "Bad Lieutenant,"  And, much as I admire the
director's efforts to tackle the spiritual and moral underpinnings that
lie beneath the surface of such durable staples of the B-movie maker's
palatte as gangster films, vampire movies and urban cop melodramas, I'm
sorry to observe that thus far I've found the director's genre-bending
experiments an uneasy mix, burdened by far too much self-conscious talk
and not nearly enough character-driven action.   
Which is shame, since Ferrara demonstrates as sure a grasp of pulp
character and convention as any American director since Sam Fuller,
another director who rarely shied from exploring the multiple layers of
his pulp subject matter, though rarely at the expense of its relentless
momentum.  But in age when so many independent film makers seem content to
set their sights no higher than emulating the flash and fire of Quentin
Tarantino, I suppose I can hardly complain when a director of Ferrara's
talent and ambition chooses to pattern himself after Robert Bresson.

Title
Review for Microcosmos: Le peuple de l'herbe (1996)
An odd import that's currently making the rounds of the country's art house
circuit, this lushly photographed documentary gives us a fairly novel
close-up at a bunch of insects as they mate, eat, fight and generally
cavort for a series of extremely patient documentary film makers in France.
Though not without its charms, it's now here near the cinematic revelation
promised by the well meaning reviews that were hyped in the press when the
film made a recent stop in LA on its current rounds of the art house
circuit.  Though the local reviewers seemed to find this a thrilling and
unique slice of cinematic magic, I was less impressed by the film's
admittedly state of the art cinematagraphy, finding nothing more than a
modern variant on those disney true life nature films that were so popular
in third grade science class in the sixties.  Nicely shot, yeah--but its
still just bugs.  
By coincidence I happened to catch a revival of another movie that adopts 
the point of view of our six-legged friends:  the 1941 animated
feature "Mr Bug Goes to Town" (which was screened  as the final entry in the
LA County Museum's tribute to the animated films of the Fleischer brothers.)
Those looking for the classic bug's eye view movie might do themselves a favor
and track down the republic studios videocassette of this one.

Title
Review for Big Night (1996)
One of the real joys of this past season, and definite must-see.  A wholly
original film that's packed with great performances and privileged
moments.  Though nominally the tale of two brothers struggling to save the
failing restaurant on which they've pegged their hopes and dreams, that
synopsis doesn't begin to do justice to the film's poetry, nor does it
prepare you for the surprising generosity of the film's exquisite pace. 
Alternately riveting and almost maddeningly langorous, this is a film of
paradoxes: a film of nuanced subtlety whose comedy is at times painted in
broad strokes indeed.  Making this film must have been an act of faith on
the part of all involved, since it's difficult to imagine how any of the
film's grace notes could possibly have been spelled out in the script, as
good as it may have been.  An elegant tale, deftly told.
reply directly to vince at 
ag644@lafn.org

Title
Review for Killer: A Journal of Murder (1996)
This worthy effort from star James Woods slipped in and out of theaters so
quickly that many of you will probably assume it's a straight to video
release when it finally pops up on Blockbuster's new release shelf, which
should be any day now.  But I suspect the film's low profile has more to
do with the unfortunate timing of its release than anything else; as the
third death row drama to hit the nation's screens in year when we'd
already suffered through Sean Penn and Sharon Stone's long walk down the
last mile, it's no surprise that this somewhat more modest movie would
come and go without hope of reprieve.  Which is too bad, since the movie's
premature demise deprived filmgoers of a catching a great unbridled turn
by James Woods on the big screen.  A nicely-realized period piece set in
the years leading up to the depression, "Killer" purports to tell the
story of America's first bona fide serial killer, related through the eyes
of an unusually principled prison guard who befriends the outcast con
throughout the years of his death row incarceration.  And though "Killer"
bears perhaps too many similarities in theme and plot to the year's two
previous death row dramas--Tim Robbins' "Dead Man Walking" and the one
that starred Sharon Stone, the name of which eludes me right this
instant--it has by far the most driving narrative of the three, as well as
a central relationship that struck me as a far more plausible dynamic than
that explored in either of its more high-profile precursors.   But see
this one for the performance of James Woods, an actor who consistently
makes such interesting choices that he could well develop into one of
America's most accomplished actors as he matures, assuming he doesn't
accidentally become some kind of Hollywood institution along the way.
