Authors
2fatguys@tdis.icpsr.umich.edu (Too Fat Guys)
Number of Reviews
6

Title
Review for Mom and Dad Save the World (1992)

Title
Review for Single White Female (1992)
Roger:  So, another Evil Lesbian movie, Roger?
Roger:  As I mentioned earlier, Allie and Hedy's relationship seems
        initially to have strong lesbian overtones.  Fortunately, this
        is no BASIC INSTINCT.  The director, Barbet Schroeder, seems to
        explicitly push the apparently lesbian theme.  However, we find
        out fairly quickly that Hedy is a surviving twin and is using
        Allie as a surrogate sister.
Roger:  So, that's two thumbs up, a first here, for SINGLE WHITE
        FEMALE.  That's all for now -- the tty is closed.
-- 
For the latest review by the Too FAT Guys, finger roger@icpsr.umich.edu.

Title
Review for Sneakers (1992)
Roger:  SNEAKERS, a techno-thriller, engages in some of the least subtle
        government bashing in recent memory.  Martin Bishop (Robert
        Redford) runs a computer security company with "Mother" (Dan
        Aykroyd), "Whistler" (David Strathairn), Crease (Sidney Poitier),
        and Carl (River Phoenix).  They are hired by NSA agents to steal a
        black box.  After retrieving the device, they soon discover what
        it is: the ultimate code breaker.
Roger:        And this is really the only portion of the movie whose technical
        accuracy can be questioned. Using the black box, they break into
        several services, such as the "National Power Grid".  Aside from
        the improbability of such a service existing, the NPG seems to
        trust encryption enough to do away with authentication.
Roger:  There were also several other technical inaccuracies, but I was
        willing to excuse them.  Accuracy is an admirable goal, but it
        doesn't always make great cinema.  At least they bothered to hire
        a technical advisor.
Roger:  Information plays so great a role, that the villain seems almost
        incidental.  The real target of abuse is the government.
        Certainly, the film seems to be saying that the government is the
        greatest abuser of information.  And who could fault anyone for
        criticizing the government?
Roger:        So, that's two thumbs up for SNEAKERS.  That's all for now --
        the tty is closed.
-- 
For the latest review by the Too FAT Guys, finger roger@icpsr.umich.edu.

Title
Review for Mo' Money (1992)
Roger:  Yes.  Theaters started showing trailers for MO' MONEY about
        two months ago with a prominent screen enumerating all of the
        artists on the soundtrack.  Ironically, the soundtrack provided
        the second funniest line in the movie.
Roger:        The scintillating Jam and Lewis soundtrack aside, this comedy-
        action-romance-with-a-twist-of-social-conscience portrays the
        story of a young man, Johnny Stewart (Damon Wayans) and his
        brother, Seymour (Marlon Wayans), two inner-city hustlers.
        When Johnny meets an attractive credit card company executive,
        he decide to find a real job to attract her.  The story becomes
        interesting when Johnny becomes unwillingly involved in an
        elaborate scheme of crime credit card fraud.
Roger:  Yes, it does have some sad commentary on the results of
        Reagan's voodoo economics.  For instance, while holding a
        full-time job, Johnny can't make ends meet until he supplements
        his income through illegal means.

Title
Review for Death Becomes Her (1992)
Roger:  Say Roger, isn't Meryl Streep a Serious Actor?
Roger:  I was wondering, why does she keep squandering her talent on
        these pitiful comedies?
Roger:  She tried it once and she liked it?

Title
Review for Buffy the Vampire Slayer (1992)
Roger:  In this cinematic extravaganza, Kristy Swanson plays Buffy, an
        undisciplined, frivolous, vacuous, valley girl cheerleader.
        Unfortunately for her, vampirism seems to be big in LA this
        year.  Shortly, she is informed by Merrick (Donald Sutherland)
        that she is the Chosen One, slayer of vampires.  He takes Buffy
        under his wing and trains her to fight the vampire Lothos
        (Rutger Hauer), and his evil henchman (Paul Reubens).  Luke
        Perry appears as Pike, Buffy's love interest.
Roger:  Of course, it's not particularly clear that the slayer is there
        to annoy Lothos.  There is a strong undertone of Merrick's
        collusion with Lothos, perhaps that Merrick's real job is to
        train slayers for Lothos's consumption, not destruction.
        Another completely spurious bit of plot relates to some of
        Merrick's instructions.  Buffy draws on them, during her final
        confrontation with Lothos.  Despite having heard them twice,
        during the film, it is still unclear to me what these
        instructions were supposed to mean.
Roger:        So, that's one thumb up and one thumb down for BUFFY THE
        VAMPIRE SLAYER.  That's all for now -- the tty is closed.
-- 
For the latest review by the Two FAT Guys, finger roger@icpsr.umich.edu.
