Authors
Jason Overbeck
Number of Reviews
45

Title
Review for Broadcast News (1987)
James L. Brooks made Broadcast News based on people he met in the news
industry.  What he created with that material is one of the best films
of the eighties, a smart, romantic and honest film about the love
triangle of three people serious about the new they provide.
Tom (William Hurt) is not educated, yet he is attractive and good on
camera causing his status to rise. Aaron (exceptional and funny Albert
Brooks) is the ideal reporter, educated and able to write wonderfully
but has some problems on camera causing him to be overlooked. Jane
(Holly Hunter) is a news reporter who has long been friends with Aaron
and yet falling in love with Tom.  Yet Tom 'personifies everything shes
been fighting for,' in the job of trying not to seel out and become
entertainers instead of educaters.  The fact is that Jane has her
biological clock ticking with reckless disregard and she is attracted to
Tome (as long as he doesn't talk).
This is the setup for what could have been a standard sitcom type film
but rises to become one of the most honest and telling portraits of love
and the relationship of men and women.  The acting, directing, and
especially writing is so smart and snaps perfectly into place.  Small
scenes work.  Not one point is off in this film, I wouldn't change a
scene.  James L. Brooks proves to be one of the best writers in the
business and continues to prove it later with As Good As It Gets.  This
film doesn't know the meaning of easy way out.  This film has too much
respect for us.  Watch a film like Titanic and then watch this or Say
Anything... and you will notice that great honest movies will leave you
feeling more impact when the characters misstep or take the direction
that you wouldn't advise.
I'm reviewing this movie in 98 and it is had not to incorprate the
modern times into the review.  I noticed the=at the delima revolving
around Jane in this film was Style or Subsatnce, much like the Best
picture Oscar race this year, Titanic Vs. LA Confidential.  Titanic was
all style lacking the substance of most great films, including LA
Confidential which may not have been as astesticly appealing but at
least didn't insult us by being pretensious.  Putting Broadcast News on
tht level adds a new level to a film which just gets better and better
and better.

Title
Review for L.A. Confidential (1997)
This is the best film of the year. If TITANIC (****) wins Best Picture
at the Oscars it will be a tragedy the size of FORREST GUMP (***) over
PULP FICTION (****). The sad fact is that TITANIC will win. Nothing
against TITANIC which is one of the best films of the year, LA.
CONFIDENTIAL is just soo much better.
LA. CONFIDENTIAL is a masterpiece of a film set in the 1940's and
dealing with three cops, one a "celebrity" cop, one a pit bull, and the
other a kid raising through the ranks by screwing over other cops. They
are thrown into a massacre that turns out to be a very complex puzzle of
twists and turns. 
Every aspect of this film is beautifully composed, the look, dialog and
acting is key. Who would expected a film this wonderful from Curtis
Hanson (co-writer/director) after he inflicted us with THE RIVER WILD
(**1/2) and HAND THAT ROCKS THE CRADLE (**)? Who would have expected a
film this complex and intricate?
The cast is fantastic, consisting of 4 red hot actors. Guy Pearce is
quite a discovery as the department hated cop, his last film was
ADVENTURES OF PRICELLA QUEEN OF THE DESERT(!). Kevin Spacey delivers a
knockout performance that out does that of THE USUAL SUSPECTS (****).
Russel Crowe hasn't been this good since his Aussie film ROMPER STOMPER
(***1/2). James Cromwell continues his critical waves, created with BABE
(***).
All hope of a Best Picture oscar is not completly lost. TITANIC didn't
recieve a nomination for screenplay or lead actor. The distinction that
made it so much higher than other films were action awards (sound,
visual effects,...). If CONFIDENTIAL comes up unvictorious to the boat
don't be suprised. Remember Fargo, Pulp, .........

Title
Review for Scream (1996)
Scream is the best and worst thing to happen to the horror genre. 
Horror films were pretty much gone in recent years and Scream revived
them, it has also probably killed the horror film without
self-referencing dialogue.  Now like Halloween, Psycho or Night of the
Living Dead we have a horror film that will create scores of imitators,
for better or worse.
Scream starts with a masterpiece scene that could make an exceptional
short film.  A girl is home alone in a big spooky house.  She gets a
phone call from a stranger, who slowly becomes more threatening and
deadly.  The stranger then puts her through a movie trivia test, the
results of which could prove fatal to her.  These scenes are taunt and
unrelenting and start Scream's flare for taking standard horror film
cliches and turning them on their heads.
After the opening tension the film settles down into a group of
teenagers stuck in a horror film (al a Halloween, Friday the 13th, etc.)
and gives them satirically smart dialogue and a darkly comic surrounding
in their High School.  The group consists of two girls (Campbell - our
hero and McGowan) and four boys (Ulrich - Campbell's boyfriend, Lillard
- McGowan's boyfriend, and Kennedy - movie-addicted nerd).  
The film has many key scenes that work very well.  As when Kennedy
explains the probable killer to Lillard or as he explains the rules
("Never Have sex!." He yells as Campbell is deflowered).  There is also
a wonderful scene that has Campbell call the bluff of the killer on the
phone.
A lot of credit has to be paid to screenwriter Kevin Williamson and
director Wes Craven.  They both handle the film marvelously.  The
script, which was part of a major studio bidding war, is very smart and
funny.  So funny that most horror directors passed because they wee
confused of the films actual genre (even though the original title was
Scary Movie).  Craven is a natural choice to direct this film because he
never really takes his films that seriously anyway.  He tried a similar
mix of horror and comedy with Wes Craven's New Nightmare and Vampire in
Brooklyn, the first was successful.  He plays this film expertly careful
not to be too funny in key scenes that require empathy for dying
characters and he also finds ways to keep comedy up while anticipating
violence.

Title
Review for Dark City (1998)
I always react more to films which contain endless imagination and
thought.  A movie like Dark City, that roars by you with images you have
never seen or dreamt, like experiences David Lynches paintings.  People
call this a comic book movie but that is nly part true.  This film is
detailed and enigmatic enough to make a great comic book but few comic
artists have as much energy as is shown in this film, one of the years
best.
A man wakes up finds a dead prostitute and soon discovers the dark side
of the world.  He encounters the Strangers a bread of aliens (I suppose)
who live under the surface of everyday life and conduct experiments on
humans whiule they cause us to sleep.
The Strangers will always be remembered as a true horrific detail,
almost like extras from a Marilyn Manson concert.  The are tall, looming
figures who wear all black and have dead, pale skin hugging their
bones.  It seems that movie dreams are never like dreams that real
humans might have, but those Strangers are creepy, and look as though
they walked out of my nightmares and onto thbig screen.
I have neglected much of the movie other than the look and that is a
shame.  We get good work from William Hurt, Rufus Sewel and Keifer
Sutherland.  The plot is also genious with ticks of sci-fi, film noir,
and horror.  The end scenes ae masterpieces in there own right.  When we
finally see what we inhabit, something comes over us, allowing us to
question theworld that we know and the peoples words we take on it.  It
may sound like I'm nuts, and I am - about this film.  Great work from
the director of the under-rated THE CROW Alex Prowles.

Title
Review for Strictly Ballroom (1992)
Strictly Ballroom is a wonderfully original film disguised as a
traditional, cliched one.  It talks about breaking out of traditions and
creating something new and heartfelt.  The story is basically about a
guy that takes an ugly duckling under his arms and teaches her (in an
incredible short time) how to be as good as him so they can compete, and
show-up the usual opponent.  If you think you've seen that before,
you're right, and you can still see Strictly Ballroom because it doesn't
follow that formula in anyway you've seen before.  
The film starts in a quasi-documentary form showing a spirited ballroom
dancer (Mercurio) trying to dance in the standard ballroom fashion, but
as he is trapped he improvises with crowd-pleasing but judge-annoying
moves.  His partner is hardly able to keep up to his moves and they lose
to a white-haired man who sticks to the traditions.   His partner and
annoying, old-timer dancing mom are frustrated by the loss and the
partner quits to join the white-haired victor.  This is when the
frustrated and flashy dancer meets the ugly duckling (Morce) whom also
has an offbeat style.
Hey have to keep their merging secret because his mother has to see her
son win, and the ugly ducking is a newcomer who has only been dancing
for 2 years.  They practice at night at his parents dance studio and she
is under constant pressure by her domineering father.  More conflicts
arise and they're dancing together is questioned.
Strictly Ballroom is a crowd-pleasing film that will keep you're toes
tapping constantly as you watch and listen to the film.  Even though you
probably know the way the film will end you will have fun getting there
and will be surprised by plot twists in between.  Strictly Ballroom is a
fun film that can be seen by people of all ages.

Title
Review for Lost in Space (1998)
I never saw the TV show LOST IN SPACE and from what I hear I didn't miss
much.  I was quite impressed with the cast list as the film began,
images of them in other much better films race through my head.  To say
that this is a dumb action film is too kind to this utterly worthless
trash.  This is one of the years worst films.
The plot is just an excuse for a series of heartless and mindless effect
shots, notice I didn't say 'special' because nothing in this film is. 
The actors run looking bored and probably having paychecks on the mind. 
What are these actors doing in this film?! William Hurt the talented
star of Broadcast News, Heather Graham of Drugstore Cowboy and Boogie
Nights, Gary Oldman from Sid And Nancy plus Professional, these are
talented actors.  
There is no point in describing the plot because the film hardly
bothers.  This is a film about Family, pilot and badguy stuck in space
and a bunch of effects.  Watching this reminded me of last years
STARSHIP TROOPERS or this years Dark City, which not many saw, and how a
film with inteligence and/or imagination can make a fun and great
film.

Title
Review for Thing, The (1982)
Don't want to see John Waters' Pecker than check out John Carpenter's
Thing.  That must be the ultimate control issue for directors, making
others ask to see your joystick.  If I ever make a film I'm sure I'll
title it Jason Overbeck's Third Leg.  Keeping with this train of thought
did you know Roger Ebert said of John Carpenter's Thing, that "Teenagers
can dare one another to watch."  I'll leave that one alone.
The Thing is a very effective movie, with scenes of shear suspense and
moments of terror and disgust.  It opened in 1982 with mixed reviews and
now seems to be a minor classic.  People will always remember the dogs
and the open-up chest and that blood-test scene.  They are perfectly
set-up and delivered, you can smile at the nifty special effects and
remember the good ole days before computer effects made lazy
imaginations.  Would any studio get away with a film like The Thing
now?  Hell no!  Not with that ending, those violent scenes with animals
and the general yuck feeling.
The story has a group of scientists in isolated Antarctica being
attacked by an alien that kills and replaces with a perfect clone.  Who
is and isn't infected?  Who can tell, the isolation has drawn strange
emotional states for all of these characters.  Leading the pack is pilot
(and antihero) MacReady (Kurt Russell) in a wacky-cool hat and a full
beard.  He is not unaffected by the isolation, he drinks too much and
plays long games of chess on his computer, but when duty calls he takes
command of the questionable group.
Guessing who is and isn't The Thing is almost impossible, everyone seems
to separate from each other and then look spooky.  The result leaves you
on the edge of your seat as they try to unmask the alien.  The final
answer leads you to feel that the screenwriter could have just picked a
name from a hat.  That doesn't matter much because this film is all
execution and the execution is slick, sick and a little gross.  It
recalls John Carpenter's much better classic Halloween.

Title
Review for Lashou shentan (1992)
Hard-Boiled has gained a certain fame since the sudden popularation of
Hong Kong action films, and it deserves every bit of it.  his film is
exciting and makes most American actioners look stale and unmotivated.
The plot is the regular male bonding esque story with small twists and
amazing set pieces.  We get a lot-o-death in a resteraunt, hospital and
factory.  Director Woo uses slow frames and sped up shots that inject
adrinalin to action scenes that seem almost hypnotic.  
Another praise of the film is in the use of hospital for climatic
setting. What a great idea.  There are plenty of patients who can't move
out of the way and of course a maternity ward full of babies.  When the
hospital may be blown up by terrorists every baby must be rescued and
delivered -- several stories down.
I have praised the action and it's exciting, also the film looks cool,
like a cold glaze over the screen.  It has the same look as many of the
Hong Kong action films that have began a wave of new fans.  For you
fans, this film is definatly worth a look, but first check out Woo's The
Killers.

Title
Review for Fear and Loathing in Las Vegas (1998)
There was once a time when drugs were funny, Cheech and Chong are living
proof of this.  I was reminded of this as I watched Thompson's alter ego
Raoul Duke (Depp) and his lawyer Dr. Gonzo (Del Toro) try to walk into a
hotel on a psychedelic mix of acid, mescaline, ether, cocaine, and
alcohol.  Seeing Depp react as a hotel lobby lady's face distorts and
contorts into a ghastly beast and wondering if you have to be on drugs
to think the Casino carpets are weird.  The first half of this film has
many such laughs.
Depp and Del Toro are on an assignment in Las Vegas in search of a story
they never follow up, and mostly staying high on drugs and trashing
everything in their path.  Depp talks with longing of San Francisco
"great" acid trips and his cigarette holder dangling from his lips while
his equally strung out lawyer gives his professional advise like, "As
your lawyer I suggest you take two hits out of the brown case." 
The film's look is that of a frenzied trip.  Wide lenses and distortions
in showing Las Vegas and the hallucinations the characters have while
looking at everyday objects.  The cinematography is off the wall, wacky
as the camera spins out of control with the characters.  Different
lighting and colored editing processes are also used generously to
compliment the acting and unusual state of mind required.
There is one moment of pure genius as Thompson drives down the road at
an incredible rate after consuming mass of drugs and skipping on his
hotel bill.  A highway patrolman flashes his lights and pulls up to him
telling him to pull over.  Instead he leads him on a chase while playing
with the expectations of the cop and narrating that it gives the cop
some excitement and he would prefer chasing him rather than him getting
nervous and pulling over immediately.  This leads to a huge laugh.
I don't know how the public will react to this film.  The critics seem
to love it or hate it and the constant drug use is raising some
controversy and hatred towards the film.  I am giving the film a
marginal recommendation but the film is definitely not for everyone and
may rely on if you think drugs are or could be funny.  Those not
familiar with the book or Thompson may have trouble deciphering the
action.  Others can sit back and expect to see a wacky film that will
have you see the world in a frenzied light for hours after.

Title
Review for Chasing Amy (1997)
Chasing Amy is the last and best of the Jersey Trilogy, it is also one
of the years very best movies.  This is a love story between real fleshed
out people, and in a year where Titanic ruled our Box Office Chasing Amy
rules my heart.  It demands comparisons to Broadcast News (which was one
of the best films in the eighties) and is almost as great as that film.
Holden (Ben Affleck - you probably saw him in Good Will Hunting)and
Bankie (Jason Lee) are longtime friends, and very serious about the
comic book Bluntman and Chronic, which has released cult status.  At a
comic book convention, they meet Alyssa Jones a beautiful comic book
artist who seems to be a quick witted match to Holden.  During a long
game of darts in a bar he falls in love with her.  He takes unnecasary
long glances at her as they talk about love, his begining macho facade
turns into putty in her hands.
Later she invites him to a bar through a mutual friend in Hooper (Dwight
Ewell - very funny).  There he finds out she grew up close to where he
did.  Then we have the revelation that she is a lesbian.  This is met by
shock from Holden, who's hurt you can see very clearly.  
She notices his problem with this revelation and this is eased by a
conversation.  This conversation leads to others and scenes of them
doing things boys and girls would do when they play with love, in search
of the boundaries of their friendship.  
Holden is also getting heat from Banky, who doesn't understand the
relationship with Alyssa (You have no chance of getting her into bed!)
and thinks it may be inmposing on their friendship.  Is this just
jealousy or is there something more with this relationship.
Later plot twists are discovered as the film gets better and better.  As
Chasing Amy slowly (and wisly) drifts from very funny to serious, with
scattered laughs.  Yet it never missteps, the twist towards serious is
real and honest, driven by the characters.  It is refreshing to see a
film driven by the characters and able to drift with the characters (and
their emotions) where every they may fall.
The only thing attacked in this film by the critics is Smith's
direction.  It is simple,... and perfect for the film.  Artistic camera
angles may not be Smith's speciality but it would have detracted from
the film and it's impact.  Not all films need to look like they were out
of the pages of Scorsese or Paul Thomas Anderson.

Title
Review for Vierde man, De (1983)
People think of extreme vience and sex when Paul Verhoeven's name is
meantioned, I think of his best film The Fourth Man.  It offers
evrything you'd expect in a Verhoeven film and adds horrific imagery and
a wonderfull story.
A gay writer comes to town for a speech, q&a session, he meets a nice
lady.  He always seems to be hallucinating, and this and the seemingly
'nice' lady start to drive him crazy.  Has this lady been married
before, has she been divorced, or did she kill them?  This is all
handled in an outrageous style that fills each scene with blood or sex.
Back in 83 this Dutch film was a bit of an art-house success, and it
deserved it.  Along wih the sex and violence you have cool, flashy
direction and engaging black comedy.  It also has very erotic scenes
mixed in with the nude bodies and blood.
I am not a big fan of dreams in film, to be sure.  I usually find them
distracting and undream like.  Every once and while a film will offer
dream sequences that work and help the movement of the story.  The
dreams in Blue Velvet, for example, or in The Fourth Man.  I followed
this writer through every dream and hallucination, on the edge of my
seat (actually couch).  
I like Verhoeven films.  I have only seen one bad one (Showgirls - and
that wasn't THAT bad), and seen many which have made my years best
list.  This is one of them, a film that takes you through an exciting
plot of hallucinatory and hipnotic imagery and plot details.  This is a
great companion piece to Starship Troopers, Basic Instinct, or Total
Recall, the directors other fine films - two of those made my top ten
list for there respective years.

Title
Review for Out of Sight (1998)
Out of Sight is a continuation of the ever growing film adaptations of
Elmore Leonard novels, and if they continue to be this good as this I
will welcome an entire genre.  Out of Sight is not only as good as
Tarantino's film Jackie Browne it also raises the stakes aiming to be
billed as a companion piece to Pulp Fiction.  This is clearly one of the
best films of the year.
Jack Foley (Clooney) has robbed more than 200 banks in his life and
never with the use of a gun.  His approach to bank robbery is as laid
back as you can imagine, he finds the way to say all the right things
and walk out of the bank with large sums of money.  At the beginning of
the film he gets arrested when his car won't start.  After a prison
break Foley is locked in the trunk with a feisty U.S. Marshall named
Sisco (Lopez) they have a long conversation about crime, life and
movies.
The story is further complicated by a large array of supporting
characters who all seem to be trying to get a piece of the uncut
diamonds owned by Ripley (Brooks), a wall street tycoon who Foley help
survive in prison.  The various character motivations are further
complicated by Out of Sight's nonlinear timeline until you are not sure
who will and has done what to whom and exactly when.
The film is not nearly as complicated as it may seem because it is
wonderfully directed by Steven Soderbergh (who hit it big with Sex, Lies
& Videotape nine years ago).  Soderbergh while keeping the characters
and motivations straight has a lot of fun with the look of the film.  He
freezes the frame at times to raise awareness and also to add a musical
quality to the images.  Giving the film the technical quality you might
expect from the always-experimental Soderbergh.
At the core of Out of Sight is the chemistry between Clooney and Lopez,
who attack their relationship with the restraint shown by Max Cherry and
Jackie Browne, but also with more recklessness as their ages and
personalities will allow.  Soderbergh wisely chooses to keep the sex
scene discrete and lays dialogue from their meeting over it.  This keeps
you paying attention to their wit and intelligence rather than their
bodies, which are as finely shaped as the script by Scott Frank.
Both leads are quite good as Clooney comes into his own and finds a
comfortable style that suggests the humor of Mel Gibson.  Also very fine
in this film is supporting work by Ving Rhames, Don Cheadle, Dennis
Farina and Albert Brooks (who doesn't appear in enough movies).  If you
are tired of the parade of stupid movies fed on you go see Out of Sight,
a smart and very funny film.

Title
Review for Wild Things (1998)
Wild Things is the sleazy cousin of Palmetto (of earlier this year). 
This one has more sex, nudity, laughs and twists.  It is also a better
film.  It is fun to watch a film that keeps twisting and contorting as
it explains the plot and buries you more.
Wild Things is about a girl (Denise Richards) who accuses a school
counsler (Matt Dillon) of sexually abusing her.  Later another girl
(Neve Campbell) files similar charges.  Up to this point the film is
noir melodrama and looking quite good.  Then something unexpected
happens, Dillon hires Bill Murray as an ambulance chasing lawyer to
handle his case.
Comedians don't get much credit for their work in films.  I will tell
you that Wild Things without Bill Murray wouldn't work.  It would look
like a Tarantino drone (like every crime-related film).  He adds life to
this film and an insanly funny 20 minutes.  I want to be very clear
about this, Bill Muray is funnier in this 20 minutes of this film than
he was in The Man Who Knew Too Little.  
Murray (very hilariously) gets the case thrown out of court and
convinces Dillon to sue the first girls mother for ruining his career. 
Then we get a twist, Dillon, Campbell, and Denis Richards are all in it
together.  They are also involved in a minage a trois.  We get a spicy
sex scene, then another twist and another.......
With all the twists you don't really feel used by the plot, like you did
with Palmetto.  You are entralled and try to out think the plot, to a
point.  I felt there was one too many twists for complete satisfaction. 
The film you are left with is somewhat of a mess, but a fun one.
Much has been made about the sexual explicetness of the material.  There
are a few steamy sex scenes but the film seems to cheat on us.  An old
rule is that eroticism is what is left unseen.  I have no problem with
that, but what is Neve Campbell doing in a film that intends to show
all.  Denis Richards is naked, and so is Kevin Bacon (very briefly) but
the sex scenes cut away whenevery Neve takes off her shirt.  It may
sound shallow or may look like I'm trying to be cute but that is not
it.  I like twisty film noirs like this.  Bound of 1996 was a great one,
and it had one sex scene to speak of.  It didn't promise the explicet
though, and Wild Things did, if it would have been more truthful to
itself my grade would have been higher.  Neve if the script calls for
something explicet, don't nix the idea because you are too prude for it,
pass the idea to another actress who will remain TRUE to the material as
written and promised.

Title
Review for Jackie Brown (1997)
Jackie Brown is not the film you'd expect from the phenom director
Quentin Tarantion.  In Pulp Fiction and Reservoir Dogs he used an
offbeat amount of quirky dialogue spiced with suprising, comic shots of
violence.  Jackie Brown tells us that Mr. Tarantino is the real deal,
making one of the most grown up crime movies I've seen.
In Jackie Brown, based on novel Rum Punch by the wondeful Elmore
Leonard, the title character must outsmart a drug/gun dealer in Sam
Jackson and find time to fall in love with Max Cherry (played by Robert
Forster, WHO SHOULD HAVE WON THE BEST SUPPORTING ACTOR AWARD).  These
scenes are handled with Tarantino's trademark great dialogue and humor. 
The film is also decisivly less violent than his previous and much more
human.
There are two common complaints about this film.  One of them is Sam
Jackson's character Ordell Robbi's use of the word "nigger."  I want to
strain that this is Ordell Robbi saying this and NOT Tarantino or
Jackson.  Spike Lee has spoken out about this very point asking weither
Quentin wanted to be made "an honorary black man."  This is absurd, are
white people not aloud to write black characters? Are white writers not
aloud to have their characters saying offensive material?  Are there not
people who talk the way Robbi does?  Spike you made Get on the Bus, a
movie I appreciated, and the black Lexus dealer uses the word
prevasively throughout his FEW MINUTES of screen time.
The other complaint about the film was the length.  It runs long but was
not at all boring and much better writen that Titanic.  This film also
has many strong performances from Sam Jackson, cute Bridget Fonda, funny
Robert DeNiro, and two great performances from Robert Forster and Pam
Grier.  
On a side note I am very happy to see Pam Grier back in good films.  She
had quite a career in the seventies blaxploitation films.  She was
notable as the one that got naked and showed off her impressive bossom,
and for her charasmatic acting.  Her body left such an impression I
remember one critic of this film complaining that we didn't even see her
shoulders.  She gives a great performance here and in films like Coffy
and Foxy Brown, lower scale but still very entertaining.

Title
Review for Barb Wire (1996)
Barb Wire was written off on everyone's list before it came out.  Even
mine.  To be honest, I saw the film expecting cheesy laughs and extended
looks at Pamela Anderson's chest.  I was not disappointed on either of
the counts.
Barb Wire is a fun rip off/update/spoof of Casablanca (!) and it stars
Pamela Anderson as Barb.  In the opening scene she twists and turns
drinched in water - clothes (what there are of them) clinging to her
body.  I imagined all the teenage boys gasping, and nodding (this will
be a cool movie).  Then it follows the plot form of Casablanca, with
modern updates and camp thrown in.  If you are farmiliar with the '42
classic you will enjoy this film more than the regular viewer.
Chances are that if you've seen Casablanca and are reading this review
you are a somewhat sophisticated viewer, and you know trash when you see
it.  This film is trash, and I mean that as a compliment.  You may think
of Pauline Kael, who observed: "The movies are so rarely great art, that
if we can't appreciate great trash, there is little reason to go." 
Definatly little reason to go to a rip off/update/spoof of Casablanca
staring Pamela Anderson and Pamela Anderson's cleavage.  You don't go to
this film too make an artistic discovery.
I would love to recomend this movie but the ending is unfun and very
slow compaired to the high energy start.  I have a place in my heart for
films like this.  Something needs to be said of a film that tries to
overcome it's disadvantages with style and heart.  This comes close to
making it, and I do recomend the film to those who think it may be your
cup of tea.
For you who will want to see it, you will want to know the info about
the REAL reason to see this film.  I'll help you: This film has a
suprisingly small amount of nudity provided the fact Lee is the main
star.  We get many looks at her body in SKIN TIGHT, cleavage revealing
outfits and there is a scene of her fully nude, except for soap
bubbles.  There are also at least two scenes of her breasts.  If that
sounds like it will work for you ... rent it, but keep it hid from your
parents.

Title
Review for JFK (1991)
JFK is about one man's crusade for the truth in the assassination of
John F. Kennedy.  This man, Jim Garrison (played marvelously by Kevin
Costner) is district attorney of New Orleans, and slowly becomes
obsessed with the Kennedy case.  He investigates the sloppy case, while
dealing separately with family problems, press leaks, death threats,
fighting among staff and someone bugging his office.  What suspects he
does interview seem shady and unreliable, as he becomes further emerged
in his case. 
JFK is gripping and brilliantly written and directed, this is also the
birth and height of Stone's truly original, artistic approach to movie
making.  JFK offers an absolutely gripping tale that weaves with
wonderful dialogue and characters and turns with pure movie making
flare.  It is to Stone's credit that we are captivated and fixated
during the film's over three hours of running time.
He acting is also brilliant and amazing, with an all star cast that rips
up the screen with fury.  Kevin Costner has his career best role in this
film, the best performance he will ever give.  Sissy Spacek has a great
turn as his growingly annoyed and concerned wife.  Gary Oldman, Tommy
Lee Jones, Joe Pesci are superb in small but important roles.
Stone was criticized as being a vast conspiracy theorist after the
release of this film and that is a shame because this film is more
interested in the truth than concocting some nutty theory about who
killed Kennedy.  This film has the same goal as its hero Jim Garrison
does as they both approach it fast and hard.  They aren't willing to
compromise to suit everybody and don't care if you disagree with their
opinions.  JFK, though based on two books (Crossfire: The Plot to Kill
Kennedy & On the Trail of the Assassins), should not be taken as a
documentary and some scenes may crumble if put to intense scrutiny.  
What is so wonderful about JFK is that it puts that intense scrutiny on
the government, Warren's report and autopsy/police records.  Many
inconsistencies and impossibilities are seen as the theories are
questioned and made to crumble.  I guess JFK may be conspiratorial and
somewhat inaccurate BUT so are the reports we are offered, most of which
are incomplete or incomprehensible to a common sense.

Title
Review for Clerks (1994)
CLERKS is raunchy, obscene, cheap and very funny throughout.  Made for
just 27,000, and set mostly in a convenience store, this represents a
vry good film made for very little money.  Often films get special
treatment and consideration if they cost less, and this is unfair
because it can be done.
Clerks cronicles the day of a Quick Stop Convience Store clerk Dante and
his buddy Randal next door who runs a bad video store.  Randal shows up
and starts utterly pointless yet often hilarious results.  Did
independent contractors get killed in The later of the Star Wars tilogy,
it was still being built when it was blown up?
Kevin Smith, the films writer and director, said that Randal represented
who he wants to be and Dante is who he is closest to.  You can tell by
the dialogue provided for his characters.  Dante is a loser, he pins for
two women and doesn't understand when one of them gets upset, he also
complains about his job constantly.  Randal doesn't care about anything,
he sits around, BS's with Dante and somethimes the costumers (when he's
not assaulting them), he is also provided with a great deal of the funny
dialogue.  
Jeff Anderson, who plays Russel, hasn't acted since his turn in Clerks. 
This is very unfortunate, Anderson provides perfectly cynical spins on
every line of dialogue, making even the dialogue that doesn't quite
work  seem funny.  Smith is moving towards bigger movies with bigger
stars and I wish we would get another look at Anderson and Brian
O'Halloran in more films.  In Clerks they have a perfectly funny
chemistry, and deliver this movie home.  People have criticized the
acting in this film , calling it a true sign of the films budget.  I
think the acting is perfect for this films feel, and I want to see more
of them.

Title
Review for Romper Stomper (1992)
Romper Stomper, like Trainspotting, is compared to the great A Clockwork
Orange, plots of both resemble it, yet both lack the scathing satire of
Orange electing instead to tell another slice of life.  This film
portrays the skinheads of Australia, they party, they fight, and they
flee.  Not all of the fighting is against other races, the selective
hatred is selecting a broader group.  What you end up withis one of the
most interesting and compelling foreign films of recent years.
Russell Crowe stars as the evil, leader of the skinhead group we
follow.  They beat two Orientals whom had the badluck of crossing the
path of the men.  The point is made early: Women or Children they're
still not as pure as I.  Watching the scenes of beating in the beginning
and around twenty minutes in are quite tough to stomach.  They are
violent, fast and uncompromising.
Those three words describe not only that scene but infact the entire
film which contains material that will affend most.  This film reminded
me of the great Henry: Portrit of a Serial Killer in the way both show
hainous villians and don't stoop to cliches or sentiment.  The action is
unbiased, not trying to steer you but show you.  Pay close attention to
the scenes of fast paced violence and you will notice teens who have
passed the degree of hatte that most humans never achieve.

Title
Review for Titanic (1997)
Titanic is a good film that was catipulted into becoming a great, best
picture winning film.  The film which cost 200+ million dollars came
along and blinded critics and audiences alike into being overcome with
gitty delight that a smart action film can be made.  It was great,
Titanic T-Shirts, posters, soundtracks, calenders, documentaries,
truth-telling interviews became the rage.  Divorce yourself from that as
you watch the movie and you may feel the uneven film that you have on
your hands.
This is an emotional epic of romance and love on a doomed ship. You know
that one character survived and you hope with all your heart that there
are two.  You might cry in Titanic.  You will watch many scenes with
your heart warming inside of you.  Meanwhile Jim (Egocentric of the
World) Cameron is spitting in your face with stupid characters made of
cardboard, lame dialogue that sits on screen begging for you to laugh it
down and moral righteousness.  You sit back and notice the great love
story of Jack and Rose and find it romantic escapism because Rose's
FIANCEE is such a jerk.  Why is he presented that way?
If he was presented as a nice but weak man the story would have had more
dimintion to it. Another key problem is Jack's character.  He is
presented as a character with no past or future, but instead a
rebellious object for her to fall in love with, his character is
cardboard. What do You learn about him? And he is the center piece of
the film.
The relationship is also not that well developed compared to better
films.  Look at this years BOOGIE NIGHTS or CHASING AMY and you will
notice that both have real emotions, not REEL ones.  It is more
refreshing to have a film that has character relationships mean
something.  The end scene of Titanic is a tear jerker but it could have
been more straining if the characters were aloud to be the people not
the cardboard statue of them.
All this may sound very negative but you will notice that I give the
film a positive review.  Some critics have called the Titanic screenplay
a horrible one.  I don't agree. The characters and dialogue is bad and
distracting in some scenes but the film is very touching and easy to
like , if not love.  Some scenes are so good that you feel as though you
would like to forgive the other bad moments to give the event the credit
it deserves.  I am giving the review a mild recomendation, for the three
that haven't seen it, and I am writing this not just as a review but a
registered argument against the film that shouldn't have even been
nominated for best picture.  By the way see LA CONFIDENTIAL instead. It
is more heart warming to see a great film than a good one!

Title
Review for Halloween (1978)
Halloween is as good a film as Psycho, if not a better one.  They are
both terrifying, both caused many rip offs - none of which were as good,
and both invented the mad slasher films.  Halloween builds tension so
wonderfully and keeps it so well that you keep waiting for some relief,
none is in site.  You can't even rely on corny horror cliches, other
than the one created by this film.  
Halloween has an escaped insane psychopath visiting his old hometown
Haddonfiels, Illinois, killing babysitters and teenagers.  This is told
not with extreme violence or splatter touches (no killing with rods) and
but tense love of suspense.  It is told as a slice of life, with hardly
any character development and none is needed.  In fact all character
development would ruin the impact and breakneck pace.
Many think that Comedy is the hardest genre to pull off, I think it is
horror.  Horror films have such a limit in depth of plot they can have,
originality in horror is hard to come by.  When you see a great orror
film like Halloween it is easy to over praise it.  I'm not doing that. 
Halloween is horror.  Halloween has inspire more horror films than any
other, including Psycho.  Halloween is a true terrifying experience for
those who love films and horror films.
** NOTE: Try not to watch this film in Pan & Scan!  This is a film that
demands letterbox or a theatre viewing (if you can).  Films like this
should be outlawed from Pan & Scan because you are missing 1/2 of the
film.  The shadows are as much a part of the film as any character.  The
only way to watch the opening mask scene and later scenes where the
killer will loom into frame is in Letterbox or Widescreen format.  DO
NOT SEE THIS IN PAN&SCAN I beg of you.  Otherwise enjoy.

Title
Review for Pulp Fiction (1994)
When critics offer their favorite or best film choices they usually
serve Citizen Kane or Casablanca, two great films.  I'll throw Pulp
Fiction and I'll do so for the same reason they pick theirs.  They
venture beyond any conventional idea of what a modern movie can be and
what it can accomplish.  They end up transcending film and making it
their own, creating waves of wannabes, none of which can even compare. 
I love Pulp Fiction.  It is the film that made me love films more than I
thought was possible.  I can't imagine seeing a better film.  
Pulp Fiction tells three stories of bad people and like Kane it is
nonlinear, making even the simplest story seem somewhat confusing.  The
first story is about a hitman taking his bosses wife out to diner, the
second about a boxer who fails to fall even though he was paid to, and
the third story has an accidental killing leaving a dead body to be
disposed of.  All the stories are told with height of humor and
outrageous flare for filmmaking.  It also has the best dialogue I have
ever heard, crackling with profanity and explodes with joy of language. 
The only writer whose dialogue I could compare Pulp Fiction to is David
Mamet, and that is a big credit to Quentin Tarantino and Roger Avery
(they won Best Original Screenplay).
The film is also famous for reviving and creating careers.  John
Travolta had no career, other than Look Who's Talking 4, and was brought
back to the Hollywood lime light by his appearance in this film.  Sam
Jackson and Uma Thurman had small careers that were catapulted into
stars by Pulp Fiction.  Quentin Tarantino was made into a household name
by the success of this film.
Pulp Fiction is an energetic and amazingly exciting film.  It teases us
with passages of humor and then explodes with deftly timed flashes of
extreme violence, and plays with our anticipation.  Tarantino knows
where we will expect to see violence and blood and he wonderfully
prolongs the dialogue passages before them to make the violence (which
isn't as graphic as everyone thinks) seem more excessive and shocking. 
Take the scene where hitmen will kill a few kids that ripped of their
boss, we get a long, funny discussion of foot massages before they enter
the apartment and more conversation about fast food after.
There is also endless speculation about Pulp Fiction.  There is a
briefcase that contains something "beautiful" that emits a yellow glow,
but we never find out what it is.  Is there something biblical in the
case?  Jules (Sam Jackson) keep referencing a bible quote, and Marsellus
Wallace (Rhames as the boss) has a Band-Aid on the back of his head.  Is
that covering the forbidden 666?  Why do Jules and Vincent (Travolta)
have their lives saved?  All these speculations are fun but
unanswerable.  The point is Pulp Fiction is the most talked about film
in several years.
I love every scene in Pulp Fiction.  There isn't a line I would word
differently or a camera shot I would edit out.  Each actor delivers a
wonderful, well-measured performance without going over the top.  This
is the kind of film that begs for you to ask what the favorite scene, or
character, or story is.  A film that energizes you to the point where
you feel you must talk about it, for the sake of having it linger on in
your head.
The only way to see Pulp Fiction is on the big screen.  Most people have
only seen it on their televisions and that is a shame.  If you must
watch it on TV please see t on wide screen video and not pan and scan. 
Also please avoid the network broadcast of Pulp Fiction, it has a TVMA
rating and is director approved but is horribly edited and absent of
content.  Like reading Shakespeare modernized and robbed of its poetic
attributes.

Title
Review for Blue Velvet (1986)
Blue Velvet inspired critical praise and discuss when released in 1986.
Siskel gave it four stars and Ebert gave in one. Ebert said that
director David Lynch was "more sadistic than the (Dennis) Hopper
character." To put that in prespective you need to know that Hopper
plays a sick twist who kidnapped this woman's (Isabella Rossellini)
husband and son, and now is using her as a sex slave. Hopper is also a
druged-up maniac who enjoys humiliating Rossellini, like a truly
draining scene where she is inflicted with public nudity. Ebert felt
that the story if handled satire-free would have been a dark and
emotional film, but with the satire the film was demeaning.
This is a demeaning film toward Rossellini, who seems to reach very
personal emotions in front of a crowd. We're the crowd. This film is
very hard to take for those not comportable with themselves and their
desires. This film is very voyueristic and disturbing to even the most
kinky voyuers and yet it is so emotionally powerful and contains such
richly, dark satire, that even the wary should take a look.  
The story begins with a perfect, yet shallow, suburbian street. The
street seems to be saturated with bright watercolors. A nice, old man
waters his lawn, looking warm and deep. This nice man collapses and we
follow him down. Then we go further down below the grass and see hungry
insects eating away like grotesque monsters. And there the satire
begins.
The man's son (Kyle MacLachlan) shows up to visit his dad and on a nice
day stroll he finds a severed ear on the ground. This propells him to
the police and further investigation for himself. Along the way he meets
a nice girl his age (Laura Dern) and they're both entralled to
investigate for themselves. The plot evolves in a surefired way and
never mis-steps, with scenes of taunt suspense and a truly wicked set of
characters led by Gar (Dean Stockwell) and Frank Booth (Dennis Hopper).
Anyone put off by the plot description should not indulge in this film
because it is really much worse than I made it sound.  The violence and
sex is gruesome and troubling and the fears described in this film are
equal to ERASERHEAD's fear of children.  On the flip side if you do
deside to visit this film you will have a chance to see one of the best
films of the eighties, and one hell of an emotional experience.
The director and screenwriter David Lynch is quite a weird person and
seems to be in touch with the dark voyueristic side of himself. I saw a
recent documentary called THE PREETY AS A PICTURE: ART OF DAVID LYNCH in
which he shared his paintings and love of art. A typical day in the life
of Lynch seemed to be carving a scull of plaster, filling it with ham
and cheese and photographing the ants hollowing it out. "All forms of
decay are worth looking at" explains Lynch. The Decay of ham or in BLUE
VELVET the decay of suburbian life.

Title
Review for Swingers (1996)
Swingers is a very funny film that offers observations of the club scene
in LA, and how hard it is to break through in "The Business."  We get
observant glances at LA trends ("Why aren't there any signs outside the
clubs") as we follow a group of actors through episodic frequently
hilarious situations as they try to score sex with a "beautiful baby"
and wait for return calls that don't arrive.
The main character is Mike (Jon Favreau, also the writer) who dreams of
becoming a stand up comedian/actor.  All his friends also have dreams of
becoming actors and mostly fail.  Trent (Vince Vaughn) takes Mike under
his wing to help him get over his previous relationship.  Mike is really
pretty pathetic, he seems to have really been in love with his
ex-girlfriend (who stayed in New York when he came to LA) and even
spoils attempts at other girls because his negativity is weighing down
his approach.
The dialogue is often funny, and more than a tip of the hat to Quentin
Tarantino's wonderful words.  In fact Tarantino seems to have an
influence on more than a few scenes.  They sit and discuss his wonderful
works and note that "everybody steals from everybody" right before a
clever homage of Reservoir Dogs and Goodfellas.  Both of those offer big
laughs.
The only complaint I have with the film is that it's slight.  No big
messages are offers or attempted.  Even the final scene where Mike is
explaining an unorthodoxed decision he made is cut off with a gag.  I
don't mind this much, I don't want many films to preach to me truths
that have already been discussed to the point of making them cliches.  I
would have preferred if Swingers had contained more meat on it's bones,
and finally that is just a testament to the films strong writing and
wonderful characterizations.  
There is a wonderful small scene in Swingers, which has Trent playing
Video Hockey with another friend.  They engage in obscene banter that
sounds like a typical exchange you WOULD expect while playing such a
game.  I laughed harder in that scene then I do in most Hollywood
movies, it is driven by the characters - like the film.

Title
Review for U Turn (1997)
There are two ways you can go with U Turn.  You can state that it has no
pont and is contrived, or you can see it as a nice change of pace for a
great director.  That director is Oliver Stone, I have liked everyone of
his film - except Natural Born Killers - and his new found shooting
style.  This style consists of B&W, underexposed film, cornball lenses
and unusual camera angles.  Many find this distracting and migraine
inducing, I find it a wonderful way to add personality to a film.
The story is about a former tennis player (Sean Penn), who owes a
lownshark money, is short two fingers, has car break down in Supierior,
Arizona, fights off murder hirings, a jealous kids warnings and the
philosophy of a blind indian.  During this he meets a Grace (Hot
Jennifer Lopez), who seduces him into a compromisng situation, and has
her husband (Nick Nolte) come home and suckerpunch Penn.
Poor Penn, as you can tell by my synopsis, he is banged around like a
demented pinball.  He goes from frustrating situation to equally
frustrating, watching Penn is fun as you see a man on the edge given
continuous nudges.  U Turn also has echos of After Hours - from another
master in Martin Scorsese - that was a better film (although it had
flaws) and yet quite a compliment for U Turn to be compaired with.
U Turn is technically a black comedy, while After Hours was a regualar
comedy.  Hours had a happy ending and Turn, well.  Both film are
interesting chage of pace films for director stuck in a rut of mega
productions, but this doesn't gel quite like you'd expect a Stone film
to be.  I liked the nasty touches in the film, and the acting is first
rate.  I am giving the film a very mild recomendation to those who feel
like a stylish, bloody, and often sick film that ends up being
suprisingly fun.

Title
Review for Good Will Hunting (1997)
My mind is constantly at work in all the movies I see.  My brain races to
find the ending of a film even before its plot has been fully revealed.  I
didn't let my mind race in Good Will Hunting, because I was too caught up
in the dialogue and characterizations.  I couldn't ruin the experience of
the film but trying to out-think it. 
This is a wonderful film that reminded me of CHASING AMY, another of the
years best films.  The writing is very funny and fresh, with some of the
best dialogue spoken all year.  I relish in good writing, in a year when we
are enflicted with trash like THE SAINT and DANTES PEAK.  I laughed more in
this film than I did in most comidies like LIAR LIAR and THE FULL MONTY.
Matched with the funny comedy is truely heart wrenching moments that
reminded me of TERMS OF ENDEARMENT, one of the best films in the eighties. 
Damon and Affleck will probable win the best screenplay oscar and deserve
it.  Critics who dismis this film as being overly predictable are not doing
the film justice.  SOme of these are the same guys who over-praised the
film SLING BLADE.

Title
Review for Lost Highway (1997)
David Lynch is a great director, his films include Eraserhead and Blue
Velvet.  Lynch continues to push the limit with Lost Highway, a film
that dares to be different and definatly does.  This is the kind of film
that Lynch fans will eat up and others will be frustated to tears.  This
film doesn't follow the truths of hollywood film and will piss of most
audiences expecting it to.
This film is also a powerful peice of atmosphere and mood setting.  We
get the setup of a troubled couple getting videotapes on their steps
that become unpersonable (a few seconds of their house) to a later tape
with them sleeping.  The first twenty minutes are the best as the mood
of tension and horror are powerful.  Then the movie changes gears to a
plot involving a mob bos's mole (Patricia Arquete), who was also he wife
of the first troubled couple.  Is this the same lady? What is going on
here?
The more the film goes on the more credibility it throws to the wind. 
After a while the film looks like it may never reach a satisfactor
ending - and it doesn't even try.  
The direction is very good, and so is the acting.  The actors are forced
to reach levels of emotions or logical blandness that they handle it
quite well.  It seems like Lynch can direct anyone to give great
performance, remember Hopper's tour de force in Blue Velvet.
It you are not disturbed by the films lack of satisfing normal standards
you may be by certain S&M scenes that are reminiscent of Rossilini in
Blue Velvet.  Instead of Rossilini's forced public nakedness, we have
Arquete being forced to strip by Robert Loggia as the mob guy.  She ends
up with noting but bikini panties and a very humiliated look on her
face.  I wonder if Lynch has something against women.  Does he find
humiliation sexy or is it a way of establishing power.
You may get the answer to that tough question in the film, Pretty as a
Picture: The Art of David Lynch.  In that film we get an inside look at
Lynch, Lynch's relationship to the cast and crew, and a breif interview
with Arquete.  She says that one of the reasons she chose the film was
because she had a huge phobia of nudity, and she thought the nude scenes
in Lost Highway may help her to get over it.  More importantly, in that
film, you will find a look inside Lynch's art.  He loves dark images and
is fascinated by decay and pushing the limit.  I am highly recomeding
Lost Highway because it pushes that limit and I will not befall the same
ambuitity as other critics.  Often critics call for originality and
imagination but when the get something too new and fresh they dismiss
it, I won't!

Title
Review for Searching for Bobby Fischer (1993)
Hey do you want to know why no GOOD family films are made?  BECAUSE YOU
WONT SEE THEM!  Hollywood is an enterprise and reacts to money, if you
don't shell out 7 bucks to see something smart like Searching for Bobby
Fischer and do for trash like Lost in Space, you will get more stupid
films.  I don't want to hear that no good family films are made because
you didn't see Searching for Bobby Fischer and wouldn't know what to do
if another such brilliant film came your way.
That being said, Searching for Bobby Fischer is one of the best and
smartest family films ever made.  A film that is heart-wrenching as it
is true to the family relationship.  I loved this film, it has an
insight on how children relate to their parents and how the parents want
to see them succeed in everything.
Josh (Max Pomeranc) is an ordinary 7 year-old kid who loves playing
baseball.  One day Josh is playing outside and finds a chess piece.  He
then teaches himself to play chess.  One day he is walking with his mom
(Joan Allen) and convinces her to stop at a park were hustlers play
competitive chess for money.  Josh sits and plays against a grungy man
and loses, but catches the eye of one hustler (Lawrence Fishburne) who
sees the move Josh puts on the guy and writes down his name as someone
to look out for.
His mother tells his father (Joe Mantegna) that he played chess and so
the father challenges the son to see how good he really is.  Josh loses
somewhat quickly and gives his father a shrug, but his mother sees
through this.  "Josh doesn't want to beat his dad." She tells him, so
the father plays him again.  This game is won by inspired play from
Josh.
The father finds a teacher for Josh, in a crusty old-timer (Ben Kingsly)
who teaches him first the basics and then to play like Bobby Fischer. 
Bobby Fischer is the greatest chess player of all time, who started at a
young age and went on to beat Russia and then go into captivity.  Many
parallels are made between him and Josh but there is one big difference,
Josh has too big a heart to hold his opponents in contempt.  Josh uses
the mixture of his teacher's knowledge and the street-smart chess
hustler to make it through chess tournaments.  
I made the statement that this film is one of the best family films ever
made, it is also one of the best films made in the nineties and a film I
have seen on repeated outings.  I also said that I love this film, and I
firmly believe that you will too if you see it.  You have no excuse now
that you have read this review.  We so rarely get to see truly great
films, please don't miss the chance to see this film.

Title
Review for Big Hit, The (1998)
In The Big Hit Melvin Smiley (Mark Walhberg) has many problems:
He has just kidnapped the daughter of a broke millionaire
He has inept and corrupt partners who scam him of hard-earned money
He has a problem with people disliking him and he has chosen to be a
hitman
His girlfriend milks his money 
And his fiance is Jewish and has parents who are rough stereotypes.
We as the audience have him beat.  At least he didn't have to sit
through this film.  I would take his spot, any day of the week.  This
film should be used in torture chambers, "Talk or we'll make you watch
The Big Hit!"  To which the probable reply would be "Okay I'll talk,
just don't make me watch that!"  To those who were unfortunate enough to
see The Big Hit in the theatre you should have asked not only for a
refund but for them to pay for years of seeing an analyst.  
I will now attempt to describe the plot so as you read please stay out
of reach for any sharp objects or electric inputs.  Smiley and his crew
Color Me Bad kidnap the daughter of a once rich businessman and attempt
to collect ransom.  They fail to collect money but piss of they're boss
and cause a conflict within the team.
Not much is left to say about The Big Hit except STAY AWAY.  This film
thinks drinking Maalox is unconditionally funny.  It thinks that people
fly 20 feet when shot with a single bullet.  This film is dreadfully
unfunny, horribly uncool and one of the worst films ever made by a human
being.  I would rather listen to Fran Drescher recite the Dictionary.

Title
Review for As Good As It Gets (1997)
Jack Nicholson gave one of his best performances in the James L. Brooks
masterpiece Terms Of Endearment.  Now almost 15-years later Nicholson is
back with Brooks in As Good As It Gets, a wonderful new film.  The
audience is so used to Jack's face that almost every time he raises an
eyebrow we erupt in laughter.
Nicholson plays Melvin an obsessive-compulsive writer of more than 60
successful romantic novels.  His next door neighbor is a gay artist
named Simon (Kinnear) who is financial trouble and has one cute dog. 
Nicholson eats every day at a restaurant and will only be served by
Karol a waitress with a chronically ill child.  
The acting in this film is great, but the brilliance of As Good As It
Gets lies in the writing.  This film is by co-written (and directed) by
James L. Brooks, a man that I cannot over-praise.  He has proven to be
one of the very best comedy writers alive.  This film's dialogue
sparkles and the main story maintains max quality while never falling to
sitcom shenanigans.
Many critics knocked the ending of this film, which maintains the fact
that As Good As It Gets is a romantic-comedy.  The entire film is unique
and uncompromising until the ending that is a bit of a let down.  It
almost has the feeling of studio handled end, that comes about after a
negative preview screening.  The ending doesn't stop the film from being
great but it does make it fall short of Brooks' 80s masterpieces.

Title
Review for Bordello of Blood (1996)
You don't see a movie about vampire hookers to view a masterful plot or
incrible characters, you see it for blood, laughs and T&A.  You get
plenty of those three in this film with plot on autodrive as Dennis
Miller offers up funny one-liners and cynical observations.  This movie
works very well until the third act which is a complete disappointment.
Super vampire opens a bordello, with vampires in place of the
prostitutes, and they kill the men and drink there blood.  There is
nothing new here but Dennis Miller shows up as a private eye to
investigate the disapperance of a loser who frequented the bordello, on
only one occasion.  Miller is sharp in this film, walking off with the
movie and shaping the T&A and blood around his very funny comedy act.  
I have meantioned Miller alot and neglected most of the other film,
including a plot element with a priest.  Who cares abut that? You go to
see this movie for a good time and it delivers.  Seeing this film is the
same reason that folks see midnight showings of The Rocky Horror Picture
Show.  You see enough to enjoy the film and walk out feeling somewhat
empty, but if you're a Miller fan your belly might be sore.

Title
Review for Striptease (1996)
Striptease is supposed to be a funny, sexy film that offers the goods --
Demi Moore's goods.  It fails on all levels but one, and that level
barely regesters.  This film does offer looks at Demi's chest and
g-string clad butt on a few ocasions.
That is all the film has to offer.  Most of the acting is terrible (Ving
Rhames survives best), the jokes are lame and very lame (I didn't laugh
once).  Demi has a straight delivery on her jokes, and that is wrong for
the part, surrounded by colorfully dreadful characters who overact, and
sometimes try.  So what is a film that just offers looks at Demi's body?
At least Showgirls wasn't as terrible as this film.  We had
unintentional laughs with that one.  This films a miracle.  It can't
even get me to laugh accidently.  Some bad films can be good, thanks to
camp, look at The Substitute or Barb Wire.  
The story of Striptease has Moorelosing custody of her child to a
no-good ex-husband, becoming a stripper at the Eager Beaver (ha-ha) to
earn money for a court appeal.  She meets many colorful characters, the
highlights being: a congressman (Reynolds), and a bouncer (Rhames).
I've meantioned that the film has hardly any appeal and thus not much to
talk about in terms of "comedy."  What you have left is Demi Moore's
naked body.  This is impressive, and somewhat voyueristic watching a
bigtime hollywood celebrity prance her pretty self up on the screen,
amidst the dreck. 
Even Moore's nude and semi-nude scenes aren't even what they've been
cracked up to be.  Articals about her addiction to showing skin, a
somewhat sexy Late Night apperance, teasing trailers, even the title
promises SKIN.  This movies doesn't even deliver on that promise, the
way the public wants.  Lets be honest, I say public because people who
see or saw Striptease aren't going to see a good movie, they will see
Demi in next to nothing.
12.5 million dollars is the sallary Demi got paid to do this film.  That
was a large steping stone (and deserving one) for women actors in
hollywood.  Yet signing that paycheck to do this movie is a slap in the
face to women.  I see Demi's choice of this film in two ways.  Either
she wants the public to be aware of the curves of her body, in ways that
only Bruce Willis knows OR she was trying to lose all inhibitions about
her body by public nudity, like Madonna did with her book SEX.  Moore's
is a very good actress, in some movies.  First rate in pivital role in A
Few Good Men.  In Striptease all she wants is for us the public to know
what her butt looks like in a thong and what her chest looks like
without minus bra and shirt.  She took it all off and will leave you
with less money and an empty feeling.  What a waste!

Title
Review for Kiss the Girls (1997)
I hate films in which the good guys don't ask for help of others (FBI)
because the killer needs to get away to preserve the standard film
running time! That is one thing that made KISS THE GIRLS such a mixed
experience, how can a film be so stupid and smart at the same time?
Morgan Freeman is chasing a serial killer that seems to be collecting
girls. Ashley Judd is the average kick boxing doctor who escapes from
Casanova's (killer's name) pad, an advanced labyrinth of mazes and
doors.  Her escape is one of the most exciting scenes in the film
because she is drugged and being chased and unable to dodge every tree. 
By the end of the chase she looks like Sly at the end of a Rockey pick
and is ready to tell the police everything she knows, but she doesn't
know much.  She convinces Freeman to take her with him (!!) and the film
begins to disable.
Too bad. Individual scenes are so good that they deserve a honest,
smarter movie to use them.  And the Acting is first rate, with Judd
showing she is one of the freshest and best new actresses around and
Freeman is sharp in a role that didn't deserve him. Gary Fleder,
director of this and the under-rated Things To Do In Denver When You're
Dead, has style to burn. Unfortunatly the film does burn.

Title
Review for City of Angels (1998)
City Of Angels has a few problems that left me feeling very mad.  I was
mad because the rest of the film is very well done, and well acted.  The
story is light, and so well told thgat you almost forgive these errors. 
I didn't.
The story has Nic Cage, an angel, falling in love with Meg Ryan, a
doctor, and when he appears to her she falls for him.  Along the way
Cage meets a guy named Mesenger, played by NYPD's Dennis Franz, who
tells him that he can fall to earth and become human.  Will he give up
his wings?
The story also has a complication in Ryans boyfriend, who seems to show
up to create a conflict than disappear.  This is what I couldn't forgive
in City Of Angels, the big, fatal plot manipulation.  It left m dangling
to upset by its disregard for us to finish its stream of thought.  It
seems to end in midstream, with little complication and lots of glowing
acting.

Title
Review for Trainspotting (1996)
Trainspotting is one of the most exciting, fresh, and energizing films I
have seen.  It is a film about heroin, and the depravity that the
addiction leads to.  This is handled with flash and pizazz, there is a
pure joy of film making with every scene, no matter how sick.
The story follows Renton his Clockwork Orange-type cronies as they fight
heroin, police, yuppies and for freedom in life.  Begining scenes have
Renton trying to quit heroin, and we get a detailing of what the special
quiting program will contain.  Following is his one last hit which ends
up in a toilet, THE WORST TOILET IN SCOTLAND.  How does he get it back,
in a nausiating surreal scene as he ends up swimming through the dirty
tub.
How you react to scenes likethese is up to you.  I felt they were very
funny in a darkly comical tone, others will find it sick and depraved. 
They are as right as I.  Trainspotting is about sick and depraved life
of drugies.  That is the point of the film.  It is very funny if you
like your comedy dark or absurdly surreal.
Some people found that Trainspotting was undecided about heroin, neither
for or against.  THIS IS ABSURD!  Showing te drugies very
uncompromisingly may look pro-heroin, but it is also honest.  You learn
many negative things about heroin and see how it tears apart the lives
of good people as well as bad ones.  If Trainspotting was handled wrong
and to unrealistically positive, you would have a laughable film like
Reefer Madness.
Trainspotting is not the best film about heroin, it can't top Drugstore
Cowboy even with the pop imagery.  Trainspoting is a great film,
though.  One of the years best.  It is also one of the most exciting
films I have seen.  One that, if you dig it, energize your spirits and
love of film.  Director Danny Boyle (previously did Shallow Grave) is a
stylist to watch.  
I don't want to neglect the acting in this film.  Everyone in the cast
gives well proportioned and controled performances.  Standouts are Ewan
McGregor and Robert Carlyle (later in Full Monty).

Title
Review for Midnight Cowboy (1969)
Midnight Cowboy is one of the best films ever made.  It is depressing
and exciting, and it crackles with visual excesses and brilliance.  It
is also the only X-rated film to win best picture at the Oscars.  The
content was very controversial when Midnight Cowboy was released in
1969, and now seems like a flat R, and less shocking.  
Midnight Cowboy tells a great stories that seems forever-recycled into
original material.  A small town kid, Joe Buck (Jon Voight) a cowboy
from Texas, enters a big city with high hopes that become deflated as he
tries to dodge the sharks.  He is looked after by Enrico "Ratso" Rizzo
(Dustin Hoffman) a con with a loser with a bum leg and heart.  Rizzo
helps Buck with his dream of becoming a hustler and Buck offer a friend.
The characters are seen so clearly and uncompromisingly that they put
most film characters to shame.  Buck as the ignorant kid who has a bad
temper and Rizzo as the pathetic con.  Both men try so hard to create a
good environment for themselves and each other that they end up cold and
desperate.  All actions in the film are character driven and Midnight
Cowboy never insults the audience by being presumptuous.  
Instead we get Ratso Rizzo one of the best tragic heroes of all time. 
You can't help feel sorry for this guy who may be bad on the surface but
really cares for his friend Buck and has the feeble hope of one day
getting to visit Florida and one day not being called Ratso but Enrico,
the name he was given.
Rizzo and Buck combine to make one of the best screen couples of all
time.  We watch as their relationship grows from nothing to wonderful
love and mutual respect.  When I say "LOVE" I'm not talking about the
easy way out love, but a friendship that will break wall and protect
them as far as it can take them.
Midnight Cowboy, which I just recently saw for the first time, doesn't
feel dated at all.  It holds it's own with freshness and excitement few
films today possess.  I would say this is a great companion piece to
Boogie Nights, the wonderful film of last year, which is now out on
video.  Midnight Cowboy's director John Schlesinger should receive most
of the credit for the film's still powerful impact and undated
qualities.
**A flat out wonderful film that should not be seen on Network
Television.

Title
Review for Species (1995)
SPECIES writer Dennis Feldman  is some kind of genius.  He does the most
obvious thing with Species, adding T&A to an alien sci-fi flick.  Now
the 11-25 year old males can have a ball, on the edge of their seats and
saliva drooling from their collective mouths.  Species is good
entertainment that has originality and eroticism to spare.
A signal from the stars told us to mix alien DNA with ours to create an
offspring.  They make the offspring female and name her Sil.  She ages
rapidly and might grow out of control, they decide to terminate the
project with cyanide gas.  Sil escapes with a fury and is unleashed on
the public.  As she caches a train a group of "hunters" are formed to
track and eliminate her.
The "hunters" are a mixed bag of specialists, either scientists or
mercenaries, and have surprisingly well developed personalities.  The
alien, Sil (Natasha Henstridge), looks fresh out of the pages of
PLAYBOY.  She comes to the conclusion that she must find a man and mate,
her looks are definitely not a handicap, but the specialists seem just
one step behind her.
This movie does a fair job of building suspense, especially during an
exciting climax, yet has it's share of cats jumping from trees and false
scares - good only for a shallow jump.  Species doesn't seem too
interested in suspense but instead with gore and nudity, and both are
offered up throughout.
Overall, Species is a fun film that offers some cheap joys and little
brain.  I have a certain loathing for films in which aliens are
disgusting, saliva soaked things with no brains, yet are supposed to be
smarter than us.  After Aliens there have been many copycats and none
have come close.  This isn't the best copycat and doesn't try to be, we
get an original take on the old idea and a certain amount of fun.
There is energy and flare to this film that seems unusual for a sci-fi
film (most of which just go through the motions).  We get a wonderful
climax and some interesting scenes and acting in between.  We also get a
lot of nudity from Natasha Henstridge.  She seems to take it off with
every scene of this film as she tries to seduce men so she can become
pregnant.  I heard one kid say that if human life - as we know it -
depended on him NOT having sex with Natasha Henstridge, we better get
ready for change.  I guess that is part Species is trying to make: Would
you rather watch a living male fantasy, quasi-human, horny as hell,
naked as hell, forever stripping and spilling out of outfit, babe seduce
men or Judge Dredd shout "I am the Law!"  Tough choice.

Title
Review for Five Corners (1987)
Five Corners is a good film that you may have missed in its theatrical
run and on the video shelves, but it is well worth a look.  It is a
period piece for 1964 and doesn't rely on old pop hits for its impact. 
Instead we get serious melodrama with sprinkles of violence and good
acting.  It has a great cast: Jodie Foster, Tim Robbins and John
Turturro.  
The plot deals with many characters and plot strands that basically
consist of two separate stories.  The one with headliner actors works
very well, the other doesn't seem complete.  The two stories will
eventually tie together (unconvincingly) and wrap up with a violent
conclusion.  We have a psychopathic rapist Heinz (John Turturro)
released from prison, much to the alarm of Linda (Jodie Foster) who was
almost raped by him. Harry (Tim Robbins) who has sworn off violence
since his father died yet saved Linda from Heinz.  Jamie (Todd Graff)
who is afraid of Heinz and was injured by him.  Unconvincing scenes of
two guys and two girls interrupt this convincing segment.  The girls
(drugged up beauties) were given to the guys (a couple of street punks)
along wit five dollars by one of the girl's fianc.  The girls wake up
with headaches and no clothes in a strange environment, one of the boy's
pseudo apartment.
The violence is very deftly used in the film, it underlines the scenes
of joy and adjustment to the times.  There is a shadow over every scene
and a hauntingly, sometimes cheerful, score in the background.  The
three actors who are now stars are really very good, but for me the
standout is Todd Graff as the jealous former boyfriend of Linda.  It is
a small performance but an important one for the impact of the film, and
somewhat touching.  He is not as tough as anyone else on the screen but
he is sweet and infectious and has high energy.  In one scene he is
offered a cup of coffee, while he storms around the room, he comments
that he can't because his heart might explode.  I liked that scene and
many others in the film.
Yet this film has many problems, too many characters, a setup to the
climax, and that second story.  It just simple doesn't belong in this
film, it's like throwing Now & Then into Goodfellas because they have a
similar time period.  Even with those flaws I can recommend this movie,
the problems it have stop it form being great but we are left with a
satisfying movie experience.

Title
Review for Boogie Nights (1997)
Paul Thomas Anderson can be compared to Dirk Digler of BOOGIE NIGHTS.
Dirk and Paul rose to the top of their fields quickly at young ages and
find themselves the hottest things around. Anderson first directed a
short film called CIGARETTES AND COFFEE (***) then made a feature with
Gwenith Paltrow called HARD EIGHT (***1/2) -- I took notice. 
BOOGIE NIGHTS had a buzz around it as it rode through the film
feastivals with a vengeance. It kept the buzz untill it arived at a
theater near me and then I carried on the buzz. What an exciting film
this is?! Every scene is handled with the pure joy of making films. Paul
Thomas Anderson was unjustly robed of an Academy Award Nomination for
directing, yet there was not a better job of it. PTA looks to be the
real thing. In any other year this would be the best film on my list but
it was narrowly beat by LA. CONFIDENTIAL (****).
Set in the seventies (with a knocking soundtrack) a young man (Mark
Wallberg) is discovered by a porno film director (Burt Reynolds) and
quickly becomes a star with the name DIRK DIGGLER, first seen on an
exploding neon board. We follow Dirk (I love that name) and his family
of porno film-makers through the ups of the seventies and the drug-laced
downs of the eighties.
All great films have one wonderful scene at least. This one has many;
the pool party, the awards, film shoots and my favorite - let me set it
up. Dirk and his friends are on their downward spiral and go to a drug
dealers house with the asspirations of ripping him off. They sit and
wait  while the drug dealer (high as a kite) sings and dances in a robe,
his bodyguard has a gun and a chinese associate walks around the room
throwing firecrackers. Must be seen to be believed.
This movie carried comparisons to PULP FICTION (****) and GOODFELLAS
(****) and it is deserving of it. All the films play with drugs, fun and
anticipation of violence. ONE HELL OF A RIDE this BOOGIE NIGHTS is.

Title
Review for Network (1976)
Network was a fantasy when it arrived in the theatres in 1976, now it
plays well as a satire of where news is headed (soon).  It is angry,
funny, smart and one of the very best films of the seventies.  This film
satires news, programming and pretty much every other hot topic of the
seventies.  Yet the themes Network satires seem universal, some of the
problems of the seventies have taken shape in our modern time.  Some
complained that it tries to cover too much, and is over-ambitious.  This
is very true, yet I do not subtract from a film greatness for being
overly ambitious.
Network has Howard Beale (Peter Finch in posthumous Best Actor winning
role) as a anchor for the fourth rated television network, he gets fired
because he is a drinker, his wife has died, he is over the hill, and
(most important) his ratings have slipped.  He announces over the air
that broadcasting is his life and he plans to blow out his brains on the
air.   He is given another chance where he states that; "Yesterday I
announced on this program that I was going to commit public suicide.
Admittedly an act of madness. Well, I'll tell you what happened: I just
ran out of bullshit."  His ratings go through the roof.
He is invited back to keep hosting, and shouting obscenities, and so it
goes.  There is great protest be Howard's best friend and producer Max
Schumacher (William Holden).  For Howard's return is Diana Christensen
(Faye Dunaway Best Actress winner), an aggressive programmer who wants
more junk and higher ratings.
Max and Diana also start an odd affair.  She is unable to love because
she sees sensitivity as weakness, and Max is married and has a
grandchild on the way.  The affair while well written and conceived is
another example of screenwriter Paddy Chayefsky.  The romance would work
well as its own movie melodrama, another account of how strong and great
this film really is.
The acting rocks in this film.  Three actors won acting Oscars and two
others were nominated.  The direction is also very taunt and well
handled by Sidney Lumet, the great director who has never won a Best
Director Oscar.  
If for no other reason, see Network because it will always be an answer
to a movie quote trivia question.  This is the film that contains the
infamous line, "I'M AS MAD AS HELL AND I'M NOT GONNA TAKE IT ANYMORE!"

Title
Review for Last Seduction, The (1994) (TV)
The Last Seduction is smart, sexy, dark, and funny.  Every scene is
briliant, a wonderful handling of film noir.  This is also a film that
offers up a delicious womans role, as a killer bitch, manipulating men
to do dirty tasks in the name of "love."  Linda Fiorentino plays the
lady, every man dream and nightmare.
Fiorentino has her husband sell pharmaceutical cocaine, then she steals
the money from him and heads to Chicago.  She holds up in a small town
outside of Buffalo caled Beston.  There she meets a guy and goes home
with him.  When consulting her lawyer later she is told to stay put and
find a job.  She does and continues to see this guy who complains, "I
feel like a sex toy" she responds "live it up."
Meanwhile her husband owes money to a loanshark that likes to break
thumbs, and he hires a private eye tofind this broad.  The plot twists
and twists to a conclusion that is totally satisfying, and darkly funny.
I can't say enough about Fiorentino's performance which goes for broke
and turns up a sly and brilliant performance that will make men cring
and turned on.  She deserved an academy award but was robbed on a
technicality, the film premiered on cable (the distributer HAD NO BALLS)
and thus she was robbed, and so was the film.  This is one of the best
films of the ninties, a great ride!

Title
Review for Nobody's Fool (1994)
Nobody's Fool is an excellent character piece that starts great and just
keeps getting better.  It also contains a great Academy Award nominated
performance by Paul Newman, as a aged constuction worker witha bum knee
and very limited prospects.  He lives with his eighth grade teacher
(Tandy is her final role) and has been ducked away from responsibility.
I use the word "ducked" because he is finaly trying to make amends for
his past failing as a parent.  For a man who ducked responsibility he
seems to have all the weight on his shoulders, and that is killing his
knee.  With all his responsibility he finds time to feud with Bruce
Willis (over a snowblower and money that Willis might owe him) and flirt
with Willis' wife Melanie Griffith, whom flirts right back.
Most of the best scenes are very quiet, carefull wording of sentences or
responses to actions.  I meantione Newman, because he is grand for this
role, but every other actor seems to do a wonderful job, including some
I haven't seen for a while.  There are wonderful moments between Newman
and his grandson and Newman and Walsh (his son).  Walsh resents Newman
for leaving him when he was young, and Newman (too proud to flat out
apologize) tries to start fresh being a grandfather, that does
grandfatherly things.
I also liked Pruitt Taylor Vince as Newman's slow constuction partner,
and best friend.  It is nice to see them onscreen, the way they
compliment each other.  The understanding that Vince looks at Newman as
something of a father figure and Newman humor him as he talks, yet
beneath the surface there is an understanding that we gain about the
nature of their friendship.
I realize I am talking about Newman and the subtle relationships with
him.  That is this film, I don'tknow where else I could point without it
leading back to Newman.  So why let old habits die hard.
Of all the relationships, Newman with Melanie Griffith is the best. 
They flirt with innuendo after innuendo and talk about where they would
go if they were free.  There is a great scene where Newman and Griffith
talk about Willis' former sercretary.  He issues a subtle dare, "When
Ruby was here she used to wear a see through top, so you might want to
keep up with her."  She responds by lifting up her sweater and flashing
him.  Game, set and match.  By the way, Newman's reaction to this is
ALONE worth the price of a rental.

Title
Review for Electra Glide in Blue (1973)
Robert Blake plays John Wintergreen, a short motorcycle cop who wants to be
a detective.  He gets an opportunity when he stumbles upon a dead body, that
might be a suicide, and does solid investigative work.  He takes notes about
everything from the body to the shell fragments in the bread loaf.  When he
tells off a lazy coroner he catches the eyes of a real detective who takes
him along as his driver.  Together they investigate the death, with the
detective showing the motorcycle cop the ropes.
Why this film doesn't have more of a following is a mystery to me.  It is
quirky, funny, exciting and violent.  It is a wonderful character study and
smart crime yarn.  It has motorcycle chases and flashy photography to rival
some of the best.  Every actor gives a strong and believable performance.
The standout being Robert Blake, most recently seen as the mystery man in
Lost Highway.  He creates a complex and smart character that has a lot more
going for him when he's not over ambitious.
Blake also gets some subtly hilarious scenes where his smarts and vertical
challenge provide some memorable moments.  My favorite sneaks across the
screen when Blake pulls over a man for speeding.  He finds out this man is a
detective and starts a friendly conversation.  After the exchange Blake
hands the detective the ticket and stands quietly calm as the detective
throws a fit.
Electra Glide in Blue has an ending that comes from a distant galaxy but
that adds to the film's charm and tone, which is always off kilter.  I
strongly recommend it to fans of action films sprinkled with art
sensibilities and independent flavoring.  It reminds me of the tone reached
in the great Robert Altman film The Long Goodbye.  The film is all about
little scenes and intelligent genre tackling.
Write to Jason Overbeck at root-for-badguys@juno.com

Title
Review for Devil's Advocate, The (1997)
I joked with my friend before the movie that wouldn't it be funny if the
big plot twist was that Pacino is the devil, which was told in the
trailer.  When I came to the realization that this was the big plot
twist I didn't care, I was too busy being entertained.  This movie is
fun.  I liked it a heck of a lot.
Reeves plays a lawer, with 64 straight convictions, recruited into a
lawfirm in New York.  This sets up several amazing scenes that revel in
briliant set construction and production design.  A building's rooftop
has water that reaches the sky.  A fun scene as Pacino walks dangerously
close to the edge, looking over the vast, dangerous city.
Reeves is also married to Charlize Theron, they settle into a grand
apartment.  While he works cases, she stays home and fixes it up.  She
is also slowly driven insane, alone.
Pacino and Theron are both perfect in their roles.  Pacino has a
egotistical way of using his motions to alow you to see that something
more devious is brewing.  Theron, one of the most talented new
actresses, is fun in a role that is somewhat minimalist.  Yet she makes
it her own.  Poor Reeves, acting next to these two great performers is
somewhat stale but still right for the role.  He has this southern drawl
that is annoying and disappears (and good ridance) in cerain scenes.  
All that said, this movie is a great entertainment.  Both funny and sexy
with a great climatic monologue from Pacino.  He goes so over-the-top in
this film, yet you have a feeling Pacino knows exactly what he is doing,
He's always great.  Yet it is Theron who consistantly suprises me.  She
is great looking and that probably detracts from her acting ability,
with this film she proves that we can expect great performances from
her.  Her last effort Trail And Error had me thinking that might be so,
this confirms it.

Title
Review for Starship Troopers (1997)
How many times has a person come up to you and compared a science
fiction movie to Ben Hur or Gone With the Wind? Don't worry, I wont
compare Troopers to those, and fact be told neither would anyone else. 
Picking to make a film about giant bugs, war and teen-angst is not going
to burn up the critic top picks or win many oscars, yet Starship
Troopers picks these disreputable genres and transcendes them to make an
epic.  This is the kind of film that Independence Day or Mimic could
have been with imagination, style, humor, and graphic carnage.
This film is fun in some sick minimalist way.  We see graphic telling of
a war with huge killer bugs, and along the way building a very funny
satire on high school and the way technology is leading us.  This film
is like Star Wars in the fact that they create not only a world new to
us but a new telling of an old story with incredible detail and
precision.
The film is also directed by the Dutch pro Paul Verhoeven who's work I
greatly admire.  His idea of a film is as much violence and sex as he
can fit (With the MPAA Ratings), the later is kept to suprising minimum,
you become shocked by the onslaught of drippingly grotesque eyecandy and
then made to laugh, not only by the outrageous way it is drawn out but
also at the style of news clips and media coverage of the war.
Starship Troopers was a flop in the US because most figured they woud
get another stupid film like Independence Day or The Lost World.  That
is not the fact at all.  This is one of the years best movies and one of
the most fun to sit through.  Adults: Just don't sit through it with
young ones.

Title
Review for Mallrats (1995)
Clerks was a big hit with the critics and film festivals and Smith was
entered into cult status.  Then Mallrats was released, the second of his
Jersey trilogy, and the critics smashed it with a sledge hammer.  It
managed to generate bad reviews from just about everybody, Smith later
even apologized for it at the 1995 Independent Spirit Awards.  I found
it a larger, yet less succsessful film than Clerks, but funny in its own
way.  
Quentin Tarantino said that he didn't want people to compair Jackie
Brown to Pulp Fiction, it may have helped if Smith had done the same
with Mallrats.  This film has some very funny moments, a fresh cast and
a minimalist setting.  Most of the film takes place in a shopping mall,
where Mallrats T.S. (Jeremy London) and Brodie (Jason Lee) hang out,
and  concieve of ways to get their girlfriends back, with the help of
Jay and Silent Bob, whom have a bigger role here than Clerks.  There are
moments of sparks along the way but the refuses to catch fire, even in
the hilarious climax on an old fasion Dating Game show, where they screw
up T.S. former girlfriend's father and she falls back for him.
This is no doubt the lowpoint of the Jersey Trilogy BUT not a bit as bad
as all the critics said.  Most of the humor here is visual and grossout,
and there are mixed efficent and absurdly dumb scenes of characters set
up for just a single joke.  Overall a mixed feeling from me, and overall
a very slight recomendation if you liked Clerks or Chasing Amy.
