Authors
Benjamin Kelsey
Number of Reviews
2

Title
Review for Erin Brockovich (2000)
In terms of a movie's credibility, the words "true story" or "actual events" 
doesn't really mean jack squat. Last year's MUSIC OF THE HEART had definite 
feel-good intentions and a "based on a true story" tag to back it up, but in 
the end, it was no better than your average work of fiction. Not every 
noteworthy news clipping that gets passed around your office at work is 
reason for a studio to pump big dollars into shooting a two-hour major motion 
picture and casting the highest-paid actors in Hollywood in the lead roles.
On the other hand, thank goodness for ERIN BROCKOVICH. To sound completely 
clichéd, yet to be completely sincere, BROCKOVICH is sure to be one of the 
most satisfying crowd-pleasers of the year.
Julia Roberts stars as the title character, a crass, brash, and rash single 
mother of three, up to her over-exposed breasts in debt, and jobless to boot. 
After losing a personal injury court case against an emergency room doctor (a 
case the audience knows is justly Erin's, but is merely her foul-mouthed word 
against his), Erin storms her small-time lawyer's office and demands a job. 
In essence, a consolation prize for a lost case.
Believe it or not, it works, and Erin immediately beings work as a file clerk 
for Ed Masry (Albert Finney). Erin doesn't fit in at the law office any 
better than she fits into her leather mini-skirts, but as everyone onscreen 
and off will soon learn, she is the best thing to ever happen to the firm. In 
the jumble of papers regarding a seemingly routine real estate transaction, 
Erin discovers medical records pertaining to such things as blood-cell count 
levels, etc., not the kinds of subjects usually dealt with in an issue of 
"Better Homes and Gardens". When she decides to poke around a bit more, she 
discovers the cover-up that would result in the largest settlement in a 
direct-action lawsuit in history.
More specifically, the company of Pacific Gas & Electricity is using a toxic 
chemical in their water that is giving nearly every family in the community 
some form of cancer, and now they're buying out their homes in an effort to 
disconnect themselves from the impropriety. What Erin discovers is over 600 
plaintiffs ready to go up against a multi-billion dollar corporation.
It may sound like your typical underdog vs. the system courtroom drama, but 
what's so wonderful about the film is that it doesn't settle for being 
nothing more than "another brick in the wall" of its genre. For the 
plentitude of laugh-out-loud moments BROCKOVICH possesses, someone walking 
past the doors of the theater might expect the sharpest, most brilliant 
comedy in years to be playing inside, and they actually wouldn't be too far 
off the mark. The sharp one-liners are indeed cutting into the audience's 
funny bone at a constant pace, but the film can never be accused of "goofing 
off". As extremely enjoyable as it is on a comedic level, it is unwavering in 
its true intentions as a drama, in which it succeeds exquisitely.
Perhaps the most commendable aspect of BROCKOVICH is that it is so consistent 
in a genre easily trapped by melodrama. The underlying element of innocent 
people done-wrong forces the film to walk a thin line that few could balance 
on. Director Steven Soderbergh's competency in this department is exemplary. 
In a sense, he "never looks down" as he walks along that cliff. He doesn't 
even flinch. The perfect blend of comedy and drama, humanity and pragmatics, 
combine into a power bar serving up 100% of your essential cinematic vitamins 
and minerals. The humor keeps the melodrama even more at bay, but it's not 
merely comic relief.
It's an extremely smart move to keep the legal details in focus. No 
manipulative side trips to see a 10-year-old child choking up blood on the 
doorstep of death. It's something most other filmakers would've done, but not 
here. While we know Brockovich as a genuine human being who is in this for 
anything but the money, you never sense that this is meant as a lesson on how 
to be a decent human being. Avoiding the sentimental aspects keeps the movie 
fluid and strong. It's never cold-hearted in its approach to the situations 
faced by the victims, but it never once tries to be a tear-jerker. Too often, 
filmakers are going for brownie points with the audience's heart, and they 
bribe their way in. BROCKOVICH doesn't even try. Now that's integrity.
The fact that Julia Roberts chose to break free of her NOTTING HILL / RUNAWAY 
BRIDE stereotype will likely cause for premature plaudits to her performance. 
But forget that Roberts brought in $20 million for this picture. She was 
perfect, end of sentence. Truth be known, I thought she was a bit stiff in 
NOTTING HILL. To say this is the performance of her career may be an 
understatement. But none of this would be true if it weren't for Finney. He's 
the one that screams Oscar contender. Also, the chemistry between Roberts and 
Finney is of the finest ever to hit the screen. It's a vibrant depiction of 
detestation between two equal halves of the perfect team.
Also of note is Aaron Eckhart as Erin's neighbor/boyfriend, George, a Harley 
Davidson fanatic who becomes a nanny for Erin's children when her 
investigations become an around the clock ordeal. George is a genuinely 
likeable character; I was disappointed he didn't have more presence in the 
film. In fact, his virtual disappearance at midpoint makes for a definite 
loose end. Still, at least the director keeps the romantic element in its 
place as a subplot. Yet another example of something that could've 
inappropriately taken over, given the chance.
If you want more examples, there's the fact that Erin never has to play 
superhero. Her accomplishments are always kept real. When the case is almost 
stolen out from under her, a simple history lesson in cinematics will have 
you bracing yourself for an "Erin against the whole world" kind of turn. It 
never happens. In fact, there is only one element where the film undeniably 
makes a threat. Without saying much, Soderbergh knows how to use our 
expectations against us - in a very funny way.
ERIN BROCKOVICH is a people's movie, with delicate direction that allows 
familiar territory to be tread without feeling old. As good a piece of 
entertainment as it consistently is, there are moments when the film still 
manages to sparkle above its own quality. At more than one point, the 
audience's stifled applause was a tangible sensation in the room, something 
that was unleashed in zealousness when the film finally ended. Did I say 
finally? Yes, BROCKOVICH had moments of seeming long, but to be honest, it 
was more of an observation than an annoyance, and when I checked my watch 
afterward, I was surprised it had actually been as long as it was. And I'm 
already ready to go back.

Title
Review for God's Army (2000)
Written, Produced, & Directed by Richard Dutcher
Originally Released: March 10, 2000
Jehovah Witnesses' notoriety as the Avon Ladies of religion, ever-ready to 
knock on your door and offer up a magazine chock full of things you 
definitely need, has been the source of many jokes on television and in 
movies for years. Less often, though sometimes more mean-spiritedly, the same 
has been done about the other door-to-door salesmen of faith, the LDS - aka 
Mormon - missionaries.
Now writer/producer/director Richard Dutcher is serving his own mission - to 
change the stereotype of Mormon missionaries, and Mormonism in general, by 
giving us a movie from their point of view. No, not a documentary or a church 
promotional video, but an actual movie, in theaters, popcorn and all.
Such a feat may sound like a pet project for any steadfast believer who's 
used to seeing the extent of Mormon cinema as ORGAZMO and Mormon-filmmaker 
Neil LaBute's anything-but-religious films, IN THE COMPANY OF MEN and YOUR 
FRIENDS & NEIGHBORS. But instead of jumping on an immediate soapbox and 
creating a purely self-serving and self-redeeming film, Dutcher has produced 
GOD'S ARMY, a surprisingly intimate yet humble film that remains as objective 
as possible, coming from the eyes, mind, words, and heart of a true believer.
GOD'S ARMY tells the story of Elder Brandon Allen (Matthew Brown), a young 
man just arrived from Kansas to serve a mission in Los Angeles for the LDS 
church. "You're not in Kansas anymore, Elder," a welcoming missionary greets 
him. Trite, but true, something any one of us might have said in the same 
situation. One day in L.A. definitely holds a whirlwind of experiences for a 
naive 19-year-old.
Immediately, Elder Allen is introduced to his new companion, Elder Dalton. At 
the ripe old age of 29, Elder Dalton (played by Dutcher) is the oldest 
serving missionary in the district, someone the lot of 19 and 20 year old 
missionaries affectionately refer to as "Pops". As we quickly learn, Pops is 
the stalwart missionary, eager to get the job done, no questions asked. In 
fact, even as Elder Allen carries his luggage back to an apartment he's yet 
to see but will be living in for some considerable time, Pops is stopping and 
knocking on doors, asking anyone who'll give him the chance if they'd like to 
hear a brief message.
It's all a bit overwhelming for Elder Allen, who's internally dealing with 
the issues of a family falling apart back home - a mother who's asked for her 
name to be taken off the records of the Church, a stepfather about to go to 
prison. The culture shock - not of being thrust into L.A. from a dinko town 
in eastern Kansas, but of suddenly being a messenger who lives, sleeps, and 
breaths religion - is more than a bit jarring. Awestruck by Pops' ability to 
assert himself towards complete strangers at their own homes, Elder Allen 
responds, "I could never do that." Without flinching, the no-nonsense Pops 
tells him, "Yes, you can. You get the next one."
The first day on the job seems too much for Elder Allen, and that night, he 
finds himself in a bus station, ready to forget the mission and serve his own 
well-being. Some reverse psychology from Elder Dalton brings him back, but 
the battle for self-conviction is already underway.
GOD'S ARMY isn't so much about missionary work as it is about attaining a 
testimony of personal convictions one's never been forced to question before. 
That being the underlying theme, it's a bit disappointing that the message 
comes off so wearily in the end. It seems Dutcher wanted to touch base on 
every key belief, misconception, and stereotype the Mormon church carries, an 
effort all too time consuming to leave room for character development. Even 
if Dutcher's overall motive was only to give America a glimpse of what 
Mormonism is truly about, doing this by way of character study would only 
have accentuated his cause.
For example, far too often than not, Dutcher puts all emphasis on the events 
surrounding the missionaries, rather than on how these events are affecting 
them. The elements of storyline and character are kept too far separated, the 
focus constantly switching between them. While Dutcher engages himself in a 
checklist of things Mormons might face while serving a mission, characters 
are allowed to become subscripts to subplots - and underdeveloped ones at 
that.
Ironically, it is within these weaker alleys that the most powerful material 
is awaiting realization. In particular, what could be the most promising 
aspect of the film concerns a fellow missionary's vehement interest in 
anti-Mormon literature. Michael Buster undeniably gives the strongest and 
most professional performance of the group as Elder Kinegar, a missionary 
whose faith is crumbling under the weight of constantly fueled doubt. What 
could've served as the film's most poignant device for both believers and 
non-believers is suppressed so as not to intrude on the above said checklist.
Often, too much leeway is given to tick off the "this and that"'s that 
should, could, and would only work had they been combined with an examination 
of a young man's psychology. Instead of demonstrating how Elder Allen views 
the events on his mission, Dutcher seems assured that merely presenting the 
two in the same scene will allow the audience to "figure it out", leaving us 
to guess and internally decide how the young man is being affected.
Still, Dutcher must be applauded for his objectiveness. With a subject as 
touchy as religion, making a film about your own faith is perhaps the 
riskiest venture one could take. Seeming presumptuous, even pompous, could be 
a near guarantee in the hands of a relatively inexperienced 
filmmaker/screenwriter who's examining their own beliefs. GOD'S ARMY isn't 
100% success in that department. A miracle healing in the film is sure to 
seem highly brazen to some non-Mormons. Yet, at the same time, Dutcher 
willingly and unbiasedly brings up attributes of the religion that have 
remained highly controversial and repellent to outsiders for years. And 
non-Mormons are never presented as wayward souls in need of salvation only 
Mormons can provide. A scene relating to the contraversial issue of blacks 
being denied priesthood authority within the Church until 1978 sums up with a 
black man telling a black missionary, "they're making a fool out of you". And 
with that, the scene ends. Dutcher doesn't give his valiant Mormon a 
brilliant explanation to reply with. The conversation is over. The non-Mormon 
finishes on top. It's a sincerely appreciated gesture.
On the plus side for believers, in a relative way, Dutcher uses his discreet 
abilities to delicately debunk several untruths often associated with the 
Church. The fact that Mormons are Christians who read the Bible is humbly 
clarified during a scene of scripture study. The fact that Mormon 
missionaries are not paid for their two years of service is confirmed during 
a modest "get-to-know-you" conversation between Elder Allen and Elder Dalton. 
Whether the script is on the defense or offense for Mormon beliefs, Dutcher 
is careful not to paint the Church through bias eyes that forgive and forget 
any "flaws" the faith may have.
In the acting department, Matthew Brown shows a definite competency for 
portraying the timid observer; an unsettled outsider who must be thinking a 
great deal more than they are saying. While Brown is meant to be the main 
star, the center of the film, if one can be had, is definitely Dutcher's 
Elder Dalton. He's the mentor, the example, the teacher. In this role, 
Dutcher does fairly well, but his character seems a bit too impassioned 
despite his tenacity. It's the smaller actors who outshine the leads hands 
down when given the chance. The aforementioned Buster, DeSean Terry, and even 
the nearly missed Jeff Kelly are all impressive as fellow missionaries, and 
luckily, Dutcher has given the first two semi-substantial parts. The one 
overall flaw among the actors - not one of them can pass a convincing laugh 
to save their soul.
All in all, GOD'S ARMY may work best as a curiosity piece. The target 
audience is unclear. If it's Mormons, there are plenty of moments where 
identifiableness becomes monotony of things they already know. If it's 
non-Mormons, there is plenty of humor Dutcher probably doesn't even expect 
them to get. Yet for all the moments he leaves the non-believers on the back 
burner, its obvious he's trying his best to appear genuine to both sides, no 
matter what the scene. Either audience should at least find a buzzing 
curiousity as to how the LDS faith is first being presented onscreen (in a 
serious manner). And both audiences may come away a bit surprised, even 
pleased, with the results.
