Authors
Chris Meadows
Number of Reviews
3

Title
Review for Rupan sansei: Kariosutoro no shiro (1979)
Directed by Hayao Miyazaki
Written by Hayao Miyazaki & Harauya Yamazaki
Based on Characters & Situations Created by Maurice Leblanc
    & Monkey Punch
Starring Yasuo Yamada, Eiko Masuyama, Kiyoshi Kobayashi, Makio Inoue,
    et al.
To understand _Castle of Cagliostro_ most completely, let's take a
brief detour into the Lupin character's illustrious past.  If you'd
rather skip it and get on with the movie, use your text-find feature
to go to the words "THE FILM".
In the first decade of the 20th century, a previously-unsuccessful
French journalist/novelist named Maurice Leblanc created a
gentleman-burglar named Arsčne Lupin.  It was a fortunate accident of
serendipity that the character of Arséne Lupin, inspired in part by
the adventures of Sherlock Holmes (and sometimes featuring a Great
Detective named variously Herlock Sholmes or Holmelock Shears as one
of Lupin's adversaries), became so popular with the French public and,
by translation, the rest of the world that Leblanc could not let him
rest, and so most of Leblanc's subsequent short stories and novels
featured the character until Leblanc's death in 1941.  In addition to
the books, a play was written based on the character (which Leblanc
then turned into another novel), and a movie was made starring John
and Lionel Barrymore.
The idea of writing mystery stories centering around a burglar
protagonist was not new, of course--Conan Doyle's own brother-in-law E.
W. Hornung had done so several years before, with two volumes of short
stories and one novel about a gentleman-burglar named Raffles.  However,
Leblanc's Lupin was infused with a Gallic romanticism, bon viveur, and
sense of fun that the stoic British Raffles lacked.
Arsčne Lupin was a gallant, dashing figure, suave and charming and
gifted with great physical prowess.  He is credited with introducing
jiu-jitsu to Paris, he was a master of disguise, and he always left a
calling card before his visits explaining just what he planned to
take.  Sometimes he told his tales to a Dr. Watson-style
confidant-chronicler, sometimes he was a protagonist in third person,
sometimes he never appeared at all until the next-to-last chapter of
the story, having been in disguise as someone else all along.
Although he was a criminal, he never let the thought of it depress him
(the way Raffles's companion did), and his sense of morals owed much
to Robin Hood--he could not bear to see an injustice done, nor could
he resist a damsel (in distress or otherwise).  Leslie Charteris's
"The Saint" could be considered a spiritual descendant of Arsčne
Lupin.
Sadly, though many of the earlier Lupin novels have entered the public
domain, few have been e-texted for greater availability.  One, _The
Glass Stopper_, can be found via Project Gutenberg
(http://sailor.gutenberg.com>), and another, _The Woman With Two
Smiles_, is available in PalmDoc format in the Mystery area of the
Palm Library (http://www.memoware.com>).
In the late 1960s, the Lupin novels were popular in Japan, and
Japanese artist Katou Kazuhiko (aka "Monkey Punch") began a "Lupin
III" manga series in a Japanese magazine, chronicling the adventures
of Arsčne Lupin's grandson.  It became popular enough itself to spawn
three manga series, three TV series and many movies and Original
Animation Videos (made-for-video-release movies).  It is widely agreed
among fans that the best of these was _Castle of Cagliostro_, the
second cinematic Lupin movie.
Interestingly, at the time of Lupin III's creation, Japan didn't
enforce trade copyrights, and so the Leblanc estate was never notified
or asked for permission to create this derivative work.  When they
_did_ find out, there was legal trouble, and eventually an agreement
was reached that the Lupin name would not be used when the anime and
manga were exported to other nations.  Hence, when Streamline dubbed
Lupin anime, they renamed him "Wolf"; when AnimEigo did, they called
him "Rupan"--a phonetic Anglicization of the Japanese pronounciation
of "Lupin".  However, since that time, the earlier Lupin works have
passed into the public domain, and the current legal status of this
agreement is somewhat murky.  Manga's Cagliostro DVD uses the spelling
"Lupin," though it is pronounced "loo-PAHN" in the dub.
Many of the first Lupin III stories and films were completely over
the top, similar to Mad Magazine, and Lupin III bore very little
resemblance to his gentlemanly ancestor.  In earlier stories, Lupin
had little compunction about killing people.  When acclaimed Japanese
director Hayao Miyazaki, who also co-directed part of the first Lupin
TV series, took the helm of _Castle of Cagliostro_, he took the
opportunity to redefine the characters to be more in line with his
vision of heroism.
The film _Castle of Cagliostro_ has its own history, almost as
fascinating as that of the Lupin III character or the plot of the film
itself.  The story concept is very loosely based on a 1924 Arsčne
Lupin novel, _Countess Cagliostro_, in which a woman named Clarisse
turns out to be the granddaughter of a famous real-life 18th-century
scoundrel and forger named Cagliostro (who died in a cell in a castle
in Italy, which thus bears his name).
Cagliostro opened theatrically in 1979 to only modest success, but met
with greater popularity over the years as it was reshown.  Rumor has
it that Steven Spielberg was awestruck when he saw it at Cannes in
1980.
In 1983, footage from Cagliostro and the earlier Lupin film _Mystery
of Mamo_ was licensed to Stern Electronics for use in a Dragon's
Lair-like arcade game, _Cliff Hanger_ (which was seen briefly in a
video arcade as an animators' in-joke in an episode of
_Macross_/_Robotech_).
Subsequently, Cagliostro was optioned by "anime antichrist" Carl
Macek's Streamline Films company, and given a theatrical sub followed
by a lackluster dub for video and Japan Airlines flights (starring Cam
"Jimmy Flinders" Clarke (Max Sterling & Lancer from _Robotech_,
Leonardo from the _Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles_ cartoon, Jackie Chan
in countless cheap live-action dubs) as the voice of "Wolf").
The Streamline dub caught flak from fans both for retiming, zooming,
and digital matting the beautiful opening-credits animation sequence
and parts of the film to eliminate all traces of Japanese writing, and
for Macek's inane changes of dubbed comments or insertion of dialogue
where there previously was none.  The most famous example changes
Goemon the Samurai's "Once again I have cut a worthless object" to
"Should've worn an asbestos suit" after he deftly slices Lupin's
burning clothes off with one stroke of his katana.
More recently, as Streamline decided to get out of the anime business,
_Castle of Cagliostro_ was purchased by Manga Video, who commissioned
a new subtitle translation by translator-extraordinaire Neil Nadelman,
as well as an all-new dub.  These have been or will be released on VHS
and DVD.  (See "THE DVD," below.)
_Castle of Cagliostro_ opens with Lupin and his companion/confidante
Jigen Daisuke robbing the swanky Casino Monaco only to find that all
the money they stole is counterfeit.  Recognizing the style of the
forgery, Lupin decides that it's time to return to the scene of an
ignoble defeat from his youth, the small European duchy of Cagliostro,
where he will finally uncover the secret of the forgeries once and for
all.
No sooner does Lupin arrive than he falls right into the middle of a
modern-day fairy tale, complete with a damsel in distress.  Clarice,
daughter of the late Grand Duke and Duchess who died in a fire seven
years before, is to be wed to the evil Count Cagliostro, who sees the
ring she wears as a secret to unlocking a vast treasure (while
continuing the family tradition of counterfeiting on the side).
Lupin, who has unfinished business with both the Count and Clarice,
cannot allow this to happen.
And so Lupin's other companions, the samurai Goemon and the spy
Fujiko, soon arrive to lend a hand--as does Lupin's arch-nemesis, the
determined Inspector Zenigata, and his squad of Interpol police.  The
Count has a few surprises in store...but so does Lupin.  The film
moves from climax to climax, growing in tension and excitement toward
a final action-packed conclusion.
_Castle of Cagliostro_ is a genuine feel-good movie, and proof that a
feel-good movie doesn't have to follow the saccharine Disney formula
to be feel-good.  Though it might surprise those who have only seen
his atypically-violent _Princess Mononoke_, Miyazaki graces the
characters in this story with a touch of gentleness, of
sentimentality, even in the midst of the over-the-top action
sequences.  Yet it never seems forced or artificial, as when a Disney
film beats you about the head and shoulders with the pugil-stick of
new-agey politically-correct morality.  In the end of the film, when
the Interpol police wave cheerfully out the back of the APC truck as
they drive away, it doesn't seem silly or artificial...it just seems
right, as though it couldn't have happened any other way.
Some of Cagliostro's action scenes have been criticized by some for
being a little over the top--and indeed during the car chase scene it
seems that Herbie the Love Bug is the stunt double for Lupin's
Volkswagen coupé, as the sturdy little car drives right up and down
the side of a near-vertical cliff, held aloft by nothing but speed,
centrifugal force, and artistic license.  Also, for the incredibly
anal nitpickers, an autogyro is seen to hover--which is actually
impossible, as autogyros don't have a powered main rotor.  However,
these are really no more outrageous than some of the stunts Arnold
Schwarzenegger, Chow Yun-Fat, or James Bond assay in their films, and,
more importantly, are very _fun_ to watch.
Manga Video's _Castle of Cagliostro_ DVD is an excellent presentation
of the film, and an average-to-fairexample of DVD features.  The film
transfer was wonderfully clear and vibrant, and quite surpassed VHS
fansub and dub copies in terms of quality, and the sound was also
excellent in both the English and Japanese tracks.  They clarity
allowed details not seen in prior versions to appear, be they smudges
on characters' clothing or the hilariously incongruous fake fangs
Jigen was wearing in one scene.  It is truly hard to believe that this
movie is twenty years old.  The sole thing keeping it from perfection
was the lack of an anamorphic transfer.
The subtitles were large, clear, and easy to read, and seemed close
enough to yet different enough from the fansubbed version to be a
complete retranslation. Strangely, a sign in the early part of the
film was digitally-matted out and covered with "Nice try, guys!"
rather than subtitled...but the matting vanished halfway through the
shot.  The opening credits were preserved as they had been, Japanese
symbols and all, and the opening song was even translated--a nice
touch, given that this isn't always the case.
The dub quality was up to Manga's recent standard--quite faithful to
the original, a mostly well-written script, but only fair to mediocre
actors.  Perhaps it is simply that they suffer by comparison to
Streamline's more familiar voices, but the actors for Inspector
Zenigata, Jodo, and Gustav seemed particularly bad.  Manga's Zenigata
in particular was unable to match the range of the Japanese actor or
Greg Snegoff, Streamline's actor for Zenigata (who also played Khyron
and Scott Bernard in _Robotech_), at portraying emotional
subtexts...which meant that in the last scene, where he should have
come off as gruff but warm, he simply came off as gruff and flat.
Jigen, Goemon, Count Cagliostro, and the old gardner were so-so, and
Lupin, Fujiko, and Clarice were pretty good.
Though there was some unnecessary dialogue (and a few minor minor
obscenities) added, most lines were faithful to the original, and
Goemon's "asbestos suit" line was the much more satisfactory "This is
not worthy of my blade."  It was somewhat annoying that they chose to
pronounce "Lupin" more in line with the Japanese, "loo-PAHN," but
given the Lupin trademark travails, not altogether surprising.  On the
whole, a dub I wouldn't be ashamed to show to subtitle haters.
That the DVD itself is only fair to good is due largely to its menu
features and content (or lack thereof).  The menu itself is nothing
special, offering the usual "play the movie, scene index, language
setup" options, as well as options for two trailers (one being little
more than a slideshow of box images of Manga's entire catalog set to
an annoyingly repetitive percussion beat, the other being an a series
of clips from Manga shows set to a KMFDM tune), a list of current
Manga DVD titles, and a WWW link (which is, amusingly, little more
than a picture saying to click on the Internet Shortcut located in the
data area of the DVD-ROM).  (It also seems to be easily breakable,
given that I have several times managed to get my Hollywood
Plus/DVDStation setup to load the menu without the selection cursor
appearing.)
Most annoying, however, is the "metal shards sliding together and
apart with metallic clank" transition that appears whenever a menu
option is selected--and has nothing at all to do with _Castle of
Cagliostro_ or anything else on the DVD, unlike some of the equally
extravagant transitions on James Bond Special Edition and other DVDs
that at least fit the theme of the movie.  But then, this is not
terribly surprising given that Manga Video has a long tradition of
trying to play up the "kewl" aspects of its anime, as demonstrated by
its former slogan ("Bizarre.  Twisted.  Uniquely imaginative"), which
it thankfully seems to have dropped.
It would have been nice if they had added, say, a small documentary or
featurette on the popularity of Miyazaki, or of Lupin, or the
character's history, or the film's use in Cliff Hanger, and if they
had nixed the annoying transition.  However, as it is, the DVD is more
than a sufficient presentation of _Castle of Cagliostro_ to satisfy
Lupin, anime, and Miyazaki fans alike.
Nausicaa.net Lupin III FAQ:
    http://www.nausicaa.net/miyazaki/lupin/faq.html
Internet Movie Database _Castle of Cagliostro_ listing:
    http://us.imdb.com/Details?0079833
"The Knockout Lounge" (Monkey Punch's homepage):
    http://www.monkeypunch.com
Cliff Hanger arcade game page:
    http://www.dragons-lair-project.com/games/pages/cliff.asp
(This review is copyright 2000 by Christopher E. Meadows.  Permission
granted for Usenet distribution and associated archival, including the
Internet Movie Database, but other distribution rights reserved to the
author.)
-- 
Chris Meadows aka  | Co-moderator, rec.toys.transformers.moderated
Robotech_Master    | Homepage: http://www.eyrie.org/~robotech/>
robotech@eyrie.org | PGP: http://www.eyrie.org/~robotech/rm.key.txt>   
robotech@jurai.net | ICQ UIN: 5477383 || Free DSL!  Ask me how!

Title
Review for Love Bug, The (1997) (TV)
Starring Bruce Campbell, Alexandra Wentworth, Mickey Dolenz, John
         Hannah
Nearly thirty years had passed since the original movie, _The Love
Bug_.  In 1997, the midst of an era of remakes of old favorites,
Disney, never one to let a dead horse lie if it could possibly beat it
a few more times, Disney decided to resurrect one of its past
successes and send it once more around the stock car track.
The lead actor--aside from the car--is well-known wise-guy Bruce
Campbell, the charismatic smart-alecky star best known for the _Evil
Dead_ trilogy and a host of cameos and other roles (most notably
Autolycus from the _Hercules_ & _Xena_ TV series and the Surgeon
General from _Escape from L.A._) and the more recent _Jack of All
Trades_ series.  His reluctant girlfriend is _Jerry Maguire_'s
Alexandra Wentworth, and the Buddy Hacket role is filled by ex-Monkee
Mickey Dolenz.  John Hannah rounds out the cast as the wealthy
Scottish villain, and Dean Jones returns as Jim Douglas, Herbie's
original driver.
The results are a mixed bag.  The movie is more or less a formulaic
remake of the original; there are a few additions and changes but the
general course of the story and its ending should come as no surprise
to fans of the original.  And the original...did it better.
The older the studio gets, the more Disney seems to resort to stock
(car) plots and hammy cliches.  As maudlin as the original movie was
at times, even it did not feel the need to stick in an "origin story"
to explain _why_ Herbie was "alive," nor did it have to create an
"evil twin" satanically-possessed VW.  Some of the scenes made me
groan and cry desperately for the succor of Joel and the 'bots.
The original _Love Bug_ was graced with the talents of Dean Jones, the
incomparable Buddy Hackett, and David Tomlinson as the villainous
Peter Thorndyke; the modern version fares less well, though Bruce
Campbell does a fine job once he settles into the role and Mickey
Dolenz is, if anything, even more believable than Buddy Hackett as the
stereotype of the eccentric mechanic.  And it is nice to see a _Love
Bug_ sequel that reunites Dean Jones with the little car, even if only
for a few minutes.
As for the car itself, Herbie is up to most of his usual tricks, this
time with the aid of a little CGI.  Strangely, there is no
driving-on-water scene (save for a flashback clip at the start of the
film), making this the first _Love Bug_ movie not to have what was
formerly one of the hallmarks of the character.  There are also very
few actual racing scenes when compared with prior incarnations.
(Presumably they didn't have the budget.)  Combined with the "fade to
black" scene transitions, it seems clear this movie was made with
television in mind.
There really isn't much else to say about the modern _The Love Bug_.
It's standard cliche-ridden Disney low-budget live-action fare, and
there is nothing objectionable or unfit for younger audiences--unless
you regard the Disney formula as objectionable in itself, which is
possible.
A brief postscript: Strangely, this movie caused the macrovision on my
RCA VCR to kick in, for _viewing_, not recording--the first commercial
movie I've ever rented to do so.  It says little for the quality of
Disney's tape duplication service.
(This review is copyright 2000 by Christopher E. Meadows.  Permission
granted for Usenet distribution and associated archival, including the
Internet Movie Database, but other distribution rights reserved to the
author.)
-- 
Chris Meadows aka  | Co-moderator, rec.toys.transformers.moderated
Robotech_Master    | Homepage: http://www.eyrie.org/~robotech/>
robotech@eyrie.org | PGP: http://www.eyrie.org/~robotech/rm.key.txt>   
robotech@jurai.net | ICQ UIN: 5477383 || Free DSL!  Ask me how!

Title
Review for Mononoke Hime (1997)
Starring Billy Crudup, Claire Dane, Minnie Driver, Billy Bob Thornton,
Gillian Anderson (English version)
Hayao Miyazaki's past films (_Laputa: Castle in the Sky_, _My Neighbor
Totoro_, _Kiki's Delivery Service_, and so on) have garnered much the
same reputation among Japanese viewers that Disney films have garnered
over here: Masterfully-done family-friendly kiddie fare that almost
everybody will enjoy.  However, Miyazaki's latest offering, _Princess
Mononoke_ (_Mononoke Hime_ in the original Japanese) is something of a
departure from his past standards, and may surprise even Miyazaki fans.
As a darker film than Miyazaki's prior movies (with the possible
exception of _Nausicaa of the Valley of the Wind_), Mononoke earns its
PG-13 rating.  If it had been made as a live-action film, it would
almost certainly have gotten an R.  Set hundreds of years ago in the
Muromachi period of Japan, the movie includes samurai violence, blood
(literally _gallons_ of blood in one scene), and some minor sexual
themes (mostly flirtation and references to characters having formerly
been brothel girls).  Thus, it falls squarely into that uniquely
American no-man's-land of mass-market animated films _not_ meant for
children...which probably explains its near-total lack of studio
publicity.  Mirimax must have been uncertain how to promote a film
like this, so deeply-seated is the American "animation = kidvid"
prejudice.  Even though it was a chartbusting smash hit in Japan,
earning a place in the 2000 _Guinness Book of World Records_ (page
132) and grossing $156.6 million in Japan alone, it has languished in
near-total obscurity in the United States despite receiving almost
nothing but rave reviews.  Princess Mononoke is a spectacular film, a
feast for the senses and the mind, and it is a shame it has not been
better promoted.
[The remainder of this review contains some minor spoilers for the
film and its ending.]
Save for its ending, _Princess Mononoke_ is very much a tragedy (in
the literary sense).  It is a film in which there are no real
villains, save perhaps the Emperor, who is barely even mentioned but
whose desire to live forever is an important plot motivator.  There
are only human beings, gods, and demons, all of whom have
imperfections that cause them to clash in numerous skirmishes and,
eventually, a final battle that destroys and costs a great deal.
And yet, most characters also have redeeming or even heroic qualities
as well.  The Lady Eboshi (voiced by Minnie Driver in the English
version), whose Irontown is denuding the forest and killing off its
gods, is in some respects downright humanitarian, taking in and
personally bandaging lepers, rescuing brothel girls from their
contracts, and protecting her people from both forest gods and human
warlords.
Perhaps the only truly blameless character is Ashitaka (Billy Crudup),
who, cursed by the blood of a forest demon he killed to protect his
village, has now come west to unravel the causes behind its
demonization, and "to see with eyes unclouded by hate."  And so he
does, moving between camps of human and forest creature with
near-impunity, friendly to all sides but partial to none, causing
everyone who meets him to wonder, "Just whose side is he on, anyway?"
The answer is all of them...and none of them.  Ashitaka wants humans
and forest denizens to live together in harmony...which may not be
possible, even after the movie's end.
The film begins when Prince Ashitaka kills the boar demon and is
banished from his village forever.  He rides west, encountering
samurai and an enigmatic monk, Jigo (Billy Bob Thornton).  As he
continues his journey, he comes across and saves the lives of two men
who were thrown over a cliff during an attack on Lady Eboshi's caravan
by the wolf-goddess Mara (Gillian Anderson).  Along the way, he meets
San (Claire Dane), a girl whose parents abandoned her in fear after
Mara caught them defiling the forest, and who Mara raised as one of
her own.  (San is also the Princess Mononoke, though this is only
mentioned once in the entire film--if you blink at the wrong moment,
as have some reviewers, you might miss it.  "Mononoke" literally means
"the spirits of things;" hence the Princess Mononoke is the girl who
communes with the woodland spirits.)
After he returns the men he saved to Irontown, Ashitaka learns of
Eboshi's motives.  He soon has the chance to learn of San's and
Mara's, and that of the clan of giant boars from which came the demon
that attacked Ashitaka's village.  As the plot thickens, the danger
mounts, and human and creature armies clash in bloody battles, time
begins to run out for the forest creatures and Irontown alike...and
Ashitaka may be the only one who can bring anything positive out of
the whole mess.
_Princess Mononoke_ is a morality play, showing the consequences of
humanity's selfishness and disregard for the environment, and the
aftermath of war in often gory detail.  However, it does not overdo
its moralizing--it shows by example, not by exposition.  The ending is
not the unrealistically saccharine "...and everybody lived happily
ever after" often found in fairy-tales but rather a more realistic
reconciliation and realization of differences, which may bode ill for
the future.  (In fact, since Japan today is more or less one huge
urban area, it's probably safe to say that humanity did end up
triumphing over the wild sooner or later.)  The film remains
consistently adult in its story and outlook.
Though _Mononoke_ is an excellent film, there are nonetheless some
minor flaws.  Storywise, it is never adequately explained (though this
could be the dub's fault) why Ashitaka has to leave his tribe forever
for being cursed, unable to return even if the curse is lifted.  Also,
there is one animal clan, the apes, whose appearances only serve to
slow the flow of the plot and insert some mostly-unnecessary
exposition.  It is also never explained why San is a Princess, how
Lady Eboshi knows that she is a Princess, or why Lady Eboshi wants her
to "become human again."  Can it be that she is the girl's biological
mother?  Odd that she never reveals it if so...
As far as the script is concerned, Neil Gaiman's adaptation is
remarkably good at matching lines to animated mouth movements, but
some lines do come off a bit corny.  The acting in general is very
good; even my friend who claimed never to have seen a good dub was
impressed.  Although it's sometimes a bit hard to countenance a
Japanese Lady with an Irish accent or a spy-cum-monk with the voice of
a backwoods hick, I suspect that the original Japanese voices' accents
probably carried similar connotations of exotic nobility or hickness
to Japanese-speakers.
The animation is, as always for cinematic Studio Ghibli (Miyazaki's
animation studio) works, first-rate.  This is the first Miyazaki film
to mark the use of extensive computer effects; however, most of these
are in the area of "digital ink and paint" programs--the equivalent of
using a drawing pad and a computer program to make a sketch, rather
than a pen and a cel--rather than the CGI (computer-generated images)
effects that are mostly synonymous with "computer animation" these
days.  There are a few noticeable CGI effects; however, they mostly do
not distract from the overall look and feel of the film.
And that overall look and feel is sumptuous, and often like a
watercolor painting in motion.  The film is full of the lush greens of
the plains and forests, and is breathtaking to watch in its full glory
on a big screen.  Stylistically, _Mononoke_ is vintage Miyazaki,
meaning that his character designs have varied little since his
earliest film.  San looks very similar to past Miyazaki heroines, such
as Kiki, Nausicaa, Sheeta (from _Laputa_), and Clara (from _Castle of
Cagliostro_.
The score is also vintage Miyazaki--the composer, Joe Hisaishi, has
worked with Miyazaki on almost all his films since _Nausicaa_.
However, this time Hisaishi has had access to a full-fledged symphony
orchestra, whereas scores to prior Miyazaki films were done mostly
with synthesizers.  The score is rich and deeply stirring, with
recurring themes for several of the characters.  From the opening
strains of the very first piece of music, it establishes the
atmosphere of the film, and does it extraordinarily well.  This is a
soundtrack to go out and buy...as I did, as soon as I saw the film.
Given this spectacular showing, it will be very interesting to see
what Hisaishi does with the score to _Laputa_, which he was
commissioned to revise and rerecord for its upcoming release to video
or theaters (Mirimax is still trying to decide which) under the title
_Castle in the Sky_.
_Princess Mononoke_ is easily one of the best animated movies of the
year (either 1997, when it was originally made, or 1999, which saw its
release upon American shores), and very likely one of the best movies
of _any_ kind.  At the time of the writing of this review, it is still
playing in many major metropolitan areas; an updated listing of which
theaters can be found at
http://WWW.Nausicaa.net/miyazaki/mh/release.html>.  If you have
the chance, you should see this movie at least once.
[This review is copyright 2000 by Christopher E. Meadows.  Permission
granted for Usenet distribution and associated archival, including the
Internet Movie Database, but other distribution rights reserved to the
author.]
-- 
Chris Meadows aka  | Co-moderator, rec.toys.transformers.moderated
Robotech_Master    | Homepage: http://www.eyrie.org/~robotech/>
robotech@eyrie.org | PGP: http://www.eyrie.org/~robotech/rm.key.txt>   
robotech@jurai.net | ICQ UIN: 5477383 
