Authors
Adrian Preston
Number of Reviews
2

Title
Review for Cinderella (1950)
The Brothers Grimm's fairy tales were a mish-mash of folk tales from around
the world. Revisionists to the last, the Grimms traveled widely, collected
tales and rewrote them to portray a Grimm version of the current socio-moral
climate. Hans Christian Anderson did exactly the same thing. Rumplestiltskin
is a prime example, the original version ( a Nordic folk tale I believe, but
I could be wrong. ) had the heroine as a scheming shrew, who used her beauty 
to ensnare Rumplestiltskin into falling deeply in love with her, and who came 
to a very sticky end after she betrayed him and he snatched her first-born 
child away. The version we all know from childhood changes the focus of the 
story completely, so the ugly, un-socially-acceptible Rumplestilskin becomes 
the bogeyman. Revisionism in action.
The reason I'm mentioning this is that it draws an astonishing parallel with
the Walt Disney of today, Pocahontas being the absolute definitive in this
respect. However, Cinderella is the Walt Disney of the past and is Disney at
it's best.
The plot is simple: Cinderella's father dies, and she becomes a char-lady to
her evil stepmother and two ugly sisters. Meeting a woman who claims to be
her fairy godmother and transforms her into a vision of beauty, she attends
the Prince's ball. The Prince falls deeply in love, but because 
Cinderella must leave at midnight, he only has a glass slipper with which
to find her. A search ensues, Cinderella is found, they are married and
live happily ever after. O.K., nothing earth shattering there, but Disney
have managed to take all their stock effects and tie them into a lovely
unified whole around the simple storyline.
As far as the plot goes ( we were talking about revisionism remember ), some
liberties are taken. In the original fairy tale, the two ugly sisters managed
to fit their feet into the glass slippers by cutting their toes and heels off,
and were only discovered because of the blood seeping out. At the end of the
story, the stepmother and sisters as punishment had their eyes put out, and 
their tongues cut off, and were made to wander the streets as beggars. But
really, you can't blame Disney for ommitting these little things. I doubt
that an animated image of two women mutilating their feet would appeal
to the younger audience. :)
The songs are simple and kept to a minimum. The comic relief characters
( the mice and the fairy-godmother ) are well-used througout the film
and are tied in well with the plot, and the villain of the piece, the
evil stepmother exudes a delicious air of evil. The weakest characters
surprisingly are the ugly sisters, who are rather underutilised, and
could have been depicted as more comic-evil than as they are portrayed, which
is vindictive-nasty. One of the main criticisms one can make of
the early Disney films is that the heroines were rather bland and ineffectual,
witness Snow White, and Sleeping Beauty. With Cinderella, Disney give us
a much more rounded character as a heroine, and the film hangs together
around her, rather than the supporting characters.
The animation, as usual is excellent. Cinderella I suppose is a early to mid 
Disney piece, and is all clean lines and subtle shades, where the animative 
focus is on the characters rather than the background. It lacks both the 
realism of earlier and recent Disney work and the minimalism of mid-period,
and is a sort of halfway-house between the two. It works though, and works
very well. As personal preference goes, it is probably my favourite of the
animation styles Disney have tinkered with so far.
Anyway, my son loves the film and so do I. (Probably for different reasons,
I've always held a bit of a flame for Cinderella.) and I award the film:

Title
Review for Pocahontas (1995)
Occasionally, not often, but every now and again, the animators at Walt Disney
are allowed to produce an absolutely breathtaking piece of animation. Of
course, it's usually so well hidden among the arrays of generic forgetable
characters and anthropomorphised creatures that it is difficult to pick out.
They did it in the Lion King, the first few seconds of a sunrise over the
African savanna was astonishingly beautiful, as the sun burst over the plains,
the traditional African song made it a visual and acoustic treat. They did it
in Fantasia, which don't forget was probably the first experimental piece to 
explore animation as a form of art. And they did it in Pocahontas. It's well
hidden, but during one of the songs, as Pocahontas is singing to John Smith, 
she sings about the wind, and her face dissolves into streaks of almost
impressionistic pastel shades, giving the feeling of life and movement and
real beauty in the world around her. It really is a quite lovely and effective
piece of animation.
Unfortunately it only lasts about three seconds, and is the only highlight
in one of the most forgetable films to come out of the Disney studios since..
well, since for ever really. The plot is really quite simple: The English
sail to the Americas to exploit the land, among them is John Smith, the 
captain of the vessel, who falls in love with the beautiful Pocahontas, a 
native indian. Their love for one another stops the English and indians
warring. That's it. Add a couple of stock Disney comic relief characters
( A raccoon, a small bird and a spoilt small dog. ), add a typical villain 
( The evil governor, who sees the Americas as a way of getting rich and 
improving his position in court. ) and even so, there is still nothing
there with which to make a film. Disney seem to have realised this and in
their panicked state ( 'Oh my God, it's only going to last twenty minutes, 
what are we going to do?' ) must have decided to pack it out with song after
song after song.
Now the Disney music has, quite rightly, won a few awards in the past. But
in Pocahontas the dreary score is just dreadful. Maybe it's just me, but
I could hardly tell them apart, just padding, they advanced the plot not
one iota and half of them were completely unescessary.
I'm a great fan of Disney villains. Prince John in Robin Hood was a 
masterpiece, as was Shere Khan (Jungle book), but recently with villains like 
Ursula (The little mermaid) Gaston (Beauty and the Beast) and Jafar (Aladdin) 
they seem to have become, well, tamer, milder, not as evil. The classic Disney
villain recently had a resurgence in Scar ( The Lion King ), but even so, was 
still only a reworking of Prince John. The evil Governor from Pocahontas is 
another in the line of manufactured stock bad guys, instantly forgetable. 
Remember the wicked witch in Sleeping Beauty kicking the skull across the 
floor? There was a time when Disney were able to imbue a real sense of evil 
into their baddies, or a superb sense of comic evil.
Finally we come to the MORAL. Disney recently reminds me of the animaniacs'
'wheel of morality'. It's tempting to believe they have one at the Disney
studios and every now and then spin it, to see what moral their next film
will espouse. The plot is secondary. THOU SHALT FACE UP TO THY 
RESPONSIBILITIES yelled the Lion King, THOU SHALL NOT JUDGE ON EXTERNAL
APPEARANCE screamed Beauty and the Beast, THOU SHALT BE TRUE TO THYSELF
wailed Aladdin. Disney have always, always been good triumphs over evil
kind of guys, but with recent films we have had morals rammed down our
throats till they are coming out of our ears. And Pocahontas is more
guilty than most THOU SHALT LOVE THY FELLOW HUMAN BEING it berates us,
THOU SHALT NOT JUDGE ON SKIN COLOUR it beats us around the head with. All
very worthy sentiments, but guys, come on, give us some entertainment!
Anyway, that's Pocahontas. Notice I haven't said anything about the 
horrifically butchered politically correct version of history Pocahontas
espouses, and the well-manered civil version of the native indians they
give us, and a host of other appaling devices they've used to get the morals
across. But still, it only a cartoon.
My son, who usually adores Walt Disney films lasted about ten minutes into 
this one, and then got bored and wandered off. I sat through the entire
length and can safely give it a:
* (one star) out of five rating. And that's only because there is no symbol
on the keyboard with which I can denote half-a-star.:)
