Authors
SR Boone
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Air Force One (1997)
     Two things prevent Wolfgang Peterson's (DAS BOOT, IN THE LINE OF
FIRE) lastest offering from suffering the same fate as the president's
jet in Air Force One. First is America's need for a president of
impeccable honesty, integrity, and action. Second is some terrific
computerized flight footage.
     Harrison Ford plays United States President James Marshall who
delivers a strong anti-terrorism speech in Moscow only to discover that
Air Force One has been infiltrated by Russian terrorists, led by Gary
Oldman, who seek a reestablishment of good old Mother Russia. Further
complicating Ford's world-wide call to arms against terrorism is the
presence of the First Lady and Daughter on the hijacked fortress. After
90 minutes of gunfire and bloody corpses, good triumphs over evil and
Ford has succesfully defended his title as Hollywood's leading action
hero.
     Ford and Oldman are terrific in the roles that suit them best:
Everyman and psychotic heavy. While Ford delivers the goods in the best
classic tradition in his well-conceived role, the multi-talented Oldman
is wasted in his; his character seems to be Hollywood's plea to bring
back the Cold War's black-and-white world. Ford has admitted he prefer's
these roles and Oldman fits in nicely, too. Regardless,  the acting is
never in question with these two.
     What is in question is the witer's decision to have Ford play with
big guns instead of big brains. Watching Air Force One, one recalls The
Fugitive and how a mediocre script was given a pulse by watching Ford
stay one step ahead of his pursuer by out thinking him; or In the Line
of FIre with it's philosophical cat-and-mouse games. This one is simply
Die Hard 4. It's a tired formula, but it still works.
     Standouts in a strong supporting are Dean Stockwell as a power
hungry Secretary of Defence and William H. Macy as a crew member of the
presidential liner.
      Throughout the high-altitude dramatics are some outstanding shots
of F-15s that come to Air Force One's aid. These are highlighted by two
impressive displays of Air Force One's defensive manueverings.
     Even with it's climax teetering on the edge of credibility, Air
Force One is a wildly entertaining ride from a director and star at the
top of their games.

