Authors
Nicole Lesley
Number of Reviews
4

Title
Review for Hurlyburly (1998)
Starring: Sean Penn, Kevin Spacey, Robin Wright, Chazz Palminteri, Garry
Shandling, Anna Paquin, Meg Ryan.
What a contrast! In the space of two days, I saw Shakespeare In Love
and HurlyBurly. I'm not sure you could get two more different
movies. While the former was all over the top, telegraphing
everything, shoving its philosophy of life down our throats,
HurlyBurly was the complete opposite, wound so tight and with so much
buried in its script, one could spend weeks thinking about it.
This is one interesting movie. It's very much in a similar vein to one
of my favourite movies of '98, In the Company of Men, although not
quite so nasty.  There's lots of talking and some scary insights into
the world of men.
HurlyBurly doens't contain much plot: we just follow Eddie (Sean Penn)
around as he tries to make sense of his life and the people around
him. His big question is: does it all pertain to him? And if it does,
how is he supposed to feel about it all? "It" means everything:
television, friends, events that happen. I guess it could be summed up
more crudely as: what's it all about?
This is not a movie for answers. Donna (Anna Paquin) gives some but
they're not really satisfying: they just lead to more
questions. That's what makes this movie stay on your mind. These are
the sorts of questions that occupy our time.  Even when we push them
to the background, however we resolve these questions influences
everything we do.
The performances are all superb in HurlyBurly. I haven't seen Sean
Penn in much before (in fact, I can't remember seeing him in
anything), but he is brilliant in this. Eddie isn't a likeable
character, but Sean Penn makes him understandable. I don't want to be
his friend but I'd like to help him.  Chazz Palminteri is also great
as Phil, making him an awful person. I'd never want to know Phil but
still I understand why Eddie wants to be his friend. Everyone in this
film nails their performances, making this world real.
It's a nasty world; it's a sexist world. Unlike Shakespeare In Love
which is unfailingly politically correct, HurlyBurly is a man's world,
seen unapologetically through the eyes of men. I find this fascinating
and on two counts, depressing. First, it's depressing that such a
world exists. A large part of HurlyBurly's success is that it
convinces me that such people are real and that this sort of
environment exists every day in Hollywood; that there are a large
number of men out there who believe women to be completely peripheral
to their world, toys, playthings. Sure, everyone is background to
everyone else but in this world, women are a long way in the
background. Second, these are the movies that are being made: stories
about men's world. Where are the stories about women's world? Not the
soap operas and the "chick flicks" that are meant to satisfy women,
but the real stories that touch on the essence of life like HurlyBurly
does for men.
HurlyBurly is based on a stage play and that is evident from the
moment the film starts. It's very talkative, intelligent and
static. While this can make the film drag a bit, and people sometimes
sound like they're quoting textbooks, mostly this is a good thing. Not
all films have to be filled with special effects and sweeping
panoramas. Not all films have to underestimate the intelligence of
their audience. All it means is that HurlyBurly is probably just as
effective on video as it is on the large screen. It also means that
you have to pay attention.

Title
Review for Star Trek: Insurrection (1998)
Starring: Patrick Stewart, Jonathan Frakes, Brent Spiner, LeVar Burton,
Michael Dorn, Gates McFadden, Marina Sirtis.
With any Star Trek movie, there comes a lot of baggage. Lots of people
stay away because they're not trekkies: they've never watched the
television show and they don't like Science Fiction. On the other
hand, fans expect so much, even becoming a tad proprietal about their
show. So who should go to see the latest instalment of the Next
Generation films? How does it hold up for the two extreme ends of the
viewing population?
I fear trekkies will be a bit disappointed. Just like First Contact,
the previous Star Trek movie, Insurrection doesn't have a lot of
plot. It's basically an extended television episode on a bigger
screen. All the standard characters are there, doing what you'd expect
of them, and it's an interesting enough plot but it's not a ground
breaking movie.
On top of that, the effects are pretty cheesy. When I go to a Star
Trek movie, I basically expect an extended television episode with
cool special effects: I got the former but was robbed of the
latter. The ships, docking and moving about in space looked like
models. Even worse were the less amazing scenes like when
Data (Brent Spiner), Picard (Patrick Stewart) and the love interest
were entering the water-craft they had discovered: the mountain
backdrop was clearly fake. I don't know how much money was spent on
special effects for Insurrection, but when I compare it to the great
crash scene from the first Next Generation movie, it comes up very
short.
There are, however, many pluses for Insurrection. While there will
never be any Best Actor Oscars being awarded to the cast of a Star
Trek film, all the performances are quite good. On top of that, there
is a lot of humour in this movie. Whilst there were humorous pieces in
First Contact, it had a very dark tone. There is no such tone in
Insurrection: we have goodies and baddies, people to save, lessons to
be learned but it is all done with a light-handedness that is very
funny. The ability of the cast to laugh at themselves makes the film
quite enjoyable.
The moral of the story, standard Star Trek, is also handled
well. Although it's fed to us via Picard pontificating about the
rights of people to self determination, watching Picard pontificate is
not an unpleasant thing. His mellifluous voice can make anything
palatable.
Overall, I think non-Science Fiction fans may enjoy Insurrection more
than the hard core fans. Like most Science Fiction, it's really a
morality play. In this case, however, Insurrection contains lots of
morality, heaps of play and very little Science Fiction.

Title
Review for Stepmom (1998)
Starring: Susan Sarandon, Julia Roberts, Ed Harris, two annoying
children.
Yes, I'll admit it.  I did go to see Stepmom: partly because of its
two leading actors and partly because someone asked me.  No, mostly
because someone asked me.  And, in spite of it all, I'll still talk to
that person.
Stepmom is exactly what you would expect: an over-wrought, weepy film.
The basic premise is that Jackie (Susan Sarandon) and Luke (Ed
Harris), who have two children, are divorced.  Luke has taken up with
Isabel (Julia Roberts), who is having trouble coping with being a
parent, even if only part-time.  Jackie is having trouble coping with
the fact that her ex-husband has fallen in love again, and that she
may be being replaced in the lives of her children.  Oh yeah, and
Jackie is having trouble coping with dying of cancer.
Clearly we have enough going on here to give the tear ducts a good
work-out.  I saw the movie in a packed movie theatre and people were
crying their eyes out; the woman next to me was crying and sniffing
and blowing her nose all throughout the picture.  As it sets out to be
a weepy, Stepmom achieves one of its goals.  Since telephone
commercials can make people cry, we need some other criteria by which
to judge this movie.
First, the performances.  All the adults in Stepmom give very good
performances.  All are experienced actors with a track record of
playing good to great roles.  All enunciate clearly, cry at the right
moments, look frazzled when expected.  No, there is nothing wrong with
the adult performances.  The daughter, Anna (Jena Malone), also does a
fine job with a strange role.  I'm not sure if she was meant to be a
spoilt brat or just someone coming to terms with it all.  Currently,
I'm voting for the spoilt brat but the script didn't really make it
clear.  The son, Ben (Liam Aiken), however, was not at all fine.
Given his young age and the material with which he was working, I'm
confident that none of it was his fault.  I think we can lay the blame
squarely at the feet of the director, Chris Columbus.  This child was
vomit-inducingly cute, unfailingly, consistently, throughout the
movie: not one bad mood, not one sour expression, not one iota of a
resemblance to a normal child.
While we're dealing with things that aren't at all fine, let's
consider the script.  Stepmom covers what I consider to be potentially
interesting film-making topics.  Split families with changing dynamics
are common in our society: a movie examining these roles could be very
illuminating.  Also, here's a movie with two strong female roles, and
two quite good female actors cast in those roles.  Unfortunately,
Stepmom feels the need to manipulate rather than investigate,
underline rather than understate, overplay rather than imply.
Even given this, Stepmom is confusing.  Clearly, we are meant to
believe that Jackie is a great mother but until the very end, we never
see that.  Instead we see a manipulative, nasty woman without a
generous bone in her body.  Throughout the film, we see Isabel trying
so hard in her new role of stepmom, often being the voice of reason,
yet during the meeting of the two women in the bar, (and there appears
to be only one bar), they do a body switch and Jackie is the
reasonable one and Isabel the selfish one.  Very strange.
On top of this, although the movie itself is quite long, and every
scene overplayed, Stepmom takes place in a relatively short space of
time: the beginning of Autumn (in the US) to Christmas.  The
metamorphosis of these characters would have been much more believable
over a longer space of time: the only reason I can see for not doing
this was that making Ben age a year or two would have been tricky.  On
the time-compression topic, no-one can make a quilt that quickly,
especially not if they're doing other things at the same time, like,
say, chemotherapy.  Just little things like that, had they been
correctly handled, would have made the movie more enjoyable.
Now it sounds like I hated this movie.  That's not quite the case.  I
just felt so much of it could have been done much better.  Had that
happened, this movie would have moved up a rating notch.  Instead of
really dealing with the issues involved, the heart-strings were
tugged, the violins were strained and the emotions exaggerated.  Of
course, you'll cry and you might even laugh at Ben's antics, but it
feels empty, so that when you leave the theatre you start thinking of
all the worthwhile things you could have done with the price of
admission.  If you feel the need for a good cry, what till it comes
out on video.
Nikki Lesley 1998

Title
Review for Shakespeare in Love (1998)
Starring: Joseph Fiennes, Gwyneth Paltrow, Geoffrey Rush, Colin Firth, Ben
Affleck, Judy Dench.
Going to see Shakespeare In Love I learnt a lesson that I've learnt
many times before and I'm sure I'll learn many times again. It kind of
undermines this web-site but the lesson is: Never listen to critics!
I had seen the preview for Shakespeare In Love and it looked exactly
like the kind of movie I would hate. Three things, however, worked
against me. First, the critics were raving about it. It was getting
ten out of tens, and fours stars and two thumbs way up. Second, a
friend of mine believes that whatever impression a preview gives, the
only thing you can be sure of is that the movie isn't like
that. Third, Colin Firth was in it.
Perhaps the lesson should be always trust your first
instincts. Shakespeare In Love was a trial to sit through. There are
so many reasons why this is a painful movie: let me count the ways.
    1.Gwyneth Paltrow and her nasal British accent. Are there no
British female actors of the right age to play this part? (Perhaps
they all read the script and had too much sense.) Or if we must have
an American actor to drag in the US audience, could we please have
someone different? After Emma and Sliding Doors I've had enough of the
British Ms. Paltrow.
    2.Romeo and Juliet. I will confess that I think this is one of
Shakespeare's weakest plays. Perhaps it was revolutionary for the
times, perhaps it tells an amazing story, but really, it's now such an
overdone plot in Hollywood: star crossed lovers, insurmountable
barriers, passion beyond compare. In Shakespeare In Love, we don't
only have to sit through the story of Romeo and Juliet, we have to sit
through the rehearsals and the performance of it, just in case we
don't get the allegory.*
    3.More British accents. I will admit that Ben Affleck played quite
a good role but there were moments when his accent wandered. At one
point this event caused me to laugh at the most inappropriate
moment. I prefer Kenneth Branaugh's approach of letting people speak
in their own accent. It's not like historical authenticity was a point
here: the British people were speaking with twentieth century accents.
    4.Did Gwyneth Paltrow really need to have her breast bound to pass
as a boy?
    5.The soap opera production values. By this I mean the climactic
moment, serious close-up of our male hero as he reacts to the
situation, amazing close-up of our female hero as she reacts to the
situation, quick shot of a couple of the by-standers for their
reaction, back to the heros, lingering on their faces, cut to a
commercial. Ok, so we didn't get the commercial but we got everything
else.
Are there any good points to this movie? Well, it looks
beautiful. They may all behave like they're in General Hospital but
they've got a budget that would make television people weep. Apart
from the wandering accents, all the performances are quite good and
finally, Colin Firth is in it.  He seems to be specialising in playing
the baddies opposite people of the Fiennes family (see The English
Patient).
Speaking of which, if you liked that movie, you'll probably like this.
They're very similar: star-crossed lovers, insurmountable barriers,
passion beyond compare. Are there no original ideas in movies any
more?
*For those of you who find this stance contradictory to the HD that I gave
Romeo + Juliet, I think Baz Luhrmann's treatment of this play is
perfect for the subject matter, suggesting perhaps that it's not totally
the play that's the thing but what you do with it that matters.
