Authors
Brian Lehr
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Star Trek: First Contact (1996)
[Note that followups are directed to rec.arts.movies.current-films and
rec.arts.movies.startrek.current only, not to rec.arts.sf.movies.  -Moderator]
Written by: Ronald D. Moore and Brannon Braga (screenplay)
Directed by:Jonathan Frakes
   Wow, looks like everybody is taking a crack at review this movie, so I
might as well throw in my half a cent or so.
   I will be the first to admit that I went to the theater with a
considerable amount of anxiety, most of it caused by the messages
prevalent on this newsgroup  in the week before the movie opened.  "It
sucked" or "It's a dog" seemed to be the general idea of most of these
foreboding reviews.  Well, I'm here to say..."yeah, right!"  Sure, that's
somewhat immature.  But so am I.
   This movie did just about everything _but_ suck.  It sorta had that
"Aliens" thing goin' with just the right amount of humor (mostly from the
planet scenes) to keep it from falling into the abyss of seriousness.  The
performances were great, especially the ranting and raving Stewart.  Don't
think I've ever seen him so ticked off.  The guest cast was good; Cromwell
and Woodard caright up with our pals from the century.  The FX were
amazing; during some scenes (ie. that Borg Queen attachment, the zero-g
walk, the zoomout at the start, etc.) I was just wondering "How'd they do
that? How'd they do that?"  And surprise, surprise!  Frakes can direct!
   Everyone else has done their little comprehensive review of the movie,
but I'm a rebel.  I'm also pretty tired.  So here's a few thinngs that
stick out in my mind:
-The cameos.  All great, though I had to explain to some of my friends
that "that one guy" was Neelix.
-Lt. Hawk(e).  Wow...you really could tell he was GAY, couldn't you???
The way he dressed up in women's clothing and pranced around, that was so
HOMOSEXUAL of him!  Man, that guy was so damn GAY I was distracted every
scene he ws in!
-The Borg are really quick workers now, aren't they?  Just squirt a little
Borg juice into you, and you're toast.
-Ok, I'm not one to get all picky about technical deatils and continuity,
but one thing really bugged me.  How could the Borg have "assimilated
decks 11 through 26" if there's only 24 decks?  That's what Picard tells
Lily!!!  I guess  I should pass it off to his mind being clouded by
revenge...
-That thing jumping out of Picard's face at the beginning.  Cool.
-The Hot Tamales I had were really bad.  Tasted like bananas or
something...ick.
   And I've never reviewed a ST movie before, so I guess it's a manditory
thing to put "the order" (of films I liked).  Ok, sure: 2 and 8 (tie), 6,
7, 4, 3, 1 and 5 (tie).  Now feel free to discount my opinion.
0.0-3.5  What was that all about?  I'm embarrassed to be watching.
3.6-5.0  Yawn.  Could have been much, much better.
5.1-6.5  A few good parts, but mostly a snoozer.
6.6-7.5  Watch it.  You may like it.  Or you may not.
7.6-8.5  Not too shabby.
8.6-9.3  Good movie.  A keeper.
9.4-9.9  The best of the bunch.  These are the ones you can tell your
friends that don't even like Star trek to watch.
10.0!!!  Never happened in my lifetime...but you never know!
http://www.teleport.com/~snorfle/index.html 
