Authors
Mariane Desautels
Number of Reviews
2

Title
Review for Violon rouge, Le (1998)
The Red Violin is the story of a journey across centuries and
continents, with the intrument as traveller, and as the catalyst of the
human lives it strings together. As a movie, it is uneven but entirely
worthwhile. I did not enjoy the segments set in Vienna and Oxford much:
they didn't appeal to me. However, the ones set in China, Italy and
Canada did sustain my interest. Here, production values and direction
are enough, in my opinion, to allow the audience to turn a shortsighted
critical eye over this movie's faults. Bravo to Niv Fichman and François
Girard.
While the violin itself is unarguably the movie's central character, the
matter of protagonists is manifold. Samuel L. Jackson gets top billing,
and I estimate that he also gets the most screen time, but he is a great
actor and he fills his segment with a sense of purpose that perfectly
espouses the narrative. The other protagonists in each segment act in
reaction to circumstances and emotional shocks, the actors' performances
are strong, but the movie's momentum lulls; the violin has no will of
its own, despite its mystique. If it had, the film would have achieved
its desired epic scope. The Red Violin is beautiful, certain to pluck
heartstrings, and moving; but it's also a cripple. Listen to the music:
that's as far as it will go.
It's a cathartic but unchallenging drama. See it. Listen carefully.
__THE RED VIOLIN directed by François Girard stars Samuel L. Jackson
and was co-written by Don McKellar and François Girard, who have often
expressed their eternal gratitude toward their translators__
-this review copyright 1999 by mariane desautels- 
http://pages.infinit.net/amneria/7.html

Title
Review for In Dreams (1999)
In Dreams opens with the flooding of a small town and wonderful music
composed by Elliot Goldenthal. The opening titles blink by, scratched in
a font approximating a child's handwriting, superposed onto the first of
the underwater sequences that likely inspired the film's working title,
'Blue Vision.'
We then meet the protagonist, Claire Cooper, as she is helping her
daughter Rebecca to memorise her line in her kindergarden's production
of a very Disneyan Snow White. The rest of the film has nothing in
common with Disney, and everything to do with Snow White, especially in
the light of the fairy tale's many interpretations. The stage has been
set, and onward goes In Dreams, with its dream-logic and vitality, like
vein blood seen blue through thin skin, and red bloodstains or apple
blossoms.
It is a very beautiful, very flawed, and very memorable nightmare. You
do not need me to tell you anything more about it.
Word to every other critic (Mr Ebert, This Means You): I was left
puzzled by one 'detail' at the end, but I'm going to do something about
it (and verify my educated guess)... *Read the book*
-this review copyright 1999 by mariane desautels-
        http://pages.infinit.net/amneria/7.html
