Authors
snarler@maple.circa.ufl.edu (Drifter...)
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Last Boy Scout, The (1991)
     Oh, so maybe Bruce Willis messed up with HUDSON HAWK.  And maybe
action movies are getting passe or formulaic or whatever....
     The movie had plenty of action, though none of the intense, endless
type in DIE HARD.  A bit more keyed down.  There are certain scenes
that are totally impossible, yes.  But there were good one-liners,
fairly interesting (if stereotypical) characters, and definitely good
acting.
     One thing that impressed me was Bruce Willis's character's
daughter.  A totally atypical young daughter character played very well
by a young female actress that looks very familiar.  While her role is
pretty much passive, the conflicts between her and her father are
sharply defined and rather intense.  More so than between Bruce Willis's
character and his wife.
     Meanwhile, the buddy character, played by the young actor from IN
LIVING COLOR without the hair, is rather amusing but rather passive,
compared to Bruce Willis.  This may be a matter of writing rather than
acting, however.  It is certainly quite a leap from pure comedy to
violent-action-buddy-cop material.
     By far, my favorite character was the nasty young bad guy with the
short blonde hair and misfortune to fall into large flying machines.  He
reminds me significantly of an actor who used to play on the old TOO
CLOSE FOR COMFORT series that had Ted Knight as a father with two
daughters.  I do not know if it is the same actor, but he made an
appealing villain.
     There is no doubt that this movie would fall apart under close
scrutiny, with contradictions and holes and fairly simple plotting.  But
it has good production values and good acting, with nicely done action
scenes and a great kicker of an opening sequence.  I recommend the movie
for action fans who do not want to bother with any deep, meaningful
material or worrying about just *where* all those bullets come from....
