Authors
Jon A. Webb
Number of Reviews
30

Title
Review for Puppet Masters, The (1994)
     THE PUPPET MASTERS is a throw-back to 50s science-fiction films,
which were really more horror or suspense movies, and which rarely got
the science anywhere near right ("the blonde exobiologist straightened
up from the electron microscope.")  This is kind of refreshing, in this
age when so many of us are wondering about what technical innovation
allowed the refitted Enterprise to not only exceed the Warp 5 galactic
speed limit, but actually achieve Warp 14 in the future scenes of "All
Good Things...."  Even more so because this film is based on Heinlein's
novel of the same name, which, like all of Heinlein's writings, seem
exactly suited for this kind of shlocky presentation.
     In the story alien brains invade the earth, and immediately start
turning everyone in the Midwest into mindless zombies, something like
Rush Limbaugh.  The whole thing is sped up quite a bit in the movie,
because of the need to compress the story so it can fit in a feature
film; the result is the addition of tension due to the very rapid
advance of the invasion, but this is almost completely undone by the
swift conclusion of the story.  The addition of the predictable final
fight absolutely does not help.
     What the movie unfortunately misses is Heinlein's study of the
experience of being a mindless zombie, which is the best part of the
book.  It would be hard to portray this in a film; it would be hard to
market a film built around this psychological conflict rather than
fights, sex, etc.  But it would've been nice if they had tried.
     It also misses effective direction.  The blonde exobiologist
peering down into the spaceship should have been a scene fraught with
tension and danger; it had almost no impact. The father-son
relationship was never properly developed prior to the torture scene.
More could have been made of the brief romantic moment. Etc.
     Still, it is nice to see the army out once again to fight against
the aliens; they go at it with the same gusto, but none of the
technical innovations (undoubtedly due to limited budget), that they
brought to our recent successful invasions of Kuwait and Haiti.  (I
wish that the film-makers had been able to work in some stock footage
of the B2 Stealth bomber taking off to fly against the aliens -- it
would have been such a nice reference to the scene in, I believe, a
version of War of the Worlds, where a Fifties "flying wing" does just
that, to no dramatic point.) In fact, the whole movie seems stuck in a
kind of time warp -- when the aliens are shipped to somebody's
apartment, they show up in a wooden crate, packed in excelsior. No
overnight delivery and styrofoam peanuts for these guys!  One almost
expects to see cars with huge fenders and men in fedoras.
     Pointing out the technical flaws in a film like this seems silly,
though, because the film does not take itself so seriously.  There were
plenty of nice bits (but not enough to make a nice film.)  I
particularly liked the encysted aliens, hidden like snakes in
mailboxes, or later like Easter eggs; the arrival of the aliens was
neat, quickly making the point without wasting lots of time and money
on special effects; some of Donald Sutherland's dialogue is pretty
funny.

Title
Review for What's Eating Gilbert Grape (1993)
     WHAT'S EATING GILBERT GRAPE is a sensitive, honest portrayal of
what would be called a "dysfunctional" family: grossly overweight
mother, retarded son, two daughters trying to get past it all, and the
older son, played by Johnny Depp, who is trying to hold everything
together.  The main point of the film is that such a family is not as
dysfunctional as it seems, when you look below the surface.
     The most outstanding things about this film are the performance by
Leonardo di Caprio of the retarded son--had I not seen him in THIS
BOY'S LIFE I would have thought he must be like that, somehow--and
the portrayal of the mother in the screenplay and on the screen by
Darlene Cates.  I never have seen a woman with a physical deformity
shown in as loving, though non-sentimental, a light.  This alone is
reason enough to see the film.
     I thought the film was only good on the whole, though, because of
inconsistent quality in the direction.  The romance between Depp and
Juliette Lewis was never completely convincing for me, and Mary
Steenburgen's character was too cartoonish.
     I liked the meeting between Gilbert and the insurance man, as
being surprisingly real, and thought Crispin Glover stole every scene
he was part of (he plays a too-enthusiastic mortician.)  The resolution
of the conflict in the film is also very believable and compelling.

Title
Review for True Lies (1994)
     TRUE LIES is the kind of movie LAST ACTION HERO tried to be: a
clever, inventive variation on the action movie.  It succeeds where
LAST ACTION HERO failed because here we actually care about the hero:
he's a real person, with a family, even if his adventures as a spy are
hardly believable.
     Arnold Schwarzenegger plays a spy whose cover is that he is a
insipid computer salesman.  Jaime Lee Curtis, who plays his wife,
believes his cover and finds her life dull enough to consider having an
affair with a used car salesman who pretends to be a spy.
     The plot is a little too cute, like LAST ACTION HERO, but it gives
a minimally acceptable context for the action in the film, which is
where the heart of the movie is.  The important thing is that this
context supports all sorts of jokes that normally wouldn't appear in an
action film.  This, and the incredibly good effects (I'm still trying
to figure out how they made it appear that they blew up part of that
bridge--it couldn't be real, could it?) make this a highly
entertaining film, not only for fans of Arnold Schwarzenegger.
     N.B. To appreciate this film you have to accept the usual conceit
of action films, which is that of the lone good man battling against
evil all around him.  In other reviews I've seen, plainly the reviewer
didn't do this.  If you can't handle stereotypes in the context of an
action film, you won't appreciate this film; you'll find it racist (all
the bad guys are Arab terrorists) and brutal (people die routinely;
women are abused).  Schwarzenegger and Curtis turn in the solid
performances you'd expect of them from their previous work.  Tom Arnold,
who plays Schwarzenegger's side-kick, is a real surprise; he's fresh,
funny, and a good part of the reason the film is so entertaining.  He's
just the right choice for this role, after which he should be taken
seriously as a comic actor.  For example, he'd be a great choice to take
over O.J.'s part in the "Naked Gun" series.
     The direction (by James Cameron) is tight and makes good use of
rapidly improving effects technology.  The script is over-written, with
a little more intellectual appeal than is really necessary.
Schwarzenegger and Curtis are in fine form.  All in all, a fine
effort.

Title
Review for River Wild, The (1994)
     THE RIVER WILD has Meryl Streep as a rower and former river guide
with a family.  She meets up with trouble on a white water rafting trip
with her family, and deals with it.
     It is clear that Meryl Streep chose this film because of the
opportunity to portray a strong female in a commercial context, and her
acting adds immeasurably to the quality of the product.  Watching her,
I felt I learned something about women generally; I have never felt
this way before. Streep takes this fairly obvious, somewhat creaky
vehicle with echoes of THE INCREDIBLE JOURNEY, DELIVERANCE, etc.  and
turns it into a commentary on the strength of a woman. As my wife said
on leaving the theater: "I feel incredibly empowered--but also totally
inadequate."
     She is supported in this by a fine cast, particularly the big
names--David Strathairn as her relatively weak husband, and Kevin Bacon
as the macho stranger.  Both of them deliver good performances, but
they are out-acted by Streep, as she has consistently out-acted every
leading man in her distinguished career.  Here her strength as an
actress works better than it ever has before, since she now has her
experience to draw on and an appropriately strong character to
portray.
     Here's to Meryl Streep, whose career is finally back on track!
Here's to the director, who was intelligent enough to allow her to
carry the weight of the movie, and to allow the tension and suspense
come from her brilliant style!
     The script is weak--in lesser hands, this would be strictly
made-for-TV fare--and the effects do not work very well; I honestly
never felt that they were that much in danger on the river, despite
numerous scenes that must have been hard to film, showing them
apparently bouncing around in some pretty tough water.
     But this hardly matters in the face of such a richly moving
portrayal. It is almost enough to make one wish that Streep were a man,
so that she would get the recognition she deserves, as the finest
cinematic actor that ever lived, and the corresponding emolument,
rather than merely as the finest actress, and the pay of an upper-end
actress with a young body. But it is better for us, if not for her, as
it is; we will continue to learn from this great woman as she continues
to turn her experience into art.

Title
Review for Forrest Gump (1994)
     FORREST GUMP is a highly entertaining film, though one expects
more of a message from it.  Tom Hanks turns in a great performance as a
mentally limited Southerner, who has a hand in practically every
significant cultural event from 1960-1985.
     Gump spends his life being a good person and unwittingly following
the Zen precept of "Eat when you're hungry; sleep when you're tired"
while waiting longingly for the love of a woman he first meets on the
bus on his way to his first day of school.  This takes him very far, to
the White House multiple times, for example, through a number of
remarkable accidents.  Through remarkable special effects technology we
see him meet Presidents, appear on the Dick Cavett show, and so on.
     The movie is as light as a feather, to which it makes reference.
It does not try to draw any lesson from Gump's experience, or really
from our own vast cultural changes in the last generation.  Instead, it
merely affirms the Horatio Alger myth that a good heart and hard work
will take you to the top, and moves on.  This is not a great failing.
     Tom Hanks's performance is perfectly fine.  He's gone a little
further here than in previous roles; he has a peculiar way of talking
(each syllable carefully enunciated, with a Southern accent) to
master.  Perhaps Hanks's somewhat reserved performance keeps this movie
from conveying a more rich message; he is a spectator at the
significant events  he participates in, never getting emotionally
involved; even in his lifelong romance he seems to hold back a little.
     The strongest thing about this film is the script; a remarkable
number of memorable cultural events are changed into things that
happened to Gump, just as the invention of several different
cylindrical plastic objects played a major role in THE HUDSUCKER
PROXY.
     Gary Sinise puts in an acceptable turn as Gump's
destined-for-martyrdom Lieutenant in the Vietnam War.  But he doesn't
submerge himself in the role the way Hanks does.  The use of special
effects technology in his appearance is as remarkable as it is
convincing.

Title
Review for Pulp Fiction (1994)
     PULP FICTION is a fun film with rich philosophical undertones.
Much has been made of its violence, but here the violence plays only a
secondary role (unlike, say, NATURAL BORN KILLERS.)  Only a blue-nose
could find this film anything but funny.
     I am reminded of a play which I know only from the title and a
very brief description: ROSENCRANTZ AND GUILDENSTERN ARE DEAD.  This
takes the minor characters from HAMLET and makes them the central
figures; it turns out they have a lot of interesting things to say.
     The Rosencrantz and Guildenstern characters here are two mob hit
men played by John Travolta and Samuel L. Jackson.  They work their way
through murders, discussing philosophy and religion.  Travolta's
character has a remarkable knack for pursuing an argument to its
logical conclusion, like a philosophy professor; Jackson's character,
however, comes closer to the real point of the movie.
     The point of the movie is the manipulation of these people's lives
by God.  Some are miraculously saved; others are killed through
arbitrary accidents.  Characters meet each other accidentally, leading
to incredible confrontations; they are momentarily inattentive and
die.  In the face of these manipulations some, through strong
character, achieve control over these events and end up going
toe-to-toe with God in influencing the story.
     The real god in this movie is the playwright and director, Quentin
Tarentino, of course.  He shows up in a cute vignette as the wimpy
put-upon friend of Jackson's character.
     There are a number of good performances here.  The most amazing is
that of John Travolta, who has perhaps never been given proper credit
for his earlier roles, where he may have been acting much more than
people realized.  Certainly his character here is complex and deeply
felt.
     Samuel L. Jackson establishes himself here as being able to play a
straight, solid, serious character, which must help him in the future.
After the madness of JUNGLE FEVER and this, he's shown he can play
quite a range of types with great force.
     As always I'm amazed by Bruce Willis's appeal.  He plays the same
character here as always--strong, wise-cracking, etc.--good as ever
if you like him. (Though I don't; I'm always reminded of the "Saturday
Night Live" skit where the truth comes out--he made a deal with the
devil.)
     Uma Thurman plays a role that seems to have been written for
Winona Ryder.  Certainly she looks quite a bit like her, and her
character is more Ryder-esque than Thurman-esque.  She's not bad at it,
but I don't think she added a lot to the role.
     Maria de Medeiros has a sweet and memorable role as Bruce Willis's
girlfriend.  She's quite appealing, and I look forward to seeing her
expand on this character in the future.
     Harvey Keitel plays a somewhat expanded version of his character
from POINT OF NO RETURN.  Here he talks more and has more class (he's
wearing a tux at 8:30 in the morning.)  Nice, but nothing new.
     Eric Stoltz is great as the drug dealer--his panic, etc., is great
comedy.
     Roseanne Arquette does a brief turn as his wife; the glee that
crosses her face in the piercing scene is worth a good fraction of the
price of admission.
     I really liked Christopher Walken's scene.  It's nothing he hasn't
done before, but the story is perfectly told, and the choice of Walken
is just perfect.
     Amanda Plummer goes a little farther into madness this time.  I
see her as getting increasingly typecast, and I feel sorry for her
since I think she has much greater range than she's being given a
chance to exhibit,

Title
Review for Natural Born Killers (1994)
     NATURAL BORN KILLERS is being billed as the most violent thing
you've ever seen, the most shocking of the Oliver Stone films, etc.,
but I didn't find it so.  Perhaps I'm just becoming jaded, but I found
Stone's editing technique, in which no shot is more than about two
seconds long, to be distancing.  I walked out of PLATOON in the village
scene; it seemed to me that Stone was showing violence just for its
sensational effect.  Here, perhaps, he is trying to do the same thing
but he has over-edited the film, with the result that one sees it as a
movie rather than the commentary on our culture that it evidently tries
to be.
     Stone's films take a controversial stand, which helps marketing.
Thus, JFK asserted a particularly unlikely version of the Kennedy
assassination myth, and Stone extended it in a kind of performance art,
going on talk shows to claim he really believed it.  BORN ON THE
FOURTH OF JULY turned a bitter Vietnam vet's tragic story into a
condemnation of the Veteran's administration, US policy in Vietnam,
etc.  NATURAL BORN KILLERS claims that we have been so desensitized by
television that we would accept truly evil people as national heroes.
     Woody Harrelson is quite good as the murdering duo.  I liked
Harrelson particularly, as he drawls and slouches his way through the
part.  He seems deeply relaxed and comfortable with his character.
     Against this, Juliette Lewis seems weak, except in a few scenes
where her anger explodes; she's great in the fight scenes, and while
dancing.  But I did not think she carried the weight of her role very
well; I still can't decide if she was meant to be a moral zero into
which Harrelson's character poured his evil, or the catalyst for his
transformation.
     The scenes with Rodney Dangerfield are probably the best of the
film, and make its point most clearly.  In fact, I think Dangerfield
would have destroyed his career with this part, if he had done it
earlier.  (Dangerfield's character is just too close to his comic
personality for comfort.) It is a parody of a TV show, with laugh
track, etc., but Dangerfield plays a sickeningly evil father, abusing
Lewis's character and the rest of his family.
     There's a little too much (any is too much) of the Oliver Stone
trademark American Indian mysticism here, as there was in THE DOORS.
     Robert Downey, Jr. is great as tabloid TV reporter with the voice
of Robin Leach (I wonder if they made a deal with Leach, or is he
suing?) who makes the murderers into stars.
     This film forms a natural end (hopefully) to Stone's indictment of
American culture.  It is an attack on television style
sensationalization of murderers, etc., which in itself extends that
sensationalization.  I don't think Stone could go much farther with
this point; like overbeaten egg whites this film falls flat.  He'll
have to think of something original to do next.

Title
Review for When a Man Loves a Woman (1994)
     "When a Man Loves a Woman" has serious flaws, but since it is 
topical, well-written, and has a popular, appealing lead actress, it 
will probably be successful.
     Meg Ryan plays an alcoholic mother who hits bottom, and enters a 
recovery program. Andy Garcia is the somewhat distant husband. When 
Ryan stops drinking, the reason why she was drinking becomes apparent, 
and Garcia finds he must change.
     The writing in the film is first-rate, and the direction is not 
bad either.
     It is interesting to note that Al Franken, the Saturday Night 
live creator of Stuart Smalley, the twelve-step program addict, was a 
co-writer. Clearly he has a lot of respect for the programs that he 
satirizes. They are seen as a god-send here.
     My main problem with this film is in the acting of Meg Ryan and 
Andy Garcia. Ryan does not give a convincing portrayal of an 
alcoholic. She seems fun and high on alcohol, and certainly 
overwhelmed by it, but she never shows any of the kind of emotional 
range needed to convey the experience of this woman.  She drinks a lot 
for some reason; Ryan is given lines to speak that are supposed to 
explain why to us; but nothing in her behavior connects us to her 
experience. She also never shows any of the physical changes 
alcoholics commonly experience -- weight gain, complexion changes, 
bloating, etc.
     Ryan's acting is deficient, but Garcia's seems almost totally 
absent.  He speaks every line in the same tone, as he has in other 
films.  He's about as well cast here as he possibly could be, since 
he's supposed to be emotionally distant and controlling.  But the 
movie would have been much better if an actor with more depth -- say, 
Nick Nolte -- had gotten the role.
     If you know someone who is an alcoholic or read the literature 
you will recognize many experiences in this film. The refusal to hear 
a call for help when asking for an explanation, the blaming of others 
for one's own deficiencies, the grown-up behavior from children, all 
are very well written and directed.  If only the actors had been up to 
conveying some of the experience rather than simply providing pretty 
faces for the advertising, this could have been a great film, rather 
than merely a mildly entertaining experience.
     One more odd thing: I was never able to understand why the theme 
from "Cats" plays such an important role here.  If you have an 
explanation, please let me know.

Title
Review for In the Mouth of Madness (1995)
John Carpenter's "In the Mouth of Madness"
Directed by John Carpenter
Written by Michael De Luca
With Sam Neill, Julie Carmen, Jurgen Porchnow, Charlton Heston
     IN THE MOUTH OF MADNESS is one of those story-within-a-story
movies, like THE LAST ACTION HERO and the last Freddie film.  Given the
only occasional success of these films, one wonders why they keep
getting made; perhaps writers like the fun of writing, effectively,
about themselves.
     The problem with this kind of movie is that it is very hard to
motivate belief in the characters, because they are portrayed as being
nothing more than a fiction.  In the absence of belief there is no
reason to care about what happens to them and hence no reason to care
about the film.  The result, in spite of whatever technical skill the
director shows for horror films, is that the film falls flat.
     Another problem with the film is John Carpenter's failure to make
any of his characters outside the central one three-dimensional.  Sam
Neill is the complete character here, and he is right up until the end,
when he finally succumbs to the arbitrary manipulations of the script.
     Julie Carmen is okay through about half the film, when she starts
acting odd.  I suppose this is supposed to be the result of the book
taking her over, or something like that, but it comes across as dull
and strange.  Charlton Heston and Jurgen Porchnow have small,
inconsequential parts.
     I did like quite a bit of the film, though.  John Carpenter is a
real expert at making you jump; he excels at the technical aspects of
horror film direction.  And there's some oddness early on, when the Sam
Neill character comes on to the Julie Carmen character and she turns
him down.  It's just a little creepy and unmotivated and you get the
feeling something odd is going on, but you don't know what.  I don't
think that Carpenter intended the scene to play this way but it is
effective in advancing the theme of the film nevertheless.
     The main technical problem underlying all of this is that making a
film where you would actually care about the characters and plot would
require too much background.  You would have to be familiar with
"Sutter Cain"'s novels, know about the plots the characters in the film
think they're caught in, etc.  This is far too much background for a
feature-length film.
     I have, however, a solution.  It would be for the filmmakers to
drop the shallow and perhaps legally actionable (assuming King wasn't
involved in this movie; somebody King did the production, so maybe I'm
wrong) pretense that they're talking about someone other than Stephen
King when they refer to the best-selling author of all these horror
books and successful movies.  Instead, they should've made a film where
Stephen King really is the author and the town Sam Neill and Julie
Carmen end up in is Castle Rock (not "Hobbe's End", which is a
reference to "Crouch End," a Stephen King short story); let the dog the
children are chasing be Cujo, and the children themselves those of the
corn.  Then those of us who follow Stephen King's prolific career would
have familiar characters to care about and the fun of finding
references to his novels and other films; the rest of the audience
would at least have a few points of reference.  It could have been a
great, fun film instead of this technically good but in the end
disappointing piece.

Title
Review for Even Cowgirls Get the Blues (1993)
     I feel that I liked "Even Cowgirls Get the Blues" more than it 
deserved. There is something about this film that is appealing, even 
though the writing is somewhat childish and the direction wooden.
     Uma Thurman plays Sissy, the woman with incredible thumbs, who is 
born to hitchhike,  She meets up with Bonanza Jellybean, played by Rain 
Phoenix (the latest of that strangely named, distinguished acting family) 
who leads the cowgirls on a Western dude ranch.
     I never read "Cowgirls," so I don't know how true this is to the 
book.  It seems to me that the story is a little dated now, when the shoe 
is on the other foot with regard to environmental issues, women's rights, 
and gay rights.
     But it is also clear that this story has meaning for a lot of 
people, quite a few of whom are in this film.  The cast list reads like 
something from Altman: Lorraine Bracco plays the whip-carrying peyote-
inspired cowgirl leader; John Hurt plays The Countess; Keanu Reeves the 
Native American object of Sissy's desire; Angie Dickinson runs the dude 
ranch; Sean Young and Crispin Glover are members of an Andy Warholesque 
party circle; and so on.  Its fun watching these actors stretch 
themselves in these odd roles.
     Gus van Sant has every actor speak his or her lines as if they were 
reading the script for the first time. This awkward effect is probably 
deliberate, as he also used it in "My Own Private Idaho." I don't know 
why he does this; perhaps it mutes the intensity of this strange material 
a little and keeps it from seeming ridiculous. It is probably what saves 
such outrageous scenes as the one where the cowgirls confront the 
Countess (which I found hilarious) and the one where Sissy does the 
commercial.
     I suppose it is the enthusiasm of the actors for the story, and the 
story itself, that made the film appealing to me. Lorraine Bracco, with 
her wild stare and whip seems to be truly enjoying herself, as does Sean 
Young with her teased hair. Buck Henry's turn as a crazed doctor seems 
heartfelt. Every one of these actors seems to genuinely want to be in 
this movie, disconnected and odd though it is.
     This is not a particularly insightful film, like "Drugstore Cowboy;" 
it does not even have very good direction. It is not a tribute to the 
book, so far as I can tell. It is a record of people who really want to 
work together with this material, and who are enjoying themselves doing 
it, while being held sightly in check by a talented artist who should be 
working with better material than this.

Title
Review for Schindler's List (1993)
     SCHINDLER'S LIST is the true story of Oskar Schindler, a German
(from Czechoslovakia) businessman who started a enamelware business
using Jewish labor duing the Holocaust.  He ended up saving the lives
of 1100 Jews who worked in his company.
     This is a remarkable film, which justifiably takes itself very
seriously.  It is Stephen Spielberg's most artistically solid film, and
arguably the best non-documentary film on the Holocaust.  Spielberg
largely stays away from the cute, artsy touches that have made his
films seem a little too commercialized (though I could've done without
the games he played using a touch of color here and there in this black
and white film; it made me think of the technology used to make the
film.)  It could well be that he will finally win Best Director for this
movie.
     The main point of the film is psychological: how it can be the
case that simply keeping one's humanity, and the recognition of it in
others, can be as defiant, brave, and ultimately worthwhile an act as
anything else.  Schindler did what he did not because he was a saint,
but because he refused to, or perhaps could not, shut his eyes to what
was going on around him; he saw everyone, both Nazis and Jews, as
people, and responded to them in that way.
     Schindler is contrasted in the film with the concentration camp
commander, who I thought was portrayed very well (though I don't recall
the actor's name.)  The commander sees the Jews as objects, less than
animals, and loses his sanity in the course of the film.
     The direction keeps the subject of the film a little remote, which
is probably necessary to avoid annoying sensationalism with this
subject.  It is not until the final scene that the reality of the film
strikes home, and then it hits very hard.
     Only Liam Neeson, as Schindler, Ben Kingsley, as Itzhak Stern (the
accountant who ran Schindler's factory), and the concentration camp
commander have a strong personal presence in the film.  The rest of the
characters are merely puppets being pushed around, except in a few
scenes.  I claim that this typical deficiency of Spielberg works for
him in this film; what is happening to the Jews, and what the Nazis are
doing, is simply too horrible for us to accept if it was portrayed in a
way that would involve us personally, as, say, Oliver Stone might.

Title
Review for Intersection (1994)
     Sometimes it's possible to imagine the "pitch" for a movie (as was
depicted in THE PLAYER) after seeing it.  But with INTERSECTION I
can only imagine the first half. "Okay, you've got Richard Gere, Lolita
Davidovich, and Sharon Stone.  Gere can't decide between them."  "All
right, what happens?"  "Uh...."
     Basically, there's no plot in this film.  Gere can't decide
between Stone and Davidovich (I guess this is the kind of choice we're
all expected to be able to sympathize with) and, well....
     Coupled to this is the problem that Gere seems (as usual) unable
to act, and Davidovich seems poorly directed.  Stone actually
demonstrates her serious aspirations by actually portraying a
character, and Martin Landau has a scene or two in which he
demonstrates that his career revival started by CRIMES AND
MISDEMEANORS was justified.  But that's about it.
     The movie is filmed in the Pacific Northwest, in and around
Vancouver, and the scenery looks great.  Gere also looks good, though
his tan doesn't quite fit in with the idea that he's a hardworking
architect in that rainy region.  Perhaps he has a home tanning booth.
     The girl who portrays Gere's daughter is quite appealing.  I don't
know what it is, but she really seems to steal scenes.  Of course,
that's not saying a great deal, considering she's stealing them from
Gere, but she exhibits a great deal more talent than one would expect
from someone of her age in as limp a film as this.  Perhaps she got
some pointers from Stone.
     If you like to see Gere, Stone, and Davidovich, you could look
through old "Vanity Fair"s, or you could go see this film.  Your choice.
One word of warning: don't go if you're looking for a peek or two under
Sharon Stone's garments, because she stays pretty much covered up
here.  She's supposed to be sexually repressed.  Davidovich presents
the lusty contrast.  As I say, Gere has a hard time making up his
mind.

Title
Review for Clear and Present Danger (1994)
     CLEAR AND PRESENT DANGER returns Harrison Ford to the screen as
Jack Ryan (PATRIOT GAMES), now taking over as the Deputy Director for
Intelligence of the CIA from James Earl Jones.  Unfortunately for him,
the President of the United States, played by Donald Moffat, is once
again planning an illegal war, and Ryan is supposed to be the fall
guy.
     This is a conventional spy-thriller, as you'd expect.  I found it
a little bit boring towards the end.  Somehow this kind of action film
doesn't seem to me to be quite suitable for Ford, though he's played
them often enough.  I'm thinking of THE FUGITIVE, where Ford and the
bad guy, both middle-aged, spend fifteen minutes or so running around
bashing each other.  Something very much like that happens again here.
It's like watching those B-grade sci-fi flicks of the Fifties, made
with plastic-model dinosaurs, which always seem to move with jerky
slowness, even when they're trying to bite each other's arms off.
     The thing I liked best about this film is Anne Archer, who plays
Ryan's wife in a small role.  She's aging, beautifully.  There are not
many roles for middle-aged women anywhere; they get discarded once they
can no longer play someone in their twenties, regardless of how
talented they are (Meryl Streep), as stewardesses used to be.  I'm
happy Anne Archer, at least has found a part she to which she can bring
her elegant beauty for at least a few more years.
     Willem Dafoe puts in a nice turn as the ambiguously evil
free-lance CIA operative who runs the war.  But I would've preferred
Chuck Norris in this role.  After all, we know Dafoe can play this kind
of part, can Norris?  He would've fit the action-hero scenes better,
too.
     Harrison Ford doesn't get to use his trademark confused-intensity
look here much.  He says it himself, "I hate this job."  He's supposed
to be much more of a direct-action type here than he was, say, in
PATRIOT GAMES, where his family was at risk.  His only conflict is over
loyalty to the President, which is oddly downplayed in Philip Royce's
direction (given that its the only source of dramatic conflict.)  As a
result, he just doesn't have that much to be confused about.  Pity.
     The script is about average for this kind of film.  I've given up
expecting great attention to detail; it just doesn't seem to be an
issue anymore.  For example, when Ryan buys something expensive, you'd
think that no one in the world has ever gone to a South American
country pretending to be associated with the CIA and trying to get
something for nothing, or South Americans are unbelievably stupid.  Or
the nonsense about breaking into computers, or a scene which reminded
me of the joke about a blackmailer handing his intended victim an
incriminating photograph: "Be careful, that's the only copy I've got."
     Overall, it's an entertaining way to spend a couple of hours, but
not a terribly entertaining way.  It's not as good as TRUE LIES, though
you may find yourself put off by TRUE LIES tongue-in-cheek approach to
spy thrillers (though I didn't.)  This is meat-and-potatoes fare,
served up a little too cold.

Title
Review for Six Degrees of Separation (1993)
     The home of a wealthy, culturally sophisticated New York couple is
invaded by a man who says he is Sidney Poitier's son.  They are charmed
by him, their lives entwine with his, and the continuing series of
incidents become dinner party fodder that ultimately changes their
lives.
     This film has two very strong performances, and several more than
adequate ones.  Stockard Channing is great as the rich wife.  She's
witty and interesting and her performance leaves you wanting to know
more about her.
     Will Smith is remarkably impressive as the young man who claims to
be Poitier's son.  His work here is especially impressive because his
most prominent past work was on a television series.  He manages to
stay right on the edge of either portraying a somewhat theatrical but
real person, or a remarkably good pretender -- you can't be sure.
     The direction (by Frank Schepisi) is what carries the film.  Not
all the performances are as great as Stockard's and Smith's, but they
are carefully entwined by someone who has obviously spent a long time
observing people of this class, and who knows exactly how to portray
them, their children, and their lives.
     Performance by Donald Sutherland and Anthony Michael Hall (nice to
see he's grown up now) are more than adequate.  Sutherland has always
annoyed me a little, with his fakery and choice of roles.  Here he is
less annoying than usual, because his air of insincerity fits the role
so well.  Hall is quite compelling as an intense gay MIT undergrad.  I
think this role will finally revive his career.
     The central point of this film is somewhat similar to that in
Kasdan's GRAND CANYON--something about the interconnectedness of all
humanity ("Six Degrees of Separation" refers to the six mutual
acquaintances that one study has said relate any two people in the
world), how small incidents can change lives, and how love can triumph
over all.  It's an interesting theme, hopeful without being
sentimental.  It's intriguing to me that these films are coming out
now, at the beginning of a new political era; are moviemakers
responding to that, or am I simply noticing it more?

Title
Review for Vanya on 42nd Street (1994)
     VANYA ON 42ND STREET is David Mamet's adaptation of Chekhov's
"Uncle Vanya," as directed by Louis Malle.  The adaptation seems
faithful so far as I can tell (I've never seen the play or read it, but
it sounds authentic) and shows great respect for the conventions of the
theater as well as great love for actors.  Still, as much as I wanted
to like this film, I found it dull and flat, except for a few scenes
where the actors and Chekhov's material break through and I felt I was
really learning something about humanity.
     The story is a play within a play; Andre Gregory is the director
of a production of "Uncle Vanya," currently in rehearsal in an old
rundown theater.  The decrepit theater helps create the right tone for
the story, which takes place in a now-neglected farmhouse on a Russian
estate.
     The story opens with Wallace Shawn, who plays Uncle Vanya, eating
a knish outside the theater, waiting for the others.  He complains of
being tired and lays down to take a nap on a convenient bench on the
stage; at that moment, the casual conversation between two actors
begins to change, and you realize that the play has begun; when Shawn
wakes up, he is Uncle Vanya.  This is a neat, elegant transition that
is quite in tune with the overall tone of the film, which tries in a
gentle way to bring us into the mood of Chekhov's play.
     Another thing I liked about the film were Julianne Moore's
performance as Yelena; her striking beauty is the main subject of the
play, and she has a complicated relationship with Uncle Vanya--he is
ardently pursuing her, as his one last hope at achieving transcendent
joy; she finds him disgusting but at the same time she is grateful for
his jokes and friendship as she feels herself wasting away.
     I was quite struck by the performance of the woman who plays
Sonya, Uncle Vanya's niece.  She is called upon to portray a plain
woman who is painfully conscious of how inferior she is as an object of
desire to Yelena, and she conveys this very well.  As an actress she is
of course beautiful but you can see how she thinks she is not beautiful
enough to be anything more than "plain"; you can see how this belief in
itself renders her plain and makes her unsuccessful in her own bid to
get out of the trap she finds herself in.
     In spite of all these good points, I found the film hard to take.
It is simply too much of a play to work well in the less fluid and
interactive medium of film.  Several times I found myself bored.  I
feel educated, and eager to see good stage productions of Chekhov; but
I don't feel the uplifting sense of having seen something really first
rate that I sometimes get from film.

Title
Review for Last Seduction, The (1994) (TV)
     THE LAST SEDUCTION is a clever film, one of those stories where
you know not quite everything but think you do, so that you eagerly
follow the plot down some false paths and discover to your delight that
things didn't turn out that way at all--something like, say, DEATHTRAP
but not quite so deceptive.
     Linda Fiorentino plays a woman whose self-possessed, bitchy
behavior must be seen to be believed--and it's a lot of fun to watch.
Fiorentino creates a memorable character here, who I hope to see again
(ANOTHER SEDUCTION, maybe?) The movie opens with her driving the men in
a telephone boiler room almost crazy in pushing them to sell fraudulent
commemorative coins; her behavior here sets the tone for the rest of
the film, though she is really restraining herself in this scene, if
you can believe it.
     The direction, by John Dahl, is quite clever, leading from one
point of trickery by Fiorentino's character to another, and touching
now and then on the earnest stupidity of her husband (played by Bill
Pullman, who has never managed to hold on to a woman in any film he's
been in, so far as I can recall. He's a little less Mr. Nice Guy here,
but he's still not nearly a match for Fiorentino's character.  One gets
the impression she married him just because he was easy to manipulate.)
     Peter Berg plays the object of the seduction. He's a nice straight
country kid, more or less the same character he played in THE ACCUSED.
It's an acceptable performance, but it would've been nice if he'd been
able to throw in something extra given the strength of Fiorentino's
character.  I would've liked to see a moment of awareness that maybe
she was just leading him on, then "Naww...."
     I liked Linda Fiorentino's performance very much.  She reminded me
of Michelle Forbes in her great parts in "Star Trek: The Next
Generation" and KALIFORNIA, though I understand that Fiorentino has a
sort of trademark on this kind of role. Forbes would have been
interesting in this part, too--her physical strength would have
contrasted better, I think, in the places where the character has to
pretend to be shy and sexually repressed.
     I thought the caricature of small-town life a little broad
(everyone says hello, etc.) but liked the bit about black men.
     One thing I really liked about the film is how the strength of
Firentino's character is so impressive that you end up rooting for her
in the end--in spite of her being the embodiment of evil.  It's great
when an actress can turn things around like that.

Title
Review for Brady Bunch Movie, The (1995)
     THE BRADY BUNCH operates, fairly successfully, on three levels: as
a parody of the original, as a nostalgic look back at it, and as a
re-creation.  My seven-year old daughter had no problem accepting it as
a feature length version of the sitcom, since all the in-jokes went
right over her head.  Teenagers and older people in the audience caught
the many jokes about homosexuality, transvestites, crime, etc. as well
as the somewhat more adept jokes about quirks in the original
characterizations, e.g., Jan's odd way of flinging her ponytail back and
forth, Marcia's obsession with combing her hair, the father's lectures,
etc.; and everyone who longed for the original show had fun seeing
cameos by the original actors, seeing Marcia's 70s perfection
re-created, etc.
     The premise of the movie is to take the Brady Bunch and transplant
them intact into the 90s, with them still holding the same values,
using the same language, wearing the same style clothing, etc.  They
are of course assaulted by the greed and crime endemic in this era, but
manage to overcome it in true Brady fashion, by sticking together and
displaying that Brady spirit.  The film carefully adheres to the
one-dimensional production values of the original.
     I liked the young actress portraying Jan Brady, who had the only
role with any dramatic conflict. She has the mannerisms (at least as 
I've seen them parodied elsewhere--I can't remember them from the show,
not being much of a fan) down well, and also brings a kind of
additional, much welcome oddness to her interaction with her interior
monologue.
     You should only go to see this film as a harmless afternoon's
entertainment for children, or if you were or are a fan of the
original.  The in-jokes are exactly the sort you probably have already
come up with if you watch the show.  I won't spoil the fun by
mentioning any of them, though this leaves little else to review.
     The biggest success in this film is its not quite over the top
parody of the Bradys.  I got the impression that I was watching a movie
any Brady-watching college sophomore could have contributed a joke or
two to, but somehow the film almost never broke down into complete
silliness, as these films often do.  Well, not quite--there's one scene
where the bad guy explicitly brings forth all the odd things about the
Bradys--but at least the Bradys aren't around then, to hear their
lifestyle impugned.
     There is some superficial commentary on late 60s/early 70s
pseudo-pop culture.  The Monkees play a fairly prominent role, and
there is a clever very brief reference to the Partridge Family.  The
segue into the title sequence is also cute.
     For a feature-length recreation of a superficial, artistically
weightless sitcom, this film is remarkably successful.

Title
Review for Paper, The (1994)
     In THE PAPER Michael Keaton is the assistant managing editor of a
tabloid newspaper in New York City.  He relentlessly pursues truth in
the face of opposition from his wife (Marisa Tomei), who is 8-1/2
months pregnant and doesn't want him to work so hard, and the managing
editor (Glenn Close) who wants to maintain control over the paper and
doesn't like being shown up.  Naturally, all this leads to a huge
dust-up over Truth.  Does Keaton win?  You'll have to see the film (or
practically any other film based on the legend of the Fisher King) to
find out.
     The depiction of life in a newspaper room is very realistic and
compelling.  It has just about the right amount of tension and disorder
that you'd expect, with conflicting personalities playing a major
role.  This is the most entertaining part of the film.
     On the downside, there is an artificial juxtaposition of three or
four subplots leading up to the big tension-filled climax of the film.
It's just not credible that so many things would happen all at once.
Since the film aims for accuracy, this silly device diminishes the
whole thing.
     Michael Keaton is very good, if familiar.  All this Type A
frenetic wise cracking is beginning to wear a little thin.  I would
like to see him stretch himself a little (though I suppose BATMAN
qualifies.)  Marisa Tomei plays her role successfully, but she should
be trying something more demanding.  After her Oscar last year she
should be taking the lead in a film that does not require her to act
like a up-from-lower class New Yorker, or she is going to get type
cast.
     I found Glenn Close's performance to be the most satisfying of the
major characters.  She is right on the edge, heading over the hill,
threatened by Keaton, a cold and distant woman who has no one to fall
back on when things start to go wrong.  The part is a little too small
to earn her an Oscar nomination, but she is clearly an actress at the
peak of her abilities.
     Robert Duvall is very nice as the editor of the paper.  I really
enjoy watching him play these gentle fatherly roles.  I don't think the
part is well-written--the interaction with his daughter seems very
cliche--but he's still fun to watch.
     Randy Quaid has a nice small role, and Spalding Gray has fun as
the guy at the New York Times who tries to hire Keaton away from his
tabloid.  It's always nice to see Mr. Gray in a movie, and to think
about his working this experience into one of his monologues.

Title
Review for Legends of the Fall (1994)
     Because I am married, sometimes I have to see films that I'm pretty
sure I'm not going to like.  Such is the case with LEGENDS OF THE
FALL, which seeks to cash in on Brad Pitt's status as the new
"murderously handsome" young male star.  But at least I get to write
this review.
     The story is, as I think the New Yorker put it, a kind of Monty
Python version of "Bonanza."  A father (played by Anthony Hopkins),
with a commendably strong sense of justice and minority rights,
especially in those days, has three sons, at least one of whom (Brad
Pitt) looks adopted, or perhaps the secret cause of the estrangement
between husband and wife.  They live on a range at the base of some
really impressive mountains that I think we don't get to see enough of
(given the senselessness of the rest of the movie.)
     One of the sons (played by Aidan Quinn) brings home a beautiful
fiancee, played by Julia Ormond, and she stays on to totally wreck the
somewhat peaceful if odd family life formerly led.  She falls in love
with the wrong son, naturally the one played by Brad Pitt, hence his
name, Tristan.
     The movie is one of those epic melodramas, extending over a
generation or more, telling the story of this tempestuous, strangely
motivated, family.  In a way it evokes another extended story, Proust's
A LA RECHERCHE DU TEMPS PERDU, in that a normally inanimate property of
the story takes on a significant role--in Proust's case time, here Brad
Pitt's hair.  Watching it grow and with the marked addition of facial
hair at certain critical moments of the story gives one a sense of
progress in the film towards its inevitable conclusion: grayness.
     There are a lot of really odd things in this film.  For example,
theres a significant scene early on in the film where the sheriff and
some other scurrilous characters, justice being on the side of the
rebel in this film, come riding up to look for a man named Lloyd
Cutler.  Tony Hopkins and someone else say he's not here, and we never
hear from him again (I think he is the man with the Native American
wife, but what he did is never brought up again.)  One gets the feeling
that at some stage in the progress of the film from screenplay to
projection quite a bit of the film was mysteriously lost.
     I really liked Anthony Hopkins portrayal later in the film, after
the stroke.  It is so over the top, and Hopkins such a good actor, that
he must have been hamming it up for the delight of the crew.
     Brad Pitt's near silence and impressive hair makes one think of
Fabio: in fact, I think that with a few rewrites Fabio could have done
the role nearly as well, without requiring months' delay in the
production schedule for hair growth, and having better chest
development besides.
     In summary, go if you have to, but if you do go look for those
little bits of strangeness that make this film bearable, and treasure
them.

Title
Review for Love Affair (1994)
     LOVE AFFAIR is an example of a film actually improved by its
marketing.  The film is a remake of the classic tear-jerker AN AFFAIR
TO REMEMBER, which played so prominent a role in SLEEPLESS IN SEATTLE
(which was, in a way, another remake.)  The plot has not aged well;
the roles of women and men (not to mention the position of the
differently-abled) have changed enough in forty years so that the pride
that drives the final scene doesn't make much sense anymore.
     So the film is badly flawed, but by playing up the movie's
relation to their real-life love affair and marriage Warren Beatty and
Annette Bening have improved it quite a bit. One is supposed to
understand from this film the deep affection Beatty felt for Bening,
which led him to finally settle down with her.  Beatty's acting range
is so limited that I did not think this came across, but the mere
casting of Bening in this role, when she is somewhat past her prime
(appropriately, given the context, but strikingly against tradition for
Hollywood) makes one understand his feelings for her much more than his
unchanging expression ever could.
     There are really only three or four significant characters n the
film:  Beatty, Bening, Katherine Hepburn, and Gary Shandling, who plays
Beatty's character's agent, in the exact style of his character from
the Larry Saunders show.
     I found Hepburn's performance quite striking, easily the best in
the film.  I do not think I have ever seen an old person played as
simply and directly as here. It is quite daring to do this, because
everyone will assume that she is simply playing herself. Perhaps she
is, but we must also remember that she is a fine and experienced
actress.
     There are some nice travel shots.  Tahiti is beautiful.  I would
say that taking a Russian cruise ship on a tour of the South Pacific
looks like a nice way to spend a vacation.
     In summary, the film is pretty badly flawed, and not worth the
build-up it was given by its marketing, but it is far better than many
critics (who must be comparing it with AN AFFAIR TO REMEMBER) have been
saying.  It's entertaining, it has a nice solid romantic feeling and a
singular performance by Katherine Hepburn.

Title
Review for Lunes de fiel (1992)
     I couldn't tell if BITTER MOON was intended as a serious study of
sexual obsession or as a too-subtle parody of the same thing.  Roman
Polanski has either gone off the deep end with this story of a man
overwhelmed by desire for his young wife (played by Emmanuel Seigner,
who happens to be Polanski's young wife) or I and the audience I was
with are simply too unsophisticated to appreciate this wry, witty story
of the sexual exploits of a pompous fool.
     Peter Coyote plays a wrecked man who claims to have been destroyed
by his intensely sexual relationship with his wife.  On a cruise to
Israel, Hugh Grant meets first his wife, and later him, and is warned
against her charms. (Oddly, Grant's wife in this film is Kristin
Scott-Thomas, his friend from FOUR WEDDINGS AND A FUNERAL, who again
plays a woman named Fiona.)
     The strangest thing about this film is that Coyote's character
writes and talks with consistently lurid, purple prose.  He comes to
Paris to be a writer, though it's obvious he can't write at all, as his
style is straight out of the pages of a romance novel combined with
Penthouse letters.
     I have a suspicion that Polanski intended Coyote's character to
have a comic effect, at which he is certainly successful, but then
somehow in the editing the point of the film, which was to make a
comedy, got strangely twisted by someone with no sense of humor.  The
overall tone of the film is entirely serious, if excessively cliche,
and the direciton never makes it clear how you are supposed to react.
     If this is a serious film, it has been done better before, for
example in the execrable WILD ORCHID or the mediocre 9-1/2 WEEKS.
I never before realized how good these movies could look in
comparison.  Compared to Coyote as directed by Polanski, Mickey Rourke
is Marlon Brando before he gained weight.
     I have a suggestion for improving the film, if Polanski wants to
try again.  Try casting Grant as the wrecked lover and Coyote as the
naif.  The effect would be entirely different, and much more
intersting, if it were Grant saying those lines--assuming he could
keep his expression straight, that is.
     One other thing: Polanski would be well-advised to keep young
children out of his films.  One cannot help but wonder what the casting
requirements must be.

Title
Review for Disclosure (1994)
     DISCLOSURE has Michael Douglas essentially reprising his roles
from FATAL ATTRACTION and BASIC INSTINCT; for some reason he seems to
be incredibly attractive to successful, dangerous women.  Here his
pursuer is played by Demi Moore.
     The film is badly miscast.  It is supposed to be taking place in a
high-tech company developing virtual reality technology, but no manager
in it is anything like a person who would be involved in such a
company.  Demi Moore particularly stands out as an oddball.  Tight
skirts, aggressive attitude, polished manner reminiscent of someone
selling real estate--this is nothing like what these companies are
like.  Donald Sutherland is also similarly odd.
     Michael Douglas is also oddly not suited to his role.  He can
certainly play the object of desire, but as a technical manager he
doesn't make sense.
     Dennis Miller has a small, promising role.  I think he has good
potential as an actor.  His sardonic style leavened with flashes of wit
gives him quite a bit of range.
     But I think the most glaring error in the film is in the
direction.  Certain things are simply not established well, or are
allowed to run on in the wrong way; the interaction between Douglas and
Moore in particular, and the relationship between Sutherland and
Moore.  Is she being promoted simply as a replacement for Douglas, and
why--since she is demonstrably incompetent?  Certain behaviors do not
make sense, like Douglas's secretary continually turning around to see
what's going on in her boss's office.  A competent secretary would not
do this.
     It wasn't until after the film was over that I realized that I had
no idea why what happened happened.  Was Demi Moore's attempted
seduction a calculated attempt to get Michael Douglas fired and, if so,
how?  Was she put up to it by Donald Sutherland?  What was really
supposed to be going on in this film?  Either the direction or the
editing left something seriously missing from this film.
     The preview for the film gave me the impression that there was
some nifty high tech secret underlying the main plot; this is not
true.  The surface plot is all there is, with some fairly vanilla
high-tech virtual-reality stuff thrown in.

Title
Review for Hideaway (1995)
Directed by Brett Leonard
Written by Andrew Kevin Walker and Neal Jimenez
With Jeff Goldblum (Hatch), Christine Lahti (Lindsey),
     Alicia Silverstone (Regina), Jeremy Sisto (Vassago).
     This is a standard horror film, with average direction and writing
for this genre (which is to say, they aren't too great).  Production
values are pretty good; the effects, which seem familiar to me from
previews and other promotion of THE LAWNMOWER MAN are probably the
best thing technically about this film--though I this particular class
of computer effects has been used up.
     The role for Jeff Goldblum is weak but okay; the other actors
don't have an awful lot to do except the usual--run around and act
scared or diabolical as the case may be.
     The story opens nicely, with a creepy Satanic murder-suicide.
Jeff Goldblum is then in an accident and dies, experiencing special
effects oddly reminiscent of the wormhole from STAR TREK: DEEP SPACE
NINE.  When he comes back, he starts experiencing visions of violent
murders.  It took me a while to figure out what was going on--maybe I
wasn't too quick on the uptake here but I found the false leads and
their resolution pretty satisfying.
     Jeff Goldblum spends quite a bit of time trying to figure out
what's going on.  Most of this time he doesn't have much to do but sit
around and look puzzled, have visions, scribble, or make phone calls to
the police.  Given this limitation, he's pretty successful at making
this part of the film fun to watch.  I don't know how many times he has
to act like he's seeing something elsewhere which leads him to some
great insight--but each time he manages to do it a little differently.
This shows how a good actor can help save a film with weak writing.
     Jeremy Sisto has a nice greasy creepiness to him; he brings
something extra to his role, and is fun to watch.  I can see him quite
easily as every (horror movie) father's greatest fear; the nice-looking
young man his daughter brings home who sees the girl not as a work of
art, but as raw materials.
     I would have liked this film a lot better if it has been a little
more campy.  The scene at the end, with the appearance of the younger
daughter, would have been enhanced a hell of a lot if when we see
Alicia Silverstone's face she was allowed to roll her eyes a little
("They're *still* thinking about her!  What, am I invisible?")  If
you're making a film like this, and you can't make it really good, try
to make it really fun.  All the raw materials were there (silly father,
roller coaster, shotgun, etc.)
     All in all I'd give this film a B for the good acting of Jeff
Goldblum and Jeremy Sisto and the okay special effects.  If you really
enjoy this sort of thing, you'll probably enjoy this one; but I
wouldn't go expecting to be scared or intrigued much.

Title
Review for Philadelphia (1993)
     Tom Hanks plays a lawyer who was fired by his legal firm for
having AIDS.  Denzel Washington is the ambulance-chasing lawyer who
prosecutes the law firm for doing this.  Mary Steenburgen defends the
firm.
     I liked this movie as a whole, but found some serious problems
with parts of it.   Tom Hanks acting, for example, is great.  I didn't
know he had the kind of intensity required to display such a range of
emotion so quietly.  He really carries this movie, and deserves the
accolades being heaped upon him for this role, independently of the
courage he showed in taking it.
     Jonathan Demme's direction is normally excellent, making it all
the more odd that he flubs some of the testimony so badly.  He is great
when he is directing Hanks--I remember especially the street scene
after Hanks's first meeting with Washington, and the soaring fantastic
opera scene.  Demme seems to have a gift for drawing out these kind of
individual performances (remember Byrne's dance at the beginning of
"Stop Making Sense"?) (By the way, the music in this film is excellent,
and really enhances the story line.)
     But in the courtroom, the direction, or possibly the editing, is
badly flubbed.  You don't have experienced lawyers, who are trying to
prove they are not bigots, just get up on the stand and start referring
to the Old Testament's views on homosexuality--at least, not without a
lot of goading.  The writing is weak here, too; it's as if the writer
wasn't interested in dramatizing what should be one of the two major
points of the film.
     There are a few other odd scenes as well.  Hanks's relationship
with his family is oddly uncomplicated.  It is as if Demme wasn't
intersted in these scenes, and wanted to get past them with as little
diversion from the main story line, but then, why put them in at all?
They aren't strictly necessary to the story line.
     Washington's homophobia is not convincing.  I'm fairly sure he
could have portrayed a convincing homophobe, after seeing his great
dramatic skill, so the problem must once again have been a lack of
clear direction.
     It is always nice to see Mary Steenburgen.  Here she seems
conflicted about her role, which is appropriate given the subject
matter.  I thought she was just about the best thing about the
courtroom scenes, after Hanks's brooding stillness.

Title
Review for Safe Passage (1994)
     SAFE PASSAGE has Susan Sarandon once more portraying an
over-protective mother (as in LORENZO'S OIL and, in effect, THE
CLIENT.)  This time she has seven boys to worry about, and Sam Shepard
as an estranged husband whose eyesight keeps flickering on and off like
a worn-out fluorescent light.  She has a lot to worry about too,
because one of her sons is in the Sinai, one of a group of Marines who
have just been bombed while sleeping.  The movie setting is the family
house, while they all wait for the portentous news.
     I thought the movie was well acted and directed, but the
screenplay stunk.  There are too many incidents in this film that are
unmotivated (such as the encounter of the youngest son with Daisy, or
the father's blindness), obvious (the role of the Marine son in the
family is a cliche) or unexplained (what happened to that sickness the
running son came home with; how was the obvious depression of the
youngest son early in the film resolved?)
     Older actresses like Sarandon have a tough time in Hollywood.
Unlike older actors, who achieve greatness and go on to command
fortunes for small roles (Brando, DeNiro, Nicholson), they seem to take
on bigger roles and get less and less for them (Meryl Streep in THE
RIVER WILD is another example.)  I think part of the reason (besides
Hollywood's obvious chauvinism) is that they don't seem to realize that
their best work is behind them.  When Nicholson puts on heavy makeup
for The Joker or The Wolfman he's doing something people really want to
see: an actor with a great history demeaning himself, and having fun
with a role.  A role where he tries to teach us about what it is like
to grow older and give us some compelling insights into the nature of
middle age in a more straightforward way, as Sarandon does here, simply
would not be as successful, regardless of how well it would be received
critically. (Though I must admit I have no idea if people would go to
see, say, Streep in a John Waters film.)
     Many of the actors here seem wasted; they could have made just as
much of a movie with many fewer sons.  Robert Sean Leonard, a fine
young actor, seems frozen by the constraints of his role.  Sam Shepard
spends most of his time moping around; he does nothing to suggest his
role in this family was anything more than perfunctory. On the other
hand, the woman who plys the psychologist girlfriend of Leonard has a
striking presence.
     The direction, on the other hand, seemed right on.  I particularly
liked the little touches in the interaction between Sarandon and the
other characters, especially including Shepard.  Shepard's falling
asleep when he did is a cliche, as is the scene where Shepard and
Sarandon end up on the floor, but they don't seem so; a feeling of much
greater complexity in their relationship comes through than what the
screenplay itself conveys.

Title
Review for Short Cuts (1993)
     SHORT CUTS is a kind of 90s sequel to NASHVILLE.  The location is
L.A., and the theme is sex.  Like Altman's last film, THE PLAYER, this
film is filled with stars, but here they are playing characters.  An
early joke has Alex Trebek appearing in a cameo role.
     I thought all the actors did well, with the exception of Matthew
Modine.  For some reason he seems off his mark here: his lines sound
amateurish and flat.  This is odd, because he's playing a character
he's played before, in GROSS ANATOMY.  (In fact, almost all the actors
are playing characters they've played before, more or less.)
     I found Tim Robbins the most fun to watch.  He plays a
philandering, self-important cop, very broadly and with almost
slapstick wit.  The scene with the megaphone is a classic.
     On the whole the film does not have as much impact as NASHVILLE,
probably because Altman simply does not have as much to say now as he
did then.  It must be nice to know everyone, and to be so respected
that they all want to work with you, but that in itself does not seem
to me to be enough reason to make a film.
     Given the content, the film is also overlong.  Three-hour films
should be reserved for movies with great themes.  It is still an
entertaining film, with a remarkable cast and excellent direction, but
I felt as though I was looking at the imitation of film art.

Title
Review for Star Trek: Generations (1994)
     STAR TREK: GENERATIONS is a real dog, without the excuses of the
other two dog "Star Trek" films: I (the first, apparently they didn't
know what they were doing) and V (directed by Shatner.)
     Who directed this film?  It is very Shatner-esque.  Captain Kirk
gets to show off his fighting skills, and even Picard seems to prefer
combat given the choice.  (He can go anywhere in the universe in time or
space, and he picks the one place that will allow him to have a fight
with another old guy.  Come on, please.)
     Another Shatner-esque touch: Picard and Kirk get to go to some
place that sounds great, and it turns out to be fake snow, dumb holiday
scenes complete with a Tiny Tim substitute, and K-Mart style holiday
clothes.  (Remember how the visit with "God" in "The Undiscovered
Country" turned out to be really stupid?) No wonder they don't mind
leaving.
     Most of the original Star Trek cast are sensibly absent from this
turkey.  Only Kirk, Scotty, and Chekov show up.
     So many familiar plot devices are screwed up that you wonder how
they're going to make another movie.  I won't give away the plot, such
as it is, by revealing any of this, but I suppose Star Trek VIII will
dedicate itself to undoing the damage done by its predecessor, like
Star Trek III. I just hope they don't resurrect you-know-who.
     "All Good Things..." is a far better film.  I wonder why the same
people who could make a good film like that could not get their act
together well enough to put together a film that would appeal to anyone
other than a Trekkie.
     There's really nothing to recommend in this film.  All the TNG
actors seem to be under the influence of either very bad direction or
some kind of depressants.  Perhaps they don't want to show up the
acting skills of their inferior counterparts from TOS.
     I have an idea.  Maybe Shatner got a clause in his contract
guaranteeing him a certain type of direction, and no acting any better
than his, in exchange for doing this film.  That could explain it.

Title
Review for Dolores Claiborne (1995)
Directed by Taylor Hackford
Written by Tony Gilroy
With: Kathy Bates (title role), Jennifer Jason Leigh (Dolores's daughter),
      David Straithairn (Dolores's husband),  Christopher Plummer
      (investigating detective).
130 minutes
     There are two kinds of Stephen King films: (1)  adaptations of his
novels and stories with supernatural elements, which range from real
trash (NIGHT SHIFT, THE MANGLER, etc.) to well-meaning mediocre to good
productions (THE DARK HALF, the television productions of IT and THE
STAND, THE SHINING, etc.) and (2) the Castle Rock productions of his
stories and novels without supernatural elements: STAND BY ME, MISERY,
and now DOLORES CLAIBORNE.
     The first category is sometimes entertaining, sometimes thrilling,
sometimes embarrassing.  The second category is consistently as good as
mainstream American cinema gets.
     Dolores Claiborne is a resident of a small island off the coast of
Maine.  She's had a tough life--an alcoholic husband who abused her,
hard domestic work all the time, nothing much else except her love for
her daughter.  When I read the novel I found it weak.  The central
scene in the book with Dolores's head silhouetted against the sky while
a solar eclipse reaches totality fell flat for me.
     But in the movie this scene sings.  We see Kathy Bates's rough
face in the left and in the upper right a perfect dark circle and
crescent of awesome beauty.  Then we shift to the circle of the view
from the well, then back again.  I was really overwhelmed.
     The story has been sharpened considerably from the novel.  The
novel is centered around Dolores herself and her hard life; the movie
is centered around Dolores's relationship with her daughter Selena.
Not only is the story better cinematically, it's stronger in any case.
     But even a much weaker script would have been saved by this
exceptional cast.  You have Kathy Bates, who of course won an Academy
Award for her work in MISERY; the highly talented and versatile
Jennifer Jason Leigh; David Straithairn; and Christopher Plummer.
     Bates, at least, and maybe Leigh as well, deserves another Oscar
nomination for her performance.  Their two faces fill the screen; the
constrast between Bates's plump roughness and Leigh's gaunt youth is
rich and full of meaning in itself.  The absorbing puzzle they find
themselves in, with Bates remembering everything but hiding it under
her crustiness, and Leigh remembering nothing--barely remembering her
mother, even--drives the movie and makes that transcendent moment as
the eclipse reaches totality stunning.  Leigh's spirited turn in the
courtroom recalls other famous Hollywood defenses.
     The cinemaphotography appropriately shows the modern scenes gray
and drained of life, as they have by events, and earlier scenes full of
garish color.  The last scene keeps this drained effect, marking the
way these two women cannot really recover their youth and innocence.

Title
Review for Frankenstein (1994)
     MARY SHELLEY'S FRANKENSTEIN demonstrates that the combination of a
great story, a great producer, a great director, and great actors can
still produce a lousy film.
     Kenneth Branagh directed and plays Dr. Frankenstein.  De Niro
plays the monster.  Coppola produced, and he showed he can produce
horror films in DRACULA.  So what went wrong?
     I think it's the attempt to treat an inferior, basically low-brow
story with a great deal of artistic respect.  All the scenes are dark
and brooding.  Even attempt is made to replicate the feel of the
semi-industrial technology from the book.  The monster is played with
great sensitivity and understanding by De Niro, who brings his past
experience playing despised outsiders to the role.
     But the story can just not sustain this kind of dramatic
intensity.  Mary Shelley's book is really just a horror story, not just
more, and its flavor was much better captured by earlier, far inferior
in terms of production values, versions of this film.  The monster is
created in a fit of dark obsession; he rips up a bunch of people; and
he dies with his creator in the frozen North.  That's it--not all
this nonsense about obsession with responsibility of the creator to
society, or respect for life.  That's our modern world reinterpreting
her work.
     I did like the one bit where De Niro delivers lines straight from
Shelley's work, "And if I cannot quench one I will indulge the other."
He made me see the monster in the larger context of DeNiro's other
outsiders, no small feat.  But most of the time DeNiro himself showed
through; you get the feeling that you're watching Jake LaMotta on a
really bad day, or something like that.  DeNiro has just too strong a
screen history to portray anything like this so seriously.
     Kenneth Branagh withdraws a good deal of the credit he obtained
for the brilliant HENRY V with this film.  I just hope he got paid
well.  He doesn't have the chest of Alec Baldwin, nor enough physical
presence to bring life to a role like this one.

Title
Review for Mask, The (1994)
     THE MASK is a remarkably enjoyable film, for a movie without much
of a plot or characters.  What it does have is Jim Carrey, who is very
fresh and exciting (though he seems to be using up his talent in the
fastest possible way), Cameron Diaz as this year's full-lipped object
of desire, and a remarkable blend of morphing and cartoon-like special
effects.  Also a cute dog.  What more could you ask for?
     Carrey plays a nebbish accounts exec at a bank who finds a mask
which has a mysterious power to transform him into a cross between a
superhero and, well, Jim Carrey.  The gag works pretty well, because it
fits Carreys style so well and allows him to make a film out of
outrageous impersonations.
     I thought the musical numbers were great, especially "Cuban
Pete."  I still find myself recalling the wonderful transition when
"Pete"'s mysterious power takes hold of the female cop and she joins
in.  It's a thrilling sequence.  These bits are somehow exactly how
those dance sequences should have been done all along--with the
appropriate super-real enhancements.  At these moments, and in the
final confrontation, the movie becomes a work of real, hilarious,
vision.
     But most of the time, while we're waiting for Carrey to get hold
of the mask (which transforms him into a kind of super-hero) we're just
waiting, and even Jim Carrey can't think of much to do with this very
weak script and shallow direction.  The Carrey-Diaz romance is no
diversion; when Diaz is around him she seems to undergo a reverse
transformation and change into a nice but conventional neighborhood
girl.
     As they say, let's see how Carrey does in a good film.  The
problem is that many comics never get that good film (or only get one
or two out of a career of far too many movies)--they end up being
exploited in one bad movie after another until their audience shrinks
to nothing and they disappear.  Think of Bill Cosby, Richard Pryor,
Gene Wilder.  What works is to transition into another genre of film
(like Eddie Murphy action films); Carrey better get moving soon if he
wants to still be making films in 1996.
