Authors
Alan Cleaver
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Richard III (1995)
by Alan Kersey, Cambridge Evening News, UK
     WHEN Clarence is taken off to The Tower it is by motor launch ...
to Battersea Power Station.  And when a jubilant Richard III celebrates
his ghoulish seduction of his future queen he dances a jig through a
tube station lined with injured men, women and children.  This is a
fascinating interpretation of Shakespeare's portrait of our most
villainous king; and Sir Ian McKellen is awesome in the lead.  Even he
must have been aware of the hard act he had to follow. With Sir
Laurence Olivier's twisted hunchback still fresh in the minds of most
veteran filmgoers after 40 years, it was time, though, for a fresh
approach ... and this is certainly fresh.  It is also full of
surprises, albeit without tinkering with text. We are kept guessing for
the first few minutes as the social scene of high society in the
Thirties gives the impression that we are in for something that is more
Wodehouse than Shakespeare.  Although it is not without humour,
however, it does have all the tragic elements as it dawns on the
audience that this Richard had more in common with Adolf Hitler than
Henry VIII.  In fact, the parallels with Nazi Germany come to a head
with his introduction at a Nuremberg-style rally just prior to his
coronation.  Red and black are the prime colours but it is a wild boar
on the flags instead of a swastika.  Sir Ian reminded me of Tom
Courtenay in Dr Zhivago as he boarded the train that takes his troops
to the final battle. And when he utters those immortal words "A horse,
a horse. My kingdom for a horse" what he really needs is a Chieftain
tank.  The civil war obviously has to be fictitious but the equipment,
from divebombers to ak-ak guns, is authentic.  Debatably the most
memorable scene is of the beleaguered king manning an anti-aircraft gun
with his only good arm before getting his final come- uppance ... to
the tune of Al Jolson's I'm Sitting on Top of the World.  All this
could prove too bizarre for some Shakespeare lovers and I did have
doubts about it myself.  The fact that is all handled so brilliantly
and by such an impressive cast carries the day. Alongside Sir Ian is
Nigel Hawthorne, fresh from his BAFTA award for The Madness of King
George and playing a very sad and stoical Clarence; Annette Bening as
Queen Elizabeth, Jim Broadbent as the Duke of Buckingham, Bill Paterson
as Ratcliffe and, perhaps best of all, Adrian Dunbar as the murderous
Tyrrel.  I was fairly happy with Annette Bening's accent but very
uncomfortable with that of Robert Downey Jr, whose performance as Earl
Rivers was fine until he opened his mouth and reminded us that he is
more at home in Beverley Hills than war-torn London.  Maggie Smith
provides a formidable Duchess of York and Kristin Scott Thomas is
convincing as Lady Anne.  They all help to make this one of the most
interesting films for years and one destined to be as memorable in its
own bizarre way as the 1955 classic shared by John Gielgud, Ralph
Richardson and Claire Bloom.  The icing on the cake is that Sir Ian
will be at the Arts in person this Friday to launch Richard Loncraine's
powerful masterpiece on its three week run.  I advise early booking.
