Authors
Athan Bezaitis
Number of Reviews
23

Title
Review for Music of the Heart (1999)
[filmcritic.com presents a review from guest writer Athan Bezaitis.  You
can find the review with full credits at
http://www.filmcritic.com/misc/emporium.nsf/2a460f93626cd4678625624c007f2b46/afcf141b8b5cec37882568110020fd27?OpenDocument
The creator of A NIGHTMARE ON ELM STREET and SCREAM is toying with our
conscience again, only this time his weaponry isn't Freddy's claws or a
murderous prank caller.  Director Wes Craven's latest endeavor, MUSIC OF
THE HEART, switches gears to more virtuous human emotions in order to
tell us the story of one woman's triumph and the revival of a
downtrodden urban community.  Oddly enough, this film is just as
powerful as any of Craven's horror films and can evoke strong emotion
and sentiment, if you let it.
MUSIC OF THE HEART begins like any of the other `triumphant teacher'
dramas we've all seen.  STAND AND DELIVER and DANGEROUS MINDS both
crossed my mind as I sat through the first hour of Roberta Guaspari's
(Meryl Streep) struggle to teach a handful of young urban kids how to
play the violin.  This part of the story is hackneyed and clichéd, and
you've seen it before--if not in a previous movie than in some boring
after-school special.  But where other `triumphant teacher' dramas fail
because they concentrate too much on the saintliness of the teacher,
this movie succeeds in its captivation of Roberta Guaspari's character
flaws, and her struggle as a single mother attempting to raise her two
children in East Harlem.  When the film expands beyond the existence of
just `Roberta the teacher' and into the rest of her life, the film
becomes genuinely enjoyable.
About an hour and a half into MUSIC OF THE HEART, it zaps you ten years
into the future.  All of a sudden, you're in the nineties.  Roberta's
kids are older and more mature and although she's still single, she is
now an accomplished teacher.  However, her fate is not yet sealed as she
faces a career-threatening crisis that jeopardizes all she has worked
for.
This is where the film really takes off and the strong supporting cast
kicks in.  School principal Janet Williams (Angela Bassett-- HOW STELLA
GOT HER GROOVE BACK) and Jane Leeves ( `Frasier') both are superb in
support of Streep, who puts on yet another credible chameleon act.  Her
teenage children, Nick (Charlie Hofheimer) and Lexi (Kieran Culkin) are
both uplifting and extremely affable as they help their mother cope.
Even Gloria Estefan, in her acting debut, rounds out an excellent
supporting cast.  With all its cylinders clicking, the film takes a kind
of MR. HOLLAND'S OPUS path toward a conclusion filled with grandeur.
I don't consider myself overly emotional, but this movie is really
touching:  I haven't felt tears swelling up like that since CURLY SUE
with James Belushi.  I don't know if it was just my mood or the violin
music coupled with some powerful surges of sentimentality.  Decide for
yourself, and let me know.
Cast: Meryl Streep, Angela Bassett, Aidan Quinn, Cloris Leachman, Jane
Leeves, Michael Angarano, Charlie Hofheimer, Henry Dinhoffer Kieran
Culkin, Jay O. Sanders, Cole Hawkins, Gloria Estefan
Director: Wes Craven
Producer: Walter Scheuer
Editor:  Patrick Lussier
MPAA rating:  PG
Year of Release: 1999
--
Christopher Null - cnull@mindspring.com - http://www.filmcritic.com
Author - Network Administrator's Reference, 1999 - ISBN 0-07-882588-1
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0078825881/filmcriticcom

Title
Review for Agnes Browne (1999)
filmcritic.com presents a review from staff member Athan Bezaitis.
You can find the review with full credits at
 http://www.filmcritic.com/misc/emporium.nsf/2a460f93626cd4678625624c007f2b46/156eb1f4c41ebb79882568920011aee9?OpenDocument
Agnes Browne
A film review by Athan Bezaitis  Copyright filmcritic.com 2000
I'm always skeptical when I see a Hollywood diva trying to look haggard,
poor, and malnourished in a film.  Everybody knows that in real life
they all have personal trainers and special diets along with the best
technology has to offer in keeping themselves looking young and
beautiful.  So in the first five minutes of Anjelica Huston's latest
production, AGNES BROWNE, when her husband has died and left behind
seven young children in a poor area of Dublin, Ireland, the first thing
I said to myself was, "There's no way that a woman going through this
kind of hardship can look that good."
Set in the year 1967, the film follows the struggles of Agnes Brown,
(Anjelica Huston) a recent widow battling to keep her irregularly large
family intact (six boys and a girl, ranging in age from 2 to 14).  In
order to give her husband the funeral he deserves, Agnes must borrow
money from the menacing loan shark Mr. Billy (Ray Winstone).  As she
attempts to pay him back in weekly installments, he terrorizes her and
her small children at every street corner.  To make ends meet, Agnes
sells fruit and vegetables on the street along with her best friend
Marion Monks (Marion O'Dwyer). The two are inseparable and Marion is,
ironically enough, Anjelica's guardian angel, as she brightens Agnes
life and helps her in times of desperate need.  When Pierre (Arno
Chevrier, a Gerard Depardieu look-alike) comes along in the form of a
neighborhood French baker and takes an interest in Agnes, sparks fly as
she tries to forge a personal life of her own with the possibility of
newfound love, all while dealing with the nuisance of seven hellion
children.
Despite the fact that Agnes looks way too spry and luminous despite
struggling for money and food, Huston puts together a credible product
as both director and star.  While the story is slow in developing and
easily predictable, the humor and characters overshadow these flaws and
make the film enjoyable.  Huston adds a strange blend of humor into the
dramatic mix that adds a pleasant overtone to a dire and often tear
jerking situation.  Especially noteworthy is O'Dwyer, who not only looks
the part of a poor Irish gal, but also emotes the meaning of true
friendship in a wonderful supporting performance.
The film get three stars because by the time it was over, I had
forgotten what time of day it was.  Translation: I had become so
engrossed that I was emotionally attached to the characters by the
film's conclusion.  This is a good sign, so if you're in the mood for
something poignant, this film is for you.
*** three stars
Starring: Anjelica Huston, Marion O'Dwyer, Miall O'Shea, Ciaran Owens,
Roxanna Williams, Carl Power, Ray Winstone, Arno Chevrier, and Tom Jones
Director: Anjelica Huston
Producers: Jim Sheridan, Arthur Lappin, Anjelica Huston, and Greg Smith
Screenplay: John Goldmith, Brendan O'Carroll
Year of Release: 2000
MPAA rating: R
--
Christopher Null - cnull@mindspring.com - http://www.filmcritic.com

Title
Review for Ghost Dog: The Way of the Samurai (1999)
filmcritic.com presents a review from staff member Athan Bezaitis.
You can find the review with full credits at
http://www.filmcritic.com/misc/emporium.nsf/2a460f93626cd4678625624c007f2b46/43351ef3c2564bcb8825688400610dcc?OpenDocument
GHOST DOG: THE WAY OF THE SAMURAI
A film review by Athan Bezaitis.  Copyright Filmcritic.com 2000
Written and directed by Jim Jarmusch, GHOST DOG: THE WAY OF THE SAMURAI
embodies a variety of genres from Mobster to Urban to Martial Arts.
Jarmusch, critically acclaimed for MYSTERY TRAIN (1989) and STRANGER
THAN PARADISE (1984), stays true to his uniquely languid and methodical
style in telling the fascinating story of Ghost Dog (Forest Whitaker -
THE CRYING GAME, PHENOMENON), a contract killer who has isolated himself
from society by taking refuge in a shack atop an inner city rooftop that
he shares with a flock of pigeons.
 Ghost Dog studies the early eighteenth century Japanese warrior code
from the book, Hagakure: The Way of the Samurai, and the story is told
as a sequence of verses from the ancient text.  Each morning he bows to
the altar he has constructed and practices the ancient disciplines of
the samurai training.  In the spirit of the ancient warriors, he has
pledged his loyalty to a single master, a small-time mobster named Louie
(John Tormey - KISS ME GUIDO, JUNGLE 2 JUNGLE), who saved Ghost Dog's
life when he was young.  As an assassin, Ghost Dog communicates only via
carrier pigeon and moves through the night like a phantom, killing with
the skill and speed of a true Samurai.
 Louie is a foot soldier in a struggling and aging crime family headed
by Ray Vargo (Henry Silva).  Acting on orders, Louie hires Ghost Dog to
kill Handsome Frank (Richard Portnow), a "made man" and lover of the
boss' daughter Louise (Tricia Vessey).  Unfortunately, Louise happens to
be in Frank's apartment when Ghost Dog offs Handsome Frank, and now the
infuriated mob boss Vargo wants the hit-man dead.  Using the wisdom and
insight that he has learned from Hagakure and other ancient Eastern
books, Ghost Dog must now confront the notorious crime family, or die.
Jarmusch's signature of inimitable characters with distinctive humor is
apparent throughout, as both the mobsters and Ghost Dog are ruthless yet
remain loveable.  The film's score is a compilation of hip-hop and
reggae beats done by The Rza, Wu Tang Clan's founder, and it effectively
underscores Ghost Dog's ascetic spirituality along with the harsh tones
of the surrounding urban environment.  The story is well written, and
Forest Whitaker's performance is moving.  Also noteworthy is the jovial,
French, ice cream vendor, Raymond (Isaach de Bankole).  Raymond doesn't
understand a word of English, and Ghost Dog doesn't speak any French,
yet the two have a platonic understanding of one another that lets them
speak, despite the language barrier.
On the flip side, my only qualm is that the film is too slow at certain
points and may have benefited from some good editing.  Also, Ghost Dog's
stroll is appropriately meticulous in keeping with the method of the
Samurai, but towards the end, I was fed up with his overly deliberate
pace.
All in all, I highly recommend GHOST DOG -- it is truly an original.  No
other filmmaker has made such a bold statement about the parallels of
societal violence that exist between cultures, whether Ancient Eastern,
Mafioso, or Urban gangster.  Fans of any of the three genres will be
sure to enjoy this one.
Writer/Director: Jim Jarmusch
Starring: Forest Whitaker, John Tormey, Cliff Gorman, Frank Minucci,
Richard Portnow, Tricia Vessey, Henry Silva, Gene Ruffini, Frank Adonis,
Victor Argo, Isaach de Bankole, Camille Winbush
Producers: Jim Jarmusch, Ricard Guay, Diana Schmidt
MPAA Rating: R
Year of Release: 1999
--
Christopher Null - cnull@mindspring.com - http://www.filmcritic.com

Title
Review for Mifunes sidste sang (1999)
filmcritic.com presents a review from staff member Athan Bezaitis.
You can find the review with full credits at
http://www.filmcritic.com/misc/emporium.nsf/2a460f93626cd4678625624c007f2b46/4bc91097108bf02f8825687b00086241?OpenDocument
MIFUNE A film review by Athan Bezaitis.  Copyright Filmcritic.com 2000
In 1995, Danish directors Lars Von Trier and Thomas Vinterberg
established a code of ethics for an alternative form of filmmaking.  The
two directors were fed up by the way in which movie making was "raped"
by technology such as special effects, expensive gear, cranes, filters,
dollies, and spotlights.  They wisely knew that they could never measure
up to the Americans in that area, so they decided that European
filmmaking should head in an all-together different direction.  The
result was a vow of chastity complete with the ten commandments of what
they called Dogma filmmaking.  Some of these groundbreaking rules
included: on location shooting without the ability to bring in props,
the rule that music will not be used unless it occurs where the scene is
being shot, the camera must be hand-held, optical work and filters are
forbidden, and the films must not contain superficial action such as
murders, weapons, etc.  The purpose was to force a director to think
along unconventional and imaginative lines in order to create a Dogma
film, and the first two attempts, Vinterberg's THE CELEBRATION, and Von
Trier's THE IDIOTS, were both successful.
Director Soren Kragh-Jacobsen's MIFUNE, is the third film from the
Danish Dogma Collective.  Subtitled in English, it is the story of
Kresten (Anders W. Berhelsen) who has become an overnight sensation as a
businessman in Copenhagen.  The morning after his wedding to the boss'
daughter, he receives a phone call that his estranged father has just
died.  He has trouble explaining this to his wife, since he has told
everyone in the city that he has no living relatives, in attempt to
disguise his humble origins.  Now he must return to the family's run
down farm to bury his father and make arrangements to hide the truth of
his mentally retarded brother from his new family and friends.
Caught in a pack of lies with his in-laws, he comes up with a desperate
plan to advertise for a housekeeper to look after his brother.  But when
the beautiful Liva (Iben Hjejle) arrives, she only complicates things
for Kristen.  Liva also is not what she seems.  Out of a need to keep
her rebellious younger brother Bjarke (Emil Tarding) in private school,
she's been working as a high-class prostitute in Copenhagen.  Now she's
on the run from her pimp and a mysterious man who has been threatening
her on the phone.  When the two come together they get caught in a
whirlwind of hysteria as their troubles begin to compound.
The film is excellent, and the Dogma style only adds to the originality
of the production.  Supposedly, there is one scene with music being
played on a bent drainpipe, and another with an instrumentalist hiding
in a ditch.  The idea for the original Danish title ("Mifunes Sidste
Sang," literally "Mifune's Last Song") came to Dragh-Jacobsen when
Japanese actor Toshiro Mifune died in 1997.  In THE SEVEN SAMURAI by
director Akira Kurosawa, Mifune plays a phony samurai of peasant
origins.  The parallel is evident..
The Danish are really onto something with the proliferation of the Dogma
style.  Find out where MIFUNE is playing and enjoy it.  It's worth the
extra effort, and it's a breath of fresh air from the stale stench of
the overblown Hollywood mega-productions.
Starring: Anders W. Berthelson, Iben Hjejle, Jesper Asholt, Sofie
Grabol, Emil Tarding, Paprika Steen, Mette Bratlann
Director: Soren Kragh-Jacobsen
Producer: Birgitte Hald, Bo Ehrhardt
Cinematographer: Anthony Dod Mantle
MPAA rating: R
Year of Release: 2000
--
Christopher Null - cnull@mindspring.com - http://www.filmcritic.com

Title
Review for Rosetta (1999)
filmcritic.com presents a review from staff member Athan Bezaitis.
You can find the review with full credits at
http://www.filmcritic.com/misc/emporium.nsf/2a460f93626cd4678625624c007f2b46/61f96490ec8ab69c88256849001f1c32?OpenDocument
A film Review by Athan Bezaitis  Copyright Filmcritic.com
Fair warning!!!  Don't eat a big meal before you watch ROSETTA.  If you
thought the hand held camera motion from THE BLAIR WITCH PROJECT was
bad, you'll be stumbling out of this one with a splitting headache and
nausea that only Dramamine can prevent or projectile vomiting can cure.
At least in BLAIR WITCH the technique served a purpose that added an
element of mystery to the film.  ROSETTA, on the other hand, was so dull
and convoluted that the hand held style fails miserably in its attempt
to create a `realistic atmosphere.'  Directors Luc and Jean-Pierre
Dardenne should issue a warning for theaters to block off the first
eight rows of every location that this movie opens so that nobody gets
too close to the screen, plus they ought to provide those handy little
barf bags, just in case you have a weak stomach like me.
Rosetta, played by newcomer Emilie Dequenne, is a seventeen year-old
adolescent suffering through a miserable life in Seraing, Belgium.  She
lives in a trailer park with an alcoholic mother who prostitutes herself
for booze and food.  Her home barely has running water and cannot even
provide shelter from the cold wind.  Despite her horrid circumstances,
the film chronicles her incredible perseverance and strength as she
attempts to get a job that will provide food and rent money for her
desolate family to survive.
The film's production is primarily at fault for its failure.  Subtitled
in English, several key scenes have white backgrounds, which make the
writing on the screen illegible.  Unless you speak French, you'll have
no clue as to what is being said.  Also, the film never explains the
significance of Rosetta's perplexing stomach ailment, which plagues her
whenever she expresses any strong emotions.  These crucial blunders,
coupled with the poor handheld photography, spoil Emilie Dequenne's
performance, which resonates as the only bright spot of the whole film.
This is one that should be avoided if you're a movie hound looking for
kicks this holiday season.  But if you insist on seeing it, I don't
recommend eating cheese-filled pastries right before, like I did.
--
Christopher Null - cnull@mindspring.com - http://www.filmcritic.com

Title
Review for Perfect Blue (1997/I)
[filmcritic.com presents a review from guest writer Athan Bezaitis.  You
can find the review with full credits at
http://www.filmcritic.com/misc/emporium.nsf/2a460f93626cd4678625624c007f2b46/14c211de96509278882567fe0007a920?OpenDocument
If it were somehow easier to translate Japanese into English without
losing so much essential meaning and depth, anime style films would
surely be more entertaining and maybe even accepted by mainstream
American audiences.  This unique style of animation is fun to watch,
especially when it's in the context of a sadistic story such as
PERFECT BLUE.  The exaggerated features and expressions along with the
mess of blood and gore seem perfectly suited for the larger-than-life
anime style.  Unfortunately, PERFECT BLUE is nothing more than
visually exhilarating, and the reason is that too much is lost in the
dubbing from its original format.
Directed by Satoshi Kon, PERFECT BLUE is the story of 21-year-old pop
star Mima Kirigoe, who is the lead singer in the all-girl band Cham.
Heeding advice from her agent to get out of the business before her
fame runs out, she decides to become an actress.  Like many of the
instant pop celebrities before her, Mima finds it hard to be taken
seriously and is forced to change her image in order to be cast in
larger roles.  In her first big feature she plays a stripper who is
raped and sets off on a wild killing spree.  A disturbed fan, who also
runs her Website, refuses to accept that his favorite pop star is
changing her persona and is obsessed with keeping Mima the innocent
young starlet that he has fallen in love with.  After several of the
people associated with casting her in smutty roles are murdered, Mima
becomes plagued with disturbing hallucinations and is stalked by the
deranged Webmaster who somehow knows too many details of her personal
life.  Mima eventually can no longer discern fantasy from reality and
becomes paralyzed by her inability to associate the events around her
with increasingly disturbing visions.
 The film is inundated with frighteningly sordid imagery.  I would
definitely categorize it as a horror film complete with vicious
stabbings, a naive female victim being stalked and hunted, and a
staged rape scene that is downright chilling.  Don't be fooled into
taking your kids to see this one just because they like Power Rangers.
This one will be rated R and deservedly so.
The main problem is that too much of the dialogue seems canned and
sappy.  The translation makes Mima seem almost dumb as she is
confronted with a chain of events that she does nothing to cope with.
She comes off as nothing more than a ditsy child even as those close
to her are dying and she seems to be losing her mind.  If you're in
the mood for something dark and twisted this is the right film for
you.  Otherwise spare yourself the trouble of having to sit through
what is a crude film that will be hard for most audiences to swallow.
** Two Stars
Starring:  N/A
Producer:  Hiroaki Inoue, Masao Maryama
Director:   Satoshi Kon
--
Christopher Null - cnull@mindspring.com - http://www.filmcritic.com
Author - Network Administrator's Reference, 1999 - ISBN 0-07-882588-1
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0078825881/filmcriticcom

Title
Review for Judy Berlin (1999)
filmcritic.com presents a review from staff member Athan Bezaitis.
You can find the review with full credits at
http://www.filmcritic.com/misc/emporium.nsf/2a460f93626cd4678625624c007f2b46/7e6e6ca0fb25f5bc8825687c002c8a6a?OpenDocument
JUDY BERLIN a film review by Athan Bezaitis.  Copyright filmcritic.com
2000
JUDY BERLIN has the unmistakable characteristics of a Woody Allen film
(though it's not one).  Its cerebral humor, rash characters, and
ensemble cast are gelled with a very Allenesque theme: that life has
simply passed by the small, predominantly Jewish community of Babylon,
Long Island.  First time director Eric Mendelsohn, who reportedly worked
with Allen on several films, shoots in black and white, and effectively
paints a dreary reality for the people of the small suburb.
As the story goes, it is the second day of school and the fall is in
full swing.  David Gold (Aaron Harnick) has returned to his parent's
home after spending time working in the film business in California.  He
runs into old high school classmate Judy Berlin (Edie Falco - from HBO's
Oz and The Sopranos), an outspoken yet dimwitted aspiring actress on her
way to Hollywood that very evening.  The story follows their respective
families as Judy and David spend the day reminiscing while a solar
eclipse darkens the town.
The real substance of the film lies in its characters and the stellar
cast.  Barbara Barrie (PRIVATE BENJAMIN) plays Sue Berlin, Judy's
mother, a stern schoolteacher who wears her problems in her forcefully
stoic face.  Madeline Kahn (YOUNG FRANKENSTEIN) is Alice Gold, a
recovering alcoholic who has alienated her son David and her husband
Arthur (Bob Dishy).  Best known for her comedic roles, Kahn (recently
deceased) puts on an Oscar-worthy performance as a mother who has
awakened from a mysterious slumber caused by the eclipse, discovering
she is an embittered housewife with a dismal existence.  Her portrayal
exudes a sad sincerity with her nasal voice and methodical stroll, but
manages to stay light and funny as Kahn weaves her magic.  Finally,
Julie Kavner (best known for her voice as Marge Simpson) adds an extra
dose of laughter into the mix with some great one-liners.
Worthy of much praise is Mendelsohn, who manages to twist an average
suburban town into a strange and majestic place filled with dark and
unexpected imagery.  The film is definitely "artsy" and heavily
symbol-laden via the eclipse and the setting in "Babylon," a stark
contrast from the thriving Biblical polis.
Despite its endearing qualities, the film has its flaws, especially the
blaring harpsichord score, which serves as musical interlude.  Also, I
found the character of Judy Berlin to be too unbelievable -- everything
from her zaniness to the railroad-looking "adult braces" she was
wearing.
Overall, the film is a score for Mendelsohn, who should get plenty of
opportunity to establish himself as tour de force director in Hollywood.
Director: Eric Mendelsohn
Writer: Eric Mendelsohn
Starring: Barbara Barrie, Bob Dishy, Aaron Harnick, Madeline Kahn, Julie
Kavner, Anne Meara
Producer: Rocco Caruso, Michael Nicholas, Lisa Kolasa
Year of release: 1999
MPAA rating:  Not Yet Rated
--
Christopher Null - cnull@mindspring.com - http://www.filmcritic.com

Title
Review for Leggenda del pianista sull'oceano, La (1998)
[filmcritic.com presents a review from guest writer Athan Bezaitis.  You
can find the review with full credits at
http://www.filmcritic.com/misc/emporium.nsf/2a460f93626cd4678625624c007f2b46/f9c71c066258f8b78825682d0020b51e?OpenDocument
Director Giuseppe Tornatore has a knack for weaving a magical story.
CINEMA PARADISO firmly established him as a tour de force filmmaker with
its Academy Award successes in 1988.  His latest feature, THE LEGEND OF
1900, is another intriguing tale, which blends a compelling fictional
character with an exhilarating epoch of American history.
THE LEGEND OF 1900 is the story of a boy's journey to manhood, never
having stepped foot on dry land.  Abandoned on an ocean liner and named
for the year in which he was born, 1900 (Tim Roth- HOODLUM, RESERVOIR
DOGS) grows up within the confines of the trans-Atlantic steamer
Virginia.  His prodigious talent for piano is discovered at a young age
and 1900 spends his days entertaining passengers from all over the world
one boatload after another.  As he gets older his reputation
proliferates to the point that 1900 would be a rich man if he were ever
willing to part with his life aboard the ship.   However, despite
prodding from his friend Max (Pruitt Taylor Vince- DR. DOLITTLE, THE END
OF VIOLENCE) and others, he is content to remain a fixture at sea.
What will come of 1900 as the war approaches and the waves of immigrants
recede?  Will he move on, or stay forever in the confines of his ship?
The best part of the film is its incredible score.  Composed by Ennio
Morricone (THE UNTOUCHABLES, BULWORTH), the music is a wonderful blend
of jazz and ragtime that captures the sounds and feel of 1900's
mysterious talents.  Roth's jagged facial features are perfect because
we get a lot of close-ups of him at the piano in deep thought sweating
or crying.   Roth effectively captures the complexities 1900's strange
satisfaction with his unique interpretation of the world as a sea
dweller.
 Also worthy of note are costume designer Maurizio Millenotti and
Director of Photography Lajos Koltai.  The look and feel of the film
takes fashion from the height of the roaring twenties and combines it
with a soft blend of lighting and tone, which stylishly establishes the
film's somber mood.
Despite the plot's intrigue, some of the elements of 1900's life that
the film left untouched take away from its effectiveness.   The plot
needed more insight into 1900's character and less time on drawn out
musical sequences with elaborate pan shots.  Two hours left me with
several unanswered questions: Why do we only get a glimpse at his human
frailties towards the opposite sex?  And how does he develop the strong
British accent when a foul-mouthed and rugged ship worker raised him for
eight years?  The film could have complete with more insight into its
characters.
While LEGEND OF 1900 is far from perfect, it is extremely entertaining
and worth seeing, if just for the duel of pianists between Jelly Roll
Morton (Clarence Williams III- THE GENERAL'S DAUGHTER), the supposed
`inventor of jazz,' and 1900.  The three round duel sizzles between the
two incredibly talented musicians and is a lot more decisive than a
Lewis-Holyfield bout.
--
Christopher Null - cnull@mindspring.com - http://www.filmcritic.com
Check out the G-Rex Personal Shopper at http://www.g-rex.com

Title
Review for Ride with the Devil (1999/I)
[filmcritic.com presents a review from guest writer Athan Bezaitis.  You
can find the review with full credits at
http://www.filmcritic.com/misc/emporium.nsf/2a460f93626cd4678625624c007f2b46/2a679a79ef9917b50825683a000847ee?OpenDocument
RIDE WITH THE DEVIL A film review by Athan Bezaitis.  Copyright
filmcritic.com 1999.
Hands down, this is the best Civil War movie since GLORY.  RIDE WITH THE
DEVIL is captivating from the opening scene and its eclectic cast is
shockingly powerful.  Don't worry about Jewel ruining anything; she
convincingly makes the transition from pop star to actress, and Jeffrey
Wright's (BASQUIAT, CELEBRITY) performance of a former slave fighting
for the Confederacy is unprecedented and chillingly realistic.  I have
no clue what they were thinking with such a misleading title -- RIDE
WITH THE DEVIL isn't some supernatural, special effects-laden, cheesy
line-filled, end-of-the-millennium dud; it's a movie about a perspective
of American history rarely talked about in classrooms across the
country.  The plot sympathizes with the ideals of the Confederate
bushwhackers fighting a guerilla-style war against the Union Jay Hawks-
and to its credit; it almost makes you believe in their cause.
Our protagonist is Jake Roedel, (Tobey Maguire – THE ICE STORM) a young
Missouri-raised son of a poor Dutch immigrant, and he along with his
child hood buddy Jack Bull Chiles, the son of a Missouri plantation
owner, (Skeet Ulrich -- AS GOOD AS IT GETS, CHILL FACTOR) join up as
bushwhackers when their homes and families are seized by Union
soldiers.  They both become skilled gunmen and execute daring raids on
Union soldiers and sympathizers.  By 1862, their unit, headed by Black
John (James Caviezel), includes George Clyde (Simon Baker) and Clyde's
loyal former slave Daniel Holt (Jeffrey Wright).  With a harsh winter
looming, the Bushwhackers must disperse and find shelter.  Several
members hole up in a hidden hillside dugout.  While in hiding, their
food and supplies are provided by the young widow Sue Lee (Jewel).  When
casualties are taken from a Jay Hawk surprise attack the group is
splintered and Jake and Holt are united as soldiers in solidarity.  As
the war rages on, most of their remaining Bushwhacker compatriots are
either dead or lost on the Southern cause, so Jake and Holt must decide
whether to keep the fight alive or flee west.
The production of the film is outstanding; the settings, costumes,
imagery, and soundtrack add a strong dose of reality to the characters.
The gunfights are as exciting as any war movie I've seen, and the
dialogue is also vintage mid-1800s Southern jargon, which Ulrich pulls
off surprisingly well.  The real gold nugget of the film however is
Jeffrey Wright's character: Daniel Holt is a Southern black man fighting
against Northerners.  In principle, he's killing those who are fighting
for the freedom of his people.  This role has rarely been touched, if
ever, in modern filmmaking, however the reality of the situation is that
there actually were a number of black Southerners who fought for the
Confederacy, many of whom thought that it would lead to better treatment
after the war.  Throughout the film Holt's emotions are expectedly
hidden but when he reveals some inner demons the film is at its peak.
Believe me, I can understand why you wouldn't want to see it.  Jewel,
Skeet Ulrich, and nobody else you've ever heard of.  It's sounds hard to
take seriously, right?  Every once in a while a good one comes along
against the odds and that's the case here.  Director Ang Lee (SENSE AND
SENSIBILITY) has done a fantastic job and this film is really worth
watching, even at two hours and ten minutes.  I still haven't figured
out what RIDE WITH THE DEVIL means exactly, but it would be a travesty
if a lame title kept this one from being a real success.
 Based on the novel Woe to Live On by Daniel Woodrell

Title
Review for Jing ke ci qin wang (1999)
filmcritic.com presents a review from staff member Athan Bezaitis.
You can find the review with full credits at
http://www.filmcritic.com/misc/emporium.nsf/2a460f93626cd4678625624c007f2b46/81c3df2014250f48882568650020730c?OpenDocument
THE EMPEROR AND THE ASSASSIN: A film review by Athan Bezaitis
Copyright Filmcritic.com 2000
THE EMPEROR AND THE ASSASSIN sets a new standard for quality of
production.  The story, costumes, sets, music, and performances all have
such a powerful authenticity that after watching it, I felt like I had
just lived through a two-thousand year old episode of Chinese history.
Director Chen Kaige's (YELLOW EARTH, TEMPTRESS MOON) film lives up to
its billing and is a worthwhile success (not to mention the most
expensive Asian film ever produced).
Set in third century BC, THE EMPEROR AND THE ASSASSIN is the story of
Ying Zheng (Li Xuejian), leader of the Kingdom of Qin, whose goal is to
conquer the six other kingdoms of China and merge them into one unified
land.  To accomplish this objective, he embarks upon a horrific reign of
terror and brutality against all who stand between him and his destiny.
In an attempt to aid Zheng's conquering of China, Lady Zhao, (Gong Li)
his lover since childhood, devises an intricate fake assassination plot
against him, which, when "uncovered," will provide him with a legitimate
excuse to invade the neighboring kingdom of Yan, his greatest obstacle
to unification.  When Zheng betrays her trust and invades her homeland
of Zhao killing thousands including innocent children, she turns against
him.  As part of the original scheme to be in exile in the kingdom of
Yan, she encounters Jing Ke (Zhang Fengyi), a great warrior and former
assassin.  They fall madly in love and she attempts to convince him,
along with The Prince of Yan, to kill the King of Qin before he becomes
Emperor and continues his tyranny.
The story is a bit confusing because so much is lost in the translation
from Mandarin, but pay close attention, and you'll be able to follow
along.  What I found most enjoyable about the film was its character
portrayals within the context of a historical deconstruction.  From the
assassin, Jing Ke, to the power-hungry Ying Zheng, the emotions and
reactions are surprisingly humanistic, and I could easily relate, even
though the plot takes place two thousand years ago, and is part of a
civilization totally different than our own.  For example, Jing Ke is an
assassin who is able to recognize the wrong in killing through the power
of love and rises against King Zheng.  Also, Lady Zhao is a woman who,
in her naiveté, believed that a benevolent leadership under a united
emperor would stop the bloodshed that the people of China had faced for
hundreds of years.  These endearing characters, most of which are
fictional, blend in perfectly with the historical setting and add the
much-needed element of passion into the dramatic mix of the story.
THE EMPEROR AND THE ASSASSIN is not to be missed.  It breaks from the
typical American mold with its slow developing plot and strenuous length
(over two and a half hours), but captures the quality of the finest
homegrown products reminiscent of BRAVEHEART or DANCES WITH WOLVES.
Indulge yourself in an in this epic rendition of a tumultuous episode of
ancient Chinese history.
4 stars ****
Starring:  Gong Li, Zhang Fengyi, Li Xuejian, Sun Zhou, Lu Xiaohe, Wang
Zhiwen, Chen Kaige, Gu Yongfei, Zhao Benshan, Ding Haifeng
Director/Writer: Chen Kaige
Producer: Satoru Iseki, Shirley Kao, Philip Lee
Screenplay: Wang Peihong
MPAA rating: R
Year of Release: 1999
--
Christopher Null - cnull@mindspring.com - http://www.filmcritic.com

Title
Review for Snow Falling on Cedars (1999)
[filmcritic.com presents a review from guest writer Athan Bezaitis.  You
can find the review with full credits at
http://www.filmcritic.com/misc/emporium.nsf/2a460f93626cd4678625624c007f2b46/3ce97502087a70ae8825680b00063f8a?OpenDocument
The transformation of an intricate novel into a successful film can be
a daunting task. Filmmakers must effectively generate symbolism and
imagery onto the screen, instead of allowing the readers to interpret
it for themselves. That's why people are always saying that a movie
was never as good as the book.
Unfortunately, SNOW FALLING ON CEDARS, directed by Scott Hicks
(SHINE), is a prime example of an unsuccessful interpretation of a
tremendous novel.
Set in 1951 on a fictional island called San Piedro, just north of
Puget Sound, Kazuo Miyamoto (Rick Yune), an American-born man of
Japanese descent, is on trial for murder. In this small town, the
Anglo and Japanese-American populations had long lived in relative
harmony until Pearl Harbor dragged half the town's population into
internment camps.  Kazuo was a veteran of the war and served in the US
military, but despite his ranking and valor, he is stigmatized as a
"Jap" and faces long odds in the racially polarized town. Ethan Hawke
(REALITY BITES) plays Ishmael Chambers, the local reporter who may
have evidence crucial to Kazuo's innocence. But Ishmael's past links
him to Kazuo's wife Hatsue Miyamoto (Youki Koudo), whom he loved as a
child in a forbidden romance. As the trial unfolds, and the outcome
doesn't look good for Kazuo, Ishmael must decide to whether or not to
intervene.
What takes pages and pages of complex thought and explanation for
character development in a book seems merely happenstance when
explained in the context of a two-hour film. For example, we know that
Ishmael's character is morally astute, but the movie fails to portray
just how difficult it is for him to help absolve Kazuo from guilt. Why
would he wait when someone's life was hanging in the balance? Another
problem is the film's editing. Attempting to get its arms around a
vast amount of information, it confusingly bounces back and forth from
childhood, to war, to funerals, to internment camp, to weddings, and
so on. This montage blending of past with present appears tries to
chop together a dozen plot elements that don't make sense. Example:
halfway through the film, we learn that Ishmael went to war and lost
his arm. Are we supposed to interpret his indifference toward Kazuo's
fate as revenge for his battle wound that he blames on his lost love
for Miyamoto? I have no idea.
With a large ensemble cast of impressive actors, a lot of the talent
was wasted on roles that were limited because the film was in a
constant time warp. However, Max Von Sydow plays an Oscar-worthy
supporting role as the attorney assigned to defend Kazuo. His demeanor
is grandly stoic as he is faced with a tremendous task.
Do yourself a favor and read the book. In the two hours and five
minutes that it takes to watch the film, you can probably make a
significant dent into the novel, and it'll probably cost the same.
Unless you buy popcorn at the theater, that would make the movie more
expensive.
**1/2
--
Christopher Null - cnull@mindspring.com - http://www.filmcritic.com
Author - Network Administrator's Reference, 1999 - ISBN 0-07-882588-1
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0078825881/filmcriticcom

Title
Review for Diamonds (1999)
filmcritic.com presents a review from staff member Athan Bezaitis.
You can find the review with full credits at
http://www.filmcritic.com/misc/emporium.nsf/2a460f93626cd4678625624c007f2b46/0c8aee0c7c3597e088256888001cef9f?OpenDocument
DIAMONDS
A film review by Athan Bezaitis.  Copyright filmcritic.com 2000
Kirk Douglas is a real trooper.  He still looks darn good for eighty,
and his resilience after suffering a debilitating stroke in 1996 is
quite admirable.  Unfortunately, he's the only thing really worth
cheering about in DIAMONDS.  In his first big-time Hollywood production,
director John Asher has three major stars with Dan Aykroyd, Douglas, and
the beautiful Lauren Bacall, but the newcomer fails to add anything
truly novel to the hackneyed formula of an implausible treasure hunt
that brings together an estranged family.
The story follows the life of Harry Agensky (Kirk Douglas), a former
welterweight champion who is devastated by the one-two punch of the loss
of his beloved wife and the after-effects of a stroke.  Once known as
the "Polish Prince," Harry is now faced with spending the rest of his
life in a retirement home.  But there is hope as, supposedly, fifty
years ago he made a deal with a Reno mobster to throw a fight so that he
could retrieve hundreds of thousands of dollars worth of diamonds... but
he can't remember where they are hidden.  Nobody will help Harry, and
his visiting son Lance (Aykroyd) doesn't buy his father's fable about
the fight and the diamonds, either.  Lance is his dad's opposite, a
super-sensitive San Jose Mercury News sports writer still trying to win
over his old man.  Ironically, Lance seems to have the same problems
with his own son Michael (Corbin Allred - ANYWHERE BUT HERE).  When the
three decide to go for broke and head to Reno, they clash hard and seem
to fail every step of the way.  However, what they lose in wealth they
gain in insight, and finally discover they can't live apart.
The story, despite being sappy and clichéd, is somewhat fun, and the
physical antics of Douglas, of all people, steal the show.  He's
surprisingly nimble and quick-witted, and he proves that the "Polish
Prince," after all those years, can still kick some butt.
Unfortunately, Aykroyd, who I was hoping would show stuff from the
hilarious days of THE BLUES BROTHERS and TRADING PLACES, was somewhat
limited in his role.  So much was made of him as a big wimp, constantly
sucking up to his father, that he didn't have the freedom to get really
wacky.  On the other hand, Lauren Bacall, playing a Reno madam, is
excellent as the love interest of Harry.  The two have great chemistry
and their tryst is strangely romantic and satisfying.
This one gets three stars simply because Kirk Douglas carries it on his
still powerful shoulders.  While it's not quite as good as GRUMPY OLD
MEN, it's light years ahead of THE ODD COUPLE II.
--
Christopher Null - cnull@mindspring.com - http://www.filmcritic.com

Title
Review for Romance (1999)
[filmcritic.com presents a review from guest writer Athan Bezaitis.  You
can find the review with full credits at
http://www.filmcritic.com/misc/emporium.nsf/2a460f93626cd4678625624c007f2b46/568a258d1888948788256824000a654a?OpenDocument
It's not every day that you can see a well known porn star acting in
serious cinema.  Of course, ROMANCE is not really worthy of being called
a serious film. While its theme of one woman's struggle to overcome
sexual oppression is innovative, it lacks tact and fails miserably due
to the crudity of its approach.  I refuse to believe that this film is
some sort of groundbreaking phenomenon that French audiences will
appreciate because it's a brilliant "character study" -- and, as such,
that American's will scoff at it.  I saw the movie with two French grad
students who both walked out of the film disappointed and visibly
queasy.
Marie (Caroline Trousselard) is a depressed nymphomaniac school teacher
stuck in a relationship in which she cannot arouse her lover.  The whole
story involves her searching throughout Paris for the fufillment that
her asinine boyfriend denies her.  She defiles her body in the process
as she encounters different men who satisfy her deprived erotic needs.
She is willing to take on everything and everybody: from a vile stranger
on the her apartment stairway who prosteletyzes her for oral sex, to a
dominating masochistic school principal, to porn star Rocco Siffredi
(whose character admits he hasn't had sex in four months).  Can you
imagine what happens there?
The biggest problem with the film is not only its graphic (just about
dragged-out with nothing substantial occurring.  Case in point: the four
sexual encounters take about fifteen minutes each, and any adult can be
spared the explicit details, which fail to add any critical meaning.  If
we didn't want a plot we could have rented one of Rocco's other films.
Even Rocco's biggest fans will be disappointed, because the blue movie
titan fails to satisfy.
Then again, I have to know whether or not that scene was real.  If not,
there were some pretty amazing special effects...
1 star (lowest rating)
--
Christopher Null - cnull@mindspring.com - http://www.filmcritic.com
Check out the G-Rex Personal Shopper at http://www.g-rex.com

Title
Review for Universal Soldier: The Return (1999)
filmcritic.com presents a review from staff member Athan Bezaitis.
You can find the review with full credits at
http://www.filmcritic.com/misc/emporium.nsf/60e74e041ca9cd6b8625626f0062219f/bf06d466fd88595b8825685900752b2a?OpenDocument
Jean-Claude's best days are behind him.  Way behind him.  The former
martial arts champion is now graying at the temples, and he still hasn't
improved on his English accent.  Of course, his acting skills -- in the
traditional sense of dialogue and mannerisms -- have never given us
sufficient reason to watch his movies, but when his physical
capabilities start to deteriorate, you know he's in trouble.
So what do you do when your star loses his signature appeal?  UNIVERSAL
SOLDIER: THE RETURN attempts to turn him into a sort of James Bond,
allowing him to rely on high tech stunts and clever intuition rather
than pure power.  The problem is that nobody wants Van Damme when we've
already got Arnold, Pierce Brosnan, and even Sly Stallone as kings of
the one-liner action flicks.  So the formula is set: a limited budget, a
fallible star, and Goldberg, the WCW wrestler, as your ominous villain.
The result is a predictably lackluster flick.
RETURN is the story of SETH, the uncontrollable mainframe computer, who
has ordered the practically invincible UNISOL soldiers on a wild killing
spree.  Can Jean-Claude stop them? You'll have to rent it to find out
for yourself, but I'll tell you that Jean-Claude only does his famous
reverse aerial roundhouse kick to the face once.
If you're looking for a few cool fight scenes or some cheeseball special
effects for a mind numbing evening then check it out.  Otherwise, you'd
be better off with some of JC's other combat movies like KICKBOXER or
BLOOD SPORT.
--
Christopher Null - cnull@mindspring.com - http://www.filmcritic.com

Title
Review for Best Man, The (1999/I)
[filmcritic.com presents a review from guest writer Athan Bezaitis.  You
can find the review with full credits at
http://www.filmcritic.com/misc/emporium.nsf/2a460f93626cd4678625624c007f2b46/9859238ec6b1e750882567fe0005c9c7?OpenDocument
The best text for a film to toy with the "emotional heartstrings" of
an audience is undoubtedly the romantic comedy.  Broad in its appeal,
the filmmaker doesn't have to worry about turning away certain
audiences with horror, overblown special effects, or too much action.
Romantic comedies are so successful because they parody our
fascination with love and all its complexities.  They are kind of like
rolling along a roller coaster of emotions poking fun at our society's
mores, twisting and turning towards a morally fulfilling conclusion.
It's a catch 22- despite the fact that we know what's going to happen
in the end, we keep coming back for more, and are continuously
intrigued time and again by the molding of a blissful resolution.
THE BEST MAN, directed and written by Malcom Lee, is a prime example
of an exhilarating love story that will certainly charm its audience.
Well written and fabulously acted, this film hopefully will put some
fresh new faces onto the Hollywood scene.
The story of a group of college friends reuniting for a wedding, THE
BEST MAN chronicles a weekend in the life of Harper Stewart (Taye
Diggs- GO, THE WOOD).  A commitment shy writer who must deal with
marrying off his best friend Lance Sullivan (Morris
Chestnut-G.I. JANE), the hype of his upcoming first novel, and facing
"the gang" again, who will not let him escape some secrets of his
past.  By the end of the weekend, several of those secrets are
indirectly revealed in an advanced copy of his book, which, much to
his dismay, has already gotten around the to the group of friends.
The culprit is an over ambitious bridesmaid Jordan Armstrong, (Nia
Long- SOUL FOOD) who is also a television producer looking for an
exclusive interview, and a maybe a little something else from Harper?
Just what are these dark secrets of Harper's past?  You'll just have
to find out, but when they are revealed, the whole group will have to
reevaluate their relationships with each other, their lovers, and with
themselves.
The most commendable aspect of this film is its amazing cast.  Tye
Diggs is one of Hollywood's brightest young stars and turns in a
brilliant performance in his first feature role.  Quentin, (Terrance
Howard- JOHNS, MR. HOLLAND'S OPUS) one of Harper's main college
buddies, steals the show as a hedonistic lover-boy with no clear
career ambitions despite enormous artistic talents.  Hilariously
funny, his character encompasses a perfect blend of intelligence and
sass.  Another buddy, Murch, (Harold Perrineau- best known as the
narrator from HBO's "Oz") plays an oversensitive soft spoken guy
trapped in a dysfunctional relationship with longtime girlfriend
Shelby (Melissa De Sousa (THE FIRE THIS TIME- a short film).  It's
nice to see him in a role where he's not confined to a dark cell or a
wheel chair as in "Oz."  He's a talented actor with a bright future
and this film shows his versatility.  Sanaa Lathan, (LIFE) Harper's
girlfriend whom he can't quite commit to, also puts in a memorable
performance.  Morris Chestnut (BOYZ IN THE HOOD) must be commended for
his display of emotion in anticipation of his forthcoming wedding
despite the maelstrom of hysteria leading up to the event.  Finally,
Nia Long (STIGMATA) whose character's overzealousness often shades her
good intentions, plays an excellent role.  This cast is one of the
finest I've seen in any film of late.
The only weak points were that the movie ran a little long and several
crucial scenes were a little far fetched. Like when Lance, the groom
to be, steps into the bathroom to read Harper's book while the
strippers are getting it on at the bachelor party in his honor.  Come
on now.  How are we supposed to believe that?
Otherwise, this is definitely a fun first date movie.  A good one for
breaking the ice with that first rendezvous on a Friday night.  By the
end of the film, you just may find yourself with your arm around that
special someone.
Starring:  Taye Diggs, Nia Long, Morris Chestnut, Harold Perrineau,
Terrance
Howard, Sanaa Lathan, Monica Calhoun, Melissa De Sousa
Producers:  Spike Lee, Sam Kitt, Bill Carraro
Writer and Director:  Malcom D. Lee
Year of Release: 1999
MPAA rating:  R
*** and a half stars
--
Christopher Null - cnull@mindspring.com - http://www.filmcritic.com
Author - Network Administrator's Reference, 1999 - ISBN 0-07-882588-1
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0078825881/filmcriticcom

Title
Review for Best Man, The (1999/I)
Accompanied by THE BEST MAN director Malcolm Lee, I spoke with Diggs at
the Pan-Pacific Hotel in San Francisco about his relatively recent
venture into the world of film.  He reflected on his roller coaster ride
to success from his roots as a stage actor at Syracuse University and on
to Broadway where he starred in "Rent" and "Carousel."  He told the
story behind his debut performance in HOW STELLA GOT HER GROOVE BACK and
reflected upon his status as a budding sex symbol.  Through it all he
spoke with an amazing sense of candor and striking humility.  Those same
sincere emotions that he puts into his characters are reflected in his
cerebral persona, which directors and fans like myself have come to
revere.
filmcritic.com: In the opening paragraph of a recent New York Times
piece they compared you to Fred Astaire in reference to your history
with theater and your gradual transition to film.  How do you respond to
that statement and how do you feel about the state of modern movies?
Diggs: I would love for film to go back to those days where you had to
be able to do everything just to get by. In the forties, fifties, and
sixties they were good singers, good actors, and good dancers. That's
the school that I come from.  I would love for film to go back to that
but nowadays it's too difficult because there's a whole "cheese factor"
involved.  You see someone who sings and you need to know whether or not
they are going to have the mass appeal when they cross over.  I think
that people were just more talented and well-rounded in the past because
they had to be.  Back then the studios had crafted stars like Judy
Garland.  You just don't see the same type of all-purpose entertainers
nowadays.
filmcritic.com: You have done a lot of theater acting, both "Rent" and
"Carousel" on Broadway. Do you plan to return to that?
Diggs: Yes.  Actually from this point on until April I'm going to be
working on a show called "The Wild Card" in New York City at the
Manhattan Theater Club. It's a brand new piece taken from a poem.  I
jump at any chance to go back into theater.  That's what acting is to
me.  That's where I learned my craft.  Whenever I do acting for film
there's always a certain amount of altering I have to do to my style
because it's so different.  I'm always up for going back to the stage.
filmcritic.com: Have you done any stage since your first film HOW STELLA
GOT HER GROOVE BACK in 1997?
Diggs: No.  That was two years ago and I've been extremely busy ever
since. It's been quite a whirlwind.  The only reason I say two years is
because someone else told me.  It's all been a big blur.  Just a
different person shouting cut on a different day.  On the set I never
know what day of the week it is. It's been really crazy.  I welcome it
though.  This is what we all said that we wanted to do when we were in
college and now it has come to fruition.  It's very exciting and
challenging.
filmcritic.com: It always seems like in your movies that you're taking
your clothes off. I'm sure you get asked about that a lot.  Is that just
part of the characters or do they add it because of your status as a
rising sex symbol?
Diggs: They've never added that after I've come on to a film.  Not one
role that I've played has been written specifically for me.  It's just
been the role of the romantic lead.  Brad Pitt and Tom Cruise are always
taking off their shirts.  That's just what you do.  You have to have sex
and take off your clothes.  It has been refreshing that the last four
roles that I've done have not been so blatantly sexual with me being put
on some imaginary pedestal.  I keep all my clothes on in HOUSE ON
HAUNTED HILL, MARY JANE'S LAST DANCE, and THE WAY OF THE GUN.
filmcritic.com: Do you consider yourself a sex symbol?  How do you deal
with all your adoring female fans on a daily basis?
Diggs: I only get bits and pieces of it here and there on the streets.
Publicity really hypes it up the most.  After this movie comes out it
might get a little rougher but until now it hasn't been that bad.  Like
I went out to a predominantly black club last night and nobody said
anything and I was wishing somebody would so that someone would dance
with me.  It's a trip but it hasn't crossed over to the point where
women are throwing their panties at me.  Honestly, when people ask me
these questions it just tickles me because I wasn't like this in high
school.  I mean it was me, but I was thinner and nerdier, and didn't
have as much confidence.  Deep down that person still remains and I just
laugh when I see myself all studded out in magazine articles and films.
I know what the real person is like and it makes me laugh.
filmcritic.com: Is Taye Diggs your real name?
Diggs: It's a nickname.  All my friends from my past would know me as
Scott Diggs.  Taye Diggs comes from Scott-taye.  When I went to college
I liked it because it was so different and I have an infatuation with
nicknames.
filmcritic.com: How were you perceived in LA coming from Broadway?
Diggs: LA is so vapid.  At the time "Rent" was at its peak and most of
the cast was going into the major studios looking for parts.  I actually
got a couple of TV spots from it.  But then all that died down and as
far as casting was concerned it didn't really matter that I had been on
Broadway. Everyone was primarily concerned with screen experience.  I
was lucky enough to land a role where they were looking for a "no name"
actor in HOW STELLA GOT HER GROOVE BACK.  If they were looking for
somebody famous Wesley Snipes would have gotten to star along with
Angela Basset.  It was truly luck that they wanted to bring somebody new
on the scene.
filmcritic.com: Your supporting performance in GO has received much
critical acclaim.  How important was that role to you and what did you
get out of it?
Diggs: I feel proud because HOW STELLA GOT HER GROOVE BACK wasn't quite
out yet so I had no "Hollywood buzz" going into my audition.  I really
take pride in being able to say that I would have gotten that part
whether or not STELLA had ever existed because that's the kind of cat
Doug Liman is.  He brought me in.  He read me.  He hadn't seen STELLA.
He didn't really care, and it was the perfect type of role for me at
that time with a cast of gritty young actors.  I'm hyped that he found
something in me and allowed me to be a big part of that.
filmcritic.com: You've had two wedding movies this year with THE BEST
MAN and THE WOOD, how do they compare?
Diggs: THE WOOD was about young people and the other one is more of a
grown up movie.  One is much more light and fun and the other really
goes to the core of adult issues, emotions, and feelings, which is why I
took it.  The large ensemble cast and the fact that it was being shot in
New York, combined with a lot of strong positive images as far as
African Americans are concerned, really turned me on to THE BEST MAN.
It's a movie about black people that deals with issues that cross over
into universal themes that people of all races and creeds can relate to.
filmcritic.com: In THE BEST MAN, why didn't your character (Harper) feel
the need to confess to the people involved before his first novel came
out?
Diggs: I think that subconsciously Harper (Taye Diggs) wanted all his
friends to find out.  That's why he writes the book in the first place.
On the surface his character was ignorant but deep deep down he realized
that they should know about what happened and he felt guilty.  The way
he dealt with his guilt was through writing and he convinced himself
that nobody would ever find out, which is where he went wrong.  We all
make mistakes like that, sleeping with somebody who we shouldn't have or
kissing a girl when we know it is wrong.  Me personally, outside of the
book I don't know that I would have told either.  I'm an advocate of the
old adage, "if it ain't broke don't fix it."  If you realize that what
you did was wrong and you KNOW that it's not going to get back at
anybody, in a lot of ways confessing will aggravate the problem even
more.  I'm not saying I'm not an advocate of being honest, but let's
face it, honesty works best when both parties are understanding.
filmcritic.com: You've already said you love to dance, act, and sing.
Would you ever consider pulling a "Jennifer Lopez" by trying your hand
in the music business?
Diggs: I don't know how it would be taken.  I would have to go about
choosing a label carefully because I wouldn't want to be perceived as
corny in any way.  When you go into that area you have to cope with a
lot of stuff that I don't necessarily want to deal with as far as
selling a certain number of units and what not.  So I don't know that
I'm ready to add all that stress, but I definitely love to sing and if
it were easy then I'd do it.  But everybody would be doing it if it were
easy.
--
Christopher Null - cnull@mindspring.com - http://www.filmcritic.com
Author - Network Administrator's Reference, 1999 - ISBN 0-07-882588-1
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0078825881/filmcriticcom

Title
Review for Room for Romeo Brass, A (1999)
filmcritic.com presents a review from staff member Athan Bezaitis.
You can find the review with full credits at
http://filmcritic.com/misc/emporium.nsf/2a460f93626cd4678625624c007f2b46/02898aa859c1aca78825697f0016f18d?OpenDocument
     There's something sick about a 25-year-old man wanting to befriend
kids the age of 12 or 13.  But it makes for great cinema, especially
when the guy is affable and goofy, like newcomer Paddy Considine's
character Morell, in A Room for Romeo Brass.  Once he gains the trust of
his two adolescent pals Romeo and Knocks, the good times start to roll
as the two boys ditch school and head for the hills in search of
adventure with their newfound friend.  Directed by Shane Meadows
(TwentyFourSeven), the film is at its core a twisted comedy about a
young boy, Romeo Brass (Andrew Shim), and his search for love,
attention, and acceptance through his friends and in defiance of his
family.
     The story begins with Romeo and best friend Knocks (Ben Marshall)
as inseparable pals who live as neighbors in suburban England.  Knocks
has a rare back disorder that requires surgery and keeps him constantly
limping, but his family is supportive, especially his mother and father
as they excitedly anticipate his recovery.  Romeo, on the other hand,
lives with his mother and older sister in a volatile household with no
father figure.  In fact, Romeo's estranged dad Joseph (Frank Harper),
shows up right around the same time the boys encounter Morell.
     When Romeo sees his dad, he threatens to move out.  The 13-year-old
Romeo then decides to stay with Morell; who doesn't seem to mind because
he doesn't work, will go along with just about anything, wears the
oddest of clothes, and has become infatuated with Romeo's older sister
Ladine (Vicky McClure).  Everything seems dandy as Romeo and pals hit
the streets playing hooky from school.  In fact, Morell seems so
gullible that the boys take charge of the relationship by teasing him
and making him look like a fool in front of Ladine.
     But there's more to Morell than he lets on.  To put it mildly,
Morell has some major identity problems and soon becomes a thorn in
Romeo's life and a wedge between his and Knock's once-sacred
friendship.  The plot takes a sharp turn as the audience learns just how
disturbed Morell actually is.
     Well acted and humorous, Shane Meadows is successful in creating a
very realistic impression of adolescent friendship.  One minute the two
young friends are best pals taking a blood oath, and the next day the
tables are turned.  Meadows deserves praise for weaving the problems in
Romeo's family life, like his abrasive mother and nonexistent father,
with the emergence of his new friend Morell, who represents a
pseudo-parental figure simply because he is fully-grown and drives a
car.  The blending of humor as portrayed through Morell's quirkiness
helps lighten the somber tone, as Morell symbolizes a freedom for Romeo
from his problems at home.  Appropriately, Knocks creates a moral
dilemma for Romeo, as he comes to hate Morell while Romeo is duped by
his charm.  These twists add to the dramatic mix in creating a competing
triangle of distorted relationships between Knocks, Romeo's family, and
Romeo and Morell.
     Aside from a score of cheesy British rock, the movie was memorable
and enjoyable.  From beginning to end the pace is fluid, and at 88
minutes, it doesn't often flag.  Of course, as a foreign (British) film
it unfortunately won't be playing in many theaters, so it will be a
challenge to find on the big screen.  But I urge you to see it; I
promise you won't be disappointed.
Director: Shane Meadows
Writer: Shane Meadows, Paul Fraser
Producer: George Faber, Charles Pattinson
Starring: Andrew Shim, Ben Marshall, Paddy Considine, Frank Harper,
Julia Ford, James Higgins, Vicky McClure, Ladene Hall, and Bob Hoskins
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect'tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!

Title
Review for Bandits (1997)
[filmcritic.com presents a review from guest writer Athan Bezaitis.  You
can find the review with full credits at
http://www.filmcritic.com/misc/emporium.nsf/2a460f93626cd4678625624c007f2b46/a699f00b68ee75968825680400043b03?OpenDocument
Foreign films have a unique and powerful way of facing controversial
issues.  The most recent example comes from Germany, which has created
a movie so audacious in its statement of women's liberation, that it
makes the much-scrutinized themes of THELMA AND LOUISE feel like
child's play.  Despite subtitles, unfamiliar faces, and a somewhat
taboo motif, BANDITS is sure to have tremendous crossover appeal with
American audiences.
Directed by Katja von Garier,BANDITS chronicles four German fugitives
and their passion for rock n' roll as they attempt to evade the law
and flee the country. Their odyssey takes this all girls rock band
(hence The Bandits) from rehearsal at the prison church to performing
in front of thousands as they garner Mickey and Mallory-esque
attention through their adventures as outlaws on the run. Their
experiences and emotions are conveyed in their music, which serves as
a link between their depraved sense of humanity and newfound freedom.
The less you know about the film going into it the more enjoyable it
will be, so if you hear anyone talking about it, do yourself a favor
and cover your ears.
The cast is fabulous and the best part is that you've never seen these
actors in any other roles, unless of course, you're from Germany. How
often can you say that about an American film?  For all I knew it was
the German Sharon Stone and Tom Cruise on screen, but none of that
mattered because I was focusing solely upon characters rather than
well-publicized canned images.
Don't let the fact that this is a women's lib film deter you.  The
excellent soundtrack is all in English.  The cinematography and the
action are fantastic, and trust me when I say that the themes of
female autonomy are not at all overbearing and only add to the
nostalgia of the movie.
Find out which small theater in your neighborhood is playing this film
and check it out.  It's well worth the effort.
Director/Writer: Katja von Garnier
Starring:  Katja Riemann, Jasmin Tabatabai, Nicolette Krebitz, Jutta
Hoffman, Hannes Jaenicke, Werner Schreyer, Andrea Sawaski
Producer: Harry Kugler, Molly von Furstenberg, Elvira Senft
MPAA rating: R
Year of Release:  1999
**** Four Stars
--
Christopher Null - cnull@mindspring.com - http://www.filmcritic.com
Author - Network Administrator's Reference, 1999 - ISBN 0-07-882588-1
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0078825881/filmcriticcom

Title
Review for Held Up (1999)
filmcritic.com presents a review from staff member Athan Bezaitis.
You can find the review with full credits at
 http://www.filmcritic.com/misc/emporium.nsf/2a460f93626cd4678625624c007f2b46/05ec58085b38da99882568dd0006ac9e?OpenDocument
 Jamie Foxx and Nia Long are far too well established for screwball
comedies like Held Up.  Coming off the success of Any Given Sunday, the
gifted Foxx should be commanding some serious cash, and I'd like to see
him in more serious roles.  The same goes for Nia Long, whose portrayal
of an overachieving news producer desperate for love in The Best Man
earned rave reviews.  Unfortunately for these two young actors, Held Up
takes a big step back as far as resume building is concerned.
Regrettably, it makes no pretense about being a legitimate romantic
comedy at all; rather it's slapstick in a sort of Cheech and Chong meets
Friday in the setting of Deliverance type of story.
 The film's plot is downright fickle and it might as well have been
written in less than the hour and a half it took to watch the film.
Foxx plays Michael Dawson, a successful Chicago businessman on a trip to
the Grand Canyon with his beautiful fiancée Rae (Long).  When she finds
out that he's spent 15 thousand bucks on his newly purchased classic
roadster with the money that was meant to be for their new home, she
dumps him on the spot and hitches a ride to the airport.  So Mike is
stuck in the middle of the Grand Canyon at a Sip and Zip gas station
with fifty bucks and a blaring 8-track.  Before long he gets duped by
some kid who ends up stealing the car, while all he wants to do is get
to the airport so he can catch Rae before she gets on that plane.
 To Foxx's credit, the guy is hilarious, and somehow he hoists this
picture on his shoulders to make it halfway bearable, even after some
horribly played out jokes about his being mistaken for Puff Daddy and
Mike Tyson(???).  The film's sequencing is basically a series of pot
shots at the ethnic stereotypes of its cast, one after another.  Any
semblance of plot is invariably just fodder for the next gag.
 But the truth is that I did laugh.  I'm not saying that it's worth
$8.50, or that I'd take a date to see it, but I'll wager it becomes an
instant classic on the shelves of college students across the country,
right next to movies like Dumb and Dumber, Tommy Boy, and Don't be a
Menace to South Central While You're Drinking Your Juice in the Hood.
This is one that could only be enjoyed over many beers, late at night
with some good company.  But the saner among you should stay away.
Director: Steve Rash
Starring: Jamie Foxx, Nia Long, Ian Black III, Grant Bolton, Jake Busey
Writing Credits: Jeff Eastin, Erik Fleming
Producer: Stokely Chaffin, Kevin DeWalt, Jay Heit, Jamie Rucker King,
Neil H. Moritz
Editor: Jonathan Chibnall
MPAA Rating: PG-13
Year of Release: 2000
--
Christopher Null - cnull@mindspring.com - http://www.filmcritic.com

Title
Review for What Lies Beneath (2000)
filmcritic.com presents a review from staff member Athan Bezaitis.
You can find the review with full credits at
http://www.filmcritic.com/misc/emporium.nsf/2a460f93626cd4678625624c007f2b46/1b8ff19b819922a68825691c001aab94?OpenDocument
        So far, this summer's supposed blockbusters could have used a free
course on filmmaking from Robert Zemeckis.
Lesson number one: Take time to acclimate the audience to the
characters.  Unlike The Perfect Storm, What Lies Beneath completely
absorbs the main character's personalities into the dramatic mix-
frailties and all, through an intense look into their psyche,
practically forcing the audience to become emotionally attached.  This
is not an original concept in cinema, but after watching Clooney and
Wahlberg jump on that fishing boat and mournfully pronounce their
goodbyes as if they already knew the ominous storm was on its way, you
can't help but root for the ship to capsize.
Lesson number two: The film should have a pace that at least feels
natural.  The Patriot is a story about revenge, yet I couldn't shake the
dreadful notion of an overly contrived plot, and I could practically
smell the "sap" in those birch trees as Mel wreaked havoc.  In contrast,
the plot in What Lies Beneath is clever throughout, filled with suspense
and surprises, each scene linked in perfect transition with the next.
Lesson number three: Less is more!  We've seen Braveheart, and now
Gladiator and The Patriot in the same summer?  Both films were
successful, but movie moguls seem to have forgotten that the most
exciting and thrilling effects can be found in the main characters'
performances.  By keeping special effects subtle, What Lies Beneath
proves that you can still create a supernatural film that is downright
chilling, without all the grandeur.
        From his grave, Hitchcock would have given this picture two decrepit
thumbs up.  Zememckis pulls one straight from the Master of Suspense's
hat by casting legends Harrison Ford and Michelle Pfeiffer in an eerie
and isolated setting, which really allows their performances to resonate
throughout.
Set in affluent and rural Vermont, Ford plays Dr. Norman Spencer, a
geneticist and professor from Harvard who is on the verge of a
breakthrough with a nerve manipulation drug.  His wife, Claire (Michelle
Pfieffer) has been the pillar of strength in her husband's quest for
academic glory, and has even sacrificed her promising music career. 
Their marriage appears perfect, but ever since a terrible car accident
one year earlier, Claire has been facing emotional problems, which makes
her the perfect victim to be haunted by an unsettled entity from
beyond.  Frightened out of her wits by strange phenomena around the
house along with the disappearance of a new neighbor's wife, Claire
decides to confront what she believes is a ghost haunting the house. 
What she unearths could cost her her life and that of her husband, as
the will for revenge seems able to conquer death.
        Michelle Pfeiffer's performance is dazzling.  There's something
mysterious about the glow of her blue eyes that mesmerizes.  Half the
time you don't know whether she's possessed, depressed, or just
completely loony.  Plus, her disconcerting appearance suits the Quixotic
setting so perfectly that I found myself truly sympathizing with her
plight.  Harrison Ford also shows that his judgment in scripts is not
permanently kaput after Air Force One and the awful Random Hearts.  This
role will put him back in my good graces just in time to start more
rumors about the next Indiana Jones movie.  In addition, screenwriter
Clark Gregg deserves credit for putting together a script that is
frightening and somehow totally believable.
        I have a feeling that What Lies Beneath will be compared to the remake
of Cape Fear several years ago.  What Lies Beneath is absolutely precise
in its production.  But it's the puzzling and original plot that will
have fans of movies like The Sixth Sense in for another giddy shocker.
Starring: Harrison Ford, Michelle Pfeiffer, Diana Scarwid, Joe Morton,
James Remar, Miranda Otto, Amber Valletta
Director: Robert Zemeckis
Producers: Steve Starkey, Jack Rapke, Robert Zemeckis
Screenwriter: Clark Gregg
Year of Release: 2000
MPAA Rating: PG-13
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!

Title
Review for Where the Money Is (2000)
filmcritic.com presents a review from staff member Athan Bezaitis.
You can find the review with full credits at
http://www.filmcritic.com/misc/emporium.nsf/2a460f93626cd4678625624c007f2b46/997038ef028e021d882568b20015019d?OpenDocument
At more than one point in his career, Paul Newman has been the ultimate
con man.  THE STING, BUTCH CASSIDY AND THE SUNDANCE KID, COOL HAND LUKE,
THE HUSTLER, and THE COLOR OF MONEY all epitomized this master of smooth
talk and wily ways.  But the successes of all of his past films and all
of their cons have one common denominator: a memorable and talented
supporting cast.  In THE HUSTLER, Jackie Gleason played Minnesota Fats,
who proved to be a worthy nemesis by outsmarting the cocky and more
talented Newman.  Tom Cruise, in THE COLOR OF MONEY, was like an
apprentice learning from the master sorcerer, as Newman molded Cruise
into an effigy of his old self.  While Newman always emerged the star,
he would continually share the spotlight, so that none of those movies
became one-dimensional.
 Newman's latest film, WHERE THE MONEY IS, directed by Marek Kanievska
(LESS THAN ZERO), unfortunately lacks the supporting cast for Newman to
thrive as the luminary "hustler."  In the film, Newman plays Henry
Manning, a former bank robber who plans to break out of prison by faking
a stroke.  When he is transferred to a minimum-security nursing home, he
thinks he's home free.  However, the woman assigned to take care of him,
Carol Ann McKay (Linda Fiorentino - MEN IN BLACK) suspects that he's a
fake and attempts to lure him out of his trance so he will help her in a
burglary with her and her husband Wayne (Dermot Mulroney - COPYCAT, MY
BEST FRIEND'S WEDDING).  She goes to some outrageous lengths to keep him
from playing possum, but when she finally awakes the bank robbing
legend, she faces a challenge that could change her life.
Nothing against Linda Fiorentino, who does a fine job in this movie, but
she has no extraordinary talents that allow her to become a stand-out
criminal worthy of Newman's tutelage.  Also, her husband Wayne proves to
be a clumsy ox despite his prowess on the football field and the "cool
head" that his wife constantly brags about.  As Newman states in one of
his first lines, "It's amateur hour," and unfortunately this is the sad
truth for this movie.
Though the far-fetched plot and lack of support diminish Newman's
shining star, the movie isn't a complete failure.  It offers some good
laughs and a few vintage Newman moments, like his dance with Fiorentino,
where he manages to change her life in one song and a two-step.
--
Christopher Null - cnull@mindspring.com - http://www.filmcritic.com

Title
Review for Joe the King (1999)
[filmcritic.com presents a review from guest writer Athan Bezaitis.  You
can find the review with full credits at
http://www.filmcritic.com/misc/emporium.nsf/2a460f93626cd4678625624c007f2b46/0d80c2138f9e77fe882568100003c38a?OpenDocument
If you go to see this movie because you like Val Kilmer or Ethan
Hawke, you're making a mistake. You won't get the typical flamboyance
a la Kilmer, nor the masculine ruggedness you've come to expect from
Hawke. Both actors put on weight and changed their look in order to
portray absolute degenerates in this film, but that old trick doesn't
work for these two. No matter how sloppy, drunk, or flabby these two
get, they can't hide their Hollywood faces--they're just too
pretty. Both are unconvincing, and when the two biggest names fail to
produce, you know you've got a lousy product.
JOE THE KING is the sad story of a young boy trying to cope with his
dysfunctional family in a poor, small town in the 1970s.  Director and
writer Frank Whaley's debut attempts to reveal the loneliness of
adolescence by exposing the heart of a boy made tough by the harsh
circumstances of his miserable family life. Set in upstate New York,
the film follows Joe Henry (Noah Fleiss-JOSH AND S.A.M.) as he deals
with an abusive father (Kilmer) and a hapless mother (Karen
Young). His only salvation is his fifteen-year-old brother, Mike (Max
Ligosh). Together they comfort each other as they deal with each
violent and horrific episode of family crisis.
The weight of the film relies heavily upon the shoulders of young Joe
Henry. Unfortunately the story doesn't allow for his character to
develop because he gets no support from any of the other
characters. His mother has no time, his father is constantly drunk,
his brother hates him throughout most of the film, and his guidance
counselor (Hawke) doesn't seem to care.  So we're stuck with two hours
of one kid's pathetic existence.
The bright spot is that the young cast outshines the adults. Deprived
of food for days, the adolescents survive on a diet of Hohos and
whipped cream. They'll do anything for a buck from stealing to washing
dishes to mopping toilets. Strangely enough, the adults throughout the
town fail to notice how desperate the kids actually are, and their
indifference is disturbing. To their credit, the kids of the small
town are a lot more convincing and resilient in dealing with despair
than their elders.
But no matter what era it takes place in, this film is overdone and
clichéd. If you see it, I recommend some No Doz, otherwise you
might find yourself being awaken by some theater attendant. Or he may
have nodded off as well, who knows.
* one star [lowest rating]
--
Christopher Null - cnull@mindspring.com - http://www.filmcritic.com
Author - Network Administrator's Reference, 1999 - ISBN 0-07-882588-1
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0078825881/filmcriticcom

Title
Review for Just Looking (1999)
filmcritic.com presents a review from staff member Athan Bezaitis.
You can find the review with full credits at
http://filmcritic.com/misc/emporium.nsf/2a460f93626cd4678625624c007f2b46/2819bc86bb9f79e28825697700216a56?OpenDocument
Director: Jason Alexander
Producer: Jean Doumanian
Screenwriter: Marshall Karp
Stars: Ryan Merriman, Joseph Franquinha, Peter Onorati, Gretchen Mol,
Patti LuPone, Amy Braverman, Ilana Levine
MPAA Rating: NR
-------------------------------------
Growing up can be difficult no matter what era you are from.  Of course,
how many of us have heard the old "when I was your age..." speech from
someone older than you?  But even though the years may move forward, the
more things change, the more they can stay the same, as evidenced by
this self-proclaimed "semi-autobiographical" look at growing up in the
50's, presented by screenwriter Marshall Karp.
Just Looking is the story of Leny (played perfectly by Ryan Merriman)
who is a boy like any other 14 year old, curious about sex.  So much so
that his goal for the summer of 1955 is to see two people "engaged in
the act of love" as he puts it.  But his innocent curiosity ends up
getting him caught and his mother (Patti LuPone) and stepfather decide
to ship him off to "the country" (also known as the Bronx) where he
meets a new set of friends who just happen to share a similar interest.
Lenny teams up with the local neighborhood kids who have formed what
they call a "Sex Club."  It's not that they have any of it, just that
they talk about it a lot.  Lenny meets an older woman named Hedy
(Gretchen Mol), a beautiful nurse that just happens to be a former
brassiere model, and he places his odds that she'll be the one to
satisfy his goal.  Hedy's promiscuous lifestyle with a doctor "friend,"
combined with the Sex Club's numerous discussions on how things
supposedly work only fuel Lenny's desire to see his goal (which has now
become an obsession) into a reality.
Directed by Jason Alexander of Seinfeld fame, the film is expertly made
-- to some surprise.  Joseph Franquinha is ideal as Lenny's uncle, and
Ryan Merriman does a great job of stumbling through the clumsy but
inevitable stages of adolescence.  The entrancing Gretchen Mol is truly
a treat to watch.  Overall, Just Looking has perfect casting all the way
through.  The story is there, too: It's a delightful film with some
tender and thoughtful moments, being an altogether witty, funny,
charming, and intelligent look at adolescence and growing up.  It
honestly entertained me the entire time.
Just Looking takes place at a time when parents would rather spell s-e-x
than say it in front of their kids.  Times have changed, but the
adolescent fascination with sex has not.  This is a timeless coming of
age comedy that will ring as true for the teens of today as it will for
their baby boomer Moms and Dads.
http://www.spe.sony.com/classics/justlooking/index.html
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
