Authors
Michael J. Doyle
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Mystery Science Theater 3000: The Movie (1996)
Here's a bit of background for those of you unfamiliar with the television
program "Mystery Science Theater 3000" (MST3K). This is an American program
which basically consists of a man and two robots seen in silhouette, making
fun of some god-awful old movie playing on the screen before them. These rag
sessions are divided with little vignettes about the man (named Mike Nelson)
and the robots and their life on this space station.
Wait a second. This is the Internet. Everyone is familiar with MST3K.
So let's cut to the chase. The question is, "How do you make a movie out of
MST3K?" And the answer: "Just show it in theaters on a really big screen."
And the next question is, "Is this any good?" The answer: "It's hilarious." 
The movie of ridicule is THIS ISLAND EARTH - that 50s flick with the famous
bug-eyed, brain-headed alien. As soon as the film started and the wisecracks
began, I was laughing. They were clever, well-timed and one, after another,
after another. I was in stitches right up to the first vignette. After the
break, I had settled into the pattern of the humor and thus didn't laugh as
_hard_. But I still laughed a _lot_ - a snort or "tu-HA!" every 30 seconds
or so.
I had been afraid that the filmmakers might have tried to justify their
big-screen debut with some goofy storyline involving the robots and Mike.
Not the case. While the vignettes in the space station seemed to have
slightly better production values than the TV show, they had little
pretension toward developing a plot. No more than 5 minutes into the film,
Mike and the robots settle in to watch THIS ISLAND EARTH. There they remain,
for the bulk of the movie.
While this movie may simply be an overgrown episode of MST3K, it's the best
episode I've ever seen... although I can't call myself a fan. Since I first
channel-surfed into MST3K years ago, the bits and pieces I've seen probably
total no more than four or five full episodes. But if you don't credit my
assessment, believe the audience. There were more than a few MST3K nuts in
there and they were dying with laughter.
Do you need to see MYSTERY SCIENCE THEATER 3000: THE MOVIE on the big
screen? Of course not. But if you love MST3K, you'll see it in the theater.
I know you will. Just be sure to stick around for the credits; they rag on
them, too.
In case anyone is interested, I also posted this review a few days ago to a
mailing list I run called "Mike's Midnight Movie Reviews." Basically, I go
to advanced screenings for new movies and post a review to the list when I
get home (usually around midnight). 
To join "Mike's Midnight Movie Reviews" send a message to
listproc@colossus.net with no subject and the words "subscribe m3review" in
the body. Or you can use the subscription form at the m3review website
(http://vidkraft.com/m3review). And just so you know, there is no financial
involvement to this list on your part or mine.
Michael Doyle           Mike's Midnight Movie Reviews
maeldun@i-2000.com http://vidkraft.com/m3review
