Authors
Stephen Hopkins
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Sleepers (1996)
Director:   Barry Levinson
Starring:   Kevin Bacon, Robert DeNiro, Dustin Hoffman, Jason Patric, Brad
            Pitt, Brad Renfro, Joe Perrino, Geoffrey Wigdor, Johnathan
            Tucker
UK release: January 3, 1997
Based on the controversial bestseller by Lorenzo Carcaterra (who co-produced
the film), Sleepers tells the story of four boys growing up in "Hell's
Kitchen"--west Manhatten in New York City.
After a prank goes horribly wrong the boys are sent to reform school in
upstate New York, where they become the victims of horrifying verbal,
physical and sexual abuse at the hands of the guards who run the place.
Years later one has become a journalist and another a lawyer, having risen
to the position of New York assistant district attorney. In a chance
encounter the other two, by now killers for the mob, run into one of their
former tormentors and shoot him dead.
The events that follow bring the four friends together in a final attempt to
lay to rest the demons of the past. Their plan is as simple as it is
audacious: to avenge their past suffering and punish those who caused it. A
plan that culminates in a courtroom showdown, and quite literally calls for
all involved to get away with murder.
The film falls into three parts, charting the boys' adolescence in Hell's
Kitchen and the stunt that lands them in reform school, through to the
shooting of the guard and the trial. The first two parts focus entirely on
the young actors, led by Brad Renfro (The Client, The Cure) and newcomer Joe
Perrino. All four deliver strong performances and successfully portray a
depth of character that seems missing in the film's later stages.
Its main disadvantage is that it doesn't have the time to go into the depth
of detail that made the book such a gripping read (I read my way through
from start to finish within 24 hours). It is also manipulative and slightly
over-produced, relying too much on background music to rouse the emotions.
As the guards' ringleader Kevin Bacon is too theatrical, shouting and
yelling his way through the role when a quieter, more mundane approach would
have been far more terrifyingly effective. There is no attempt to scratch
the surface and explore more deeply the lives of the guards, or delve into
their actions in any but a superficial way.
The abuse scenes would have the power to shock anyone who had not already
read the book upon which it is based. That said, they are scattered
throughout the movie, some recalled later on as flash-backs. They are also
depicted in such a low-key way that it is all too easy to miss the full
impact of what the boys are supposed to be going through. One scene in
particular occurs when one of the boys is about to be released, and the
guards decide to have their evil way with all four of them for the last
time. The viewer sees them being frog-marched down a long, dark, narrow
passage. The camera moving backwards, you see their faces and the guards
behind them, talking. That they are about to be viciously gang-raped is
never hinted at. The scene cuts to first-person perspective, camera moving
forwards towards a patch of light at the end of the tunnel. Special effects
kick in; the light rushes to fill the screen and hey presto! years have
passed and the boys have now grown up. The way the abuse scenes are handled
spares the viewer from the dirty detail of what the boys endured, but in
doing so glosses over how severely the system affected them, so that it is
far harder to empathise with their subsequent actions as adults.
The film pays too little attention to how deeply the boys have been scarred
by the abuse at reform school. No indication that it brutalised and
destroyed two of them so much that they grew up into cold-blooded killers.
No mention that the year at reform school ripped into the gentlest of hearts
and emptied it of all feeling, leaving instead a boy devoid of his
sweet-eyed charm, his face a resting place for all the torment and abuse he
had endured, who could kill a man and not give it a moment's thought. When
watching Sleepers, it was always bits I recalled from the book that helped
to set numerous scenes in context. While it is in some ways harder for a
film to convey how a character is thinking and feeling, Levinson could have
done better here.
One of the most powerful scenes is where the four of them are sitting down
at a table talking, and one of them says all he wants is to not be afraid of
the dark again, or hear a door in the night and wonder who's coming in,
what's going to happen to him. In a film that is by turns mind-numbingly
disturbing and coated in sacchrine, this is one of the few really poigniant
moments that make it to the big screen.
Overall, Sleepers is well worth seeing, in spite of its flaws. I really
wanted it to be a good film and a success, having been so deeply affected
when the paperback came out in the shops. There is little wrong with what is
in it; the one or two flies in the ointment are what was omitted. If you
read the book before hand, you won't go far wrong.
- -- 
Stephen Hopkins  PGP keys are on Web server at
http://www.stadiou.demon.co.uk: 0x5085B1B9 (1024 bit), 0xBDF2F489 (2048 bit)
