Authors
Malcolm Austin
Number of Reviews
5

Title
Review for Toys (1992)
     I liked this movie a lot more than other people seem to have.
Partially, I think, this is because of one of my own quirks of judging a
movie.  I will often greatly enjoy a movie that achieves a distinctive
mood or feel through music, set design, camerawork, or other incidental
components, even if the plot and/or central characters of the movie are
weak.  This is why I enjoy some "bad" movies such as DUNE, STREETS OF
FIRE, or THE 5,000 FINGERS OF DR. T.
     TOYS certainly achieves such a unique feel.  If this film does not
win an Oscar for set design, the Academy will have forfeited all
respectability as judges of artistic merit (like they haven't
already ...).  The movie is simply wonderful to watch from beginning to
end.  The only movie I can think of to compare it to is WILLY WONKA AND
THE CHOCOLATE FACTORY, but this film is far more sophisticated,
visually, than that.  (Even if it doesn't have the Oompa-Loompas.)  One
thing that surprised me was how good the soundtrack was.  It uses
several of my favorite contemporary musicians, such as Enya, Thomas
Dolby, and the new and obscure (or so I thought) Tori Amos.  Not since
NORTHERN EXPOSURE have I seen such a variety of music used well to
create mood.
     Let's quickly go over the bad points.  The plot is predictable, but
that's not really the problem.  It starts with a lot of promise for an
obvious formula, but quickly becomes very dumb, culminating in a final
scene reminiscent of the classic SANTA CLAUS CONQUERS THE MARTIANS.
(This is not a complement, believe me.)  Most of the casting is actually
quite fine, with the notable exception of Robin Wright, who wanders in
and out of the movie sporting a really strange Southern accent, and
seeming to imitate Darryl Hannah all through the movie.  Robin Williams
is a perfect choice for the character of Leslie Zevo, and not just as a
zany comedian, but his talent gets squandered so badly that his only
good moments are the scenes where he is, in fact, a zany comedian.
(Contrast this to DEAD POET'S SOCIETY, in which his *worst* moments are
when he is a zany comedian.)  He does have one hilarious scene towards
the end as he delivers a Pattonesque speech to a bunch of wind-up toys
in his inimitable style.
     Joan Cusack, on the other hand, delivers a wonderful performance as
Leslie's sister Alsatia.  I think her work was good enough to merit a
Best Supporting Actress nomination, although I doubt she'll get one.
     There are so many unique scenes in this movie that I think it is
well worth seeing, despite its obvious flaws.  I'll definitely be
watching this film again.
-- 
=Malcolm Austin==w:(212)703-6134==h:(914)633-3966==maus@fid.morgan.com=====

Title
Review for Malcolm X (1992)
     Personally, I think the most significant aspect of this movie is
the likelihood that, given the discussion about the film and its
subject, millions of people will finally learn how to spell "Malcolm."
But that's just me.
     As usual, Spike Lee the director has far outshone Spike Lee the
media twerp.  This movie is an excellent portrayal of the continuing
evolution of a man's thought.  It is marred by a few touches of
oliverstonism, such as vague (and unsupportable, from the movie's
internal evidence) intimations that the CIA was involved with Malcolm
X's death, and a tacked on prologue and epilogue, featuring the Rodney
King film intercut with a burning American flag, and, in the most
unintentionally horrific scene in modern filmdom, Nelson Mandela
lecturing to school children.
     But in between these lapses into political dreck, there is a truly
outstanding movie.  It is testament, I think, to the craft of this film
that, despite its three-and-a-half-hour length, I didn't even glance at
my watch until almost three hours had gone by.  Like other great
biographical epics, such as LAWRENCE OF ARABIA, or PATTON, this movie
just doesn't seem as long as it is.
     Spike Lee has largely muted his style in this movie, so it almost
looks like "typical" Hollywood fare.  However, there remains evidence of
his directorial flare.  Most notable is the very different looks he
achieves for different parts of the film, as Malcolm X's story unfolds.
The flashy Harlem beginning contrasts with the austere prison scenes,
and the lush photography of Malcolm's years with the Nation of Islam,
and finally the spiritual and almost surreal period of Malcolm's hadj,
and the final period of his life afterwards.
     Without more research, I can't say how accurate the portrayal of
Malcolm X is, but as myth-making, this film is wonderful.  It is easily
Spike Lee's most impressive accomplishment.
-- 
=Malcolm Austin==w:(212)703-6134==h:(914)633-3966==maus@fid.morgan.com=====

Title
Review for Edward Scissorhands (1990)
     I saw EDWARD SCISSORHANDS last night at the Ziegfield theatre is
NYC.  (A *great* movie theatre in terms of picture and sound quality.)
Here are some quick impressions, if you are deciding whether or not to
see it.
     ES is directed by Tim Burton, whose credits include BATMAN,
BEETLEJUICE, and PEE-WEE HERMAN'S BIG ADVENTURE.  The film is great
visually, and Danny Elfman has contributed a good, not-just-Batman-
reedited score.  The plot is quite weak.  Winona Ryder looks about as
bad as she possibly can (which isn't very) in a blonde wig.
     The bad news is that the story is kind of limp.  But the film looks
great.  This is more than the costumes and sets--it is also how the
scenes are put together, how the characters behave, and where the camera
is and how it moves.
     A truly fine movie needs several strong elements--the script,
direction, and acting must *all* be good, and the producers need to have
sufficient resources in money and technical types to create the sort of
film they want to make.  It doesn't have to be a lot of money, depending
on what they want to do, and how clever their people are.
     EDWARD SCISSORHANDS is not a truly fine movie.  The only thing that
works really well here is the visuals.  The acting is professional but
nothing more, the story fails to convince even in its own "fantasy"
genre, and there is very little originality in what the plot contains,
or how it unfolds.
     If you only see one film this year, don't pick this one.  But a
film does not have to be truly fine in order to be worth seeing.  If you
enjoyed THE ADVENTURES OF BARON MUNCHAUSEN, you will almost certainly
like this movie.  Warning for parents though, it contains somewhat more
violence than MUNCHAUSEN.
     It is easy to compare Tim Burton to Terry Gilliam (JABBERWOCKY,
TIME BANDITS, BRAZIL, MUNCHAUSEN).  Their films have similar strengths.
Burton is somewhat more childlike and carefree in his imagination, and
Gilliam is significantly better at moving the plot along.  Maybe he just
has a better editor.
     Among Burton's other films, I would say that EDWARD SCISSORHANDS
is better than BATMAN, if you take away Nicholson's performance, and not
as good as BEETLEJUICE.
     Sorry for the rambling nature of this review, but I am pressed for
time, and am trying hard to avoid spoilers.  To sum up, I enjoyed it
purely for the look of the movie.  It has little else to recommend it,
but what more do you need?

Title
Review for Yume (1990)
     DREAMS is the first film by Akira Kurosawa since RAN was released
(in 1986?).  It is composed of eight pieces, each individually titled,
and each describing an incident seemingly taken from a larger story.
All of them of are beautifully filmed, with striking, occasionally
surreal imagery, and a minimum of conversation.  Don't wait for this
film to hit videotape; cropping the pictures will ruin many carefully
composed scenes.
     There is no plot to this film.  The individual scenes do suggest
stories, although they come sometimes from the beginning, middle, or
end of the stories which contain them.  The cinematography is
consistently astonishing.  I saw a PBS special on Kurosawa recently
which showed him painting watercolor visions for what would become the
film KAGEMUSHA.  In DREAMS, he also seems to have carefully constructed
his images.  I can think of a half-dozen individual stills which I would
like posters of.
     The film is relentlessly visual, with long stretches containing no
dialogue.  Like most Kurosawa movies, the pacing is somewhat slow by
American standards.  Scenes are built very carefully.  In "Blizzard,"
for instance, he waits until we experience the same exhaustion that the
characters on screen are going through before advancing the story
along.  The short length of each segment, however, prevents the film
from lagging, at least until the final three scenes.
     The final scenes do take the film down some, as they contain long
speeches about the evils of radiation and industrial civilisation.  I
may be reacting in part to my own negative opinion of the "Split wood,
not atoms" message imposed on these scenes, but I feel that the long
speeches, absent from any of the other scenes, disrupt the visual
storytelling process.  During the afore-mentioned PBS special, Kurosawa
says that he distrusts films that carry meanings.  As he put it,
"Meaning is easy, but style--that is very difficult."  He seems to have
forgotten this sentiment midway through this picture, and employs a
troubling narrative style to present his views.  This is a jarring
contrast to the other pieces.  "The Tunnel," for example, delivers a
very strong and complex "message" without any exposition at all.
     Even these scenes are beautifully made, however.  In particular,
the last scene, which contains no surreal photography (although the
setting is, sadly, all too unreal), is a wonderful celebration of nature
and life.  This film left me deeply moved and in awe at Kurosawa's
ability to compose images.
     The movie may be difficult to find.  In NYC, it is playing at only
one theatre (the 57th St. Playhouse), and I don't think it has been
released very widely.  It is worth the effort, however, so don't pass up
a (probably brief) chance to see this film in a theatre.

Title
Review for Cyrano de Bergerac (1990)
     I saw CYRANO DE BERGERAC yesterday.  It is by Jean-Paul Rappeneau,
and stars Gerard Depardieu in the title role.  It is, of course, based
on the play by Edmund Rostand.
     I am a long-time Cyrano fan.  I have seen the Jose Ferrer version
several times, and seen it performed as a play twice.  I have also read
two translations.  And I'm not even counting Steve Martin's ROXANNE!
     I went to this film expecting it to be great, and I have to admit I
was disappointed.  I think this was partially my own nearly jaded
familiarity with the story, and partially a result of the film.  In
particular, the sub-titles are the bane of this movie.
     The film tries much harder than the Ferrer version to avoid seeming
like a play.  The locations are detailed and look authentic.  In many
ways the translation reminds me of Zefferelli's ROMEO AND JULIET.  It is
beautifully shot, and the camera-work is top-notch.  Depardieu gives
another wonderful performance, and the rest of the cast is up to his
level.
     Despite being filmed as a movie, no liberties were taken with the
dialogue from the play, as far as I could tell, although at least a few
scenes were trimmed.
     The film is in French, and, frankly, I think that this is why the
film kind of fell flat for me.  The subtitles were excellent (written by
Anthony Burgess), but they were very distruptive, particularly when they
became idiomatic.  Burgess went to great trouble, I think, to construct
rhyming subtitles when appropriate, but at times this causes a gap
between the sub-titles and the actual dialogue.  There is also a lot of
dialogue, spoken very rapidly, and I found myself often straining to
keep up with the lines, and still look at the film itself.
     Subtitles are a blunt instrument designed to allow a foreigner to
enjoy a film, and follow the plot.  This film foils them.  I am not
suggesting that the film such have been dubbed.  That would have been
far worse.  But this film depends heavily on language, and subtitling
is just not adequate.
     There were several French speakers in the audience, and they were
rapt.  During the final scene, many (all men!) were crying.  This is how
I recall reacting when I saw the play, and read the book.  This time,
though, I felt more emotion seeing the reactions of those around me,
than in seeing the film.
     To sum up, this film is breath-taking and wonderful--if you speak
French.  If not, you might actually prefer the English (Ferrer) version,
even though it is really a far inferior film.  Better yet, see it as a
play.
