Authors
Timothy J Luoma
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for As Good As It Gets (1997)
        I prefer to go to movies knowing as little as possible about what  
other people think of them, because it tends to influence me.  I knew nothing  
about As Good As It Gets besides its stars.
        Nicholson is the only man who could play this role (Melvin).  It was  
not surprising to hear that it was written mainly for him.  He carries it  
off marvelously.  As the obsessive-compulsive, Melvin continually shocks us  
with what he says and how he acts.
        It would be easy for Nicholson to ride roughshod over the film the  
way Melvin wants to ride over the world.  But Melvin has a weakness...  
namely, Helen Hunt (and a fine choice for a weakness she is ;-)  Hunt plays  
Carol, the waitress at Melvin's favorite restaurant.  She's the only one who  
can tolerate him, and the only one who can tame him, and even that doesn't  
always work. Hunt's character is a marvelous counter-balance to Nicholson's.   
That's no small task, and she does admirably in it.
        The supporting cast, especially Kinnear, is also good.  Even the dog  
is good, who seemed to be able to exhibit miraculous control over its  
bladder and whose eyes played a part in setting the stage and telling the  
story.
        The best part of the movie is the writing.  It avoids the  
stereotypes that would have killed the movie.  The pace was perfect, keeping  
the story going at just the right tempo.  What was (pleasantly) surprising  
was the ending, which I won't spoil, but will simply say that it skillfully  
done.  As we were leaving the theatre I heard someone else say they didn't  
want the movie to end.  I felt the same way.
        Brooks draws us into this world and we truly care about those who  
are in it.  As a romantic comedy this movie was perfect, avoiding the  
pitfalls gracefully, giving us a close-up of three people who could be living  
next door.
(All Rights Reserved.  No reproduction without permission.)
