Authors
Zach McGhee
Number of Reviews
2

Title
Review for October Sky (1999)
At the core of October Sky, there is the overly convoluted and melodramatic
story, shoved down the throats of its audience, about four high school kids in
a small town trying to win a science fair. Thankfully, the film itself has much
more depth and integrity than can ultimately be described. 
The film starts in the late 1950's, just as the Russians launched Sputnik, a
satellite that would orbit the Earth continually. Indeed, the race for the moon
had begun, but it would be a few years before that happened. The mission of the
moment was to gain confidence in the United States once more, that we could
redeem ourselves as the most technologically advanced. The movie, however,
takes an unusual route to do so. 
In Coalwood, West Virginia, the town's name has definite meaning. The boys all
grew up to be coal miners, the girls all coal miners' wives. On occasion, one
boy would get a ride out of town on a football scholarship, but such occasions
were few and far between. Too small for the latter category, Homer Hickam (Jake
Gyllenhaal) is less than enthusiastic about his predetermined profession, but
can do little to change his destiny. 
Homer's father (Chris Cooper), however, sees no exception in the line-up of
forthcoming coal-miners, and as superintendent of the mine, will see his son
follow him in his footsteps. Regardless of whatever ambitions Homer may have,
they are irrelevant in a world as local as their's. 
But, one night, as Sputnik flies over the Coalwood October sky, Homer sees what
the possibilities are. In that instant, Homer's dreams grow beyond capacity. He
wants to know more about space, and satellites, and rockets. In the following
weeks, he searches out the school outcast, Quentin (Chris Owen), in a desperate
desire to learn. With Homer's other two friends (William Lee Scott, Chad
Lindberg), who are a bit reluctant at first, but soon follow Homer's ambition,
they begin. 
Cannibalizing Homer's basement, much to his father's dismay, they assemble as
many rockets as possible. However, after suffering a few casualties (i.e. his
mother's white picket-fence), they are forced to find another refuge to
continue the realization of their dream. Soon, the rockets succeed, flying
higher and higher each time. The Rocket Boys, as they came to be known, also
developed quite a cult following, with Homer's father notably absent. 
The beauty of October Sky is its ability to maintain an intricate balance
between the many issues it faces. The relationship between Homer and his
family, his father in particular, is one of the most well constructed pieces of
film in years. Typically, film has shown fathers and sons as bitter enemies,
nothing more. In October Sky, their relationship is brought to terms, as both
show obvious resentment, but ultimately love, towards one another. While the
story may be about four boys who make rockets, its heart is to succeed in life,
and realize your dreams. 
The film's imagery is visually stunning, not because of a location or fancy
15th century costumes, but because of how real and true it is. The cast is
generally excellent, with Gyllenhaal leading the way to perfection. The script,
coming from the real Homer's novel, is solid in every detail. 
While we may have to put up with a few movies like The Avengers or Armageddon,
every once and a while a movie comes along that reminds you why you pay $7
every week or two. October Sky is one of those movies. 
[Rated PG for language, brief teen sensuality and alcohol use, and for some
thematic elements.] 

Title
Review for Pleasantville (1998)
PLEASANTVILLE ***1/2* (3 and a half stars)
        It was once said that ignorance is bliss.  But how can you
know bliss while ignorant?  If you know not sorrow, you know
not happiness, and vice versa.  Such is the story of Pleasantville,
a movie that's, quite frankly, inspired.  The story of a 1950's town
who's long lasting ignorance is challenged by modern day pop culture.
The result of society's ultimate reaction to change.
        In today's world, we treat life loosely, with little value.
Many consider material things to be more valuable than long term
happiness, and simply obtain them to fill such holes of loss and
greed.  Others search for a happier time and place, and secretly
hope for a return to our past.  A time many call safer, better, more
compassionate. Two such examples are modern day teens David
(Tobey Maguire) and Jen (Reese Witherspoon).  While David regularly
drowns out his chaotic reality by immersing himself in reruns of the
1950's sit-com, Pleasantville, sister Jen lusts after cute boys as an
admitted slut, climbing the social ladder through sex appeal.  But,
as Jen prepares for a date with MTV, and David for his much anticipated
Pleasantville marathon, a doorbell is rung.  A strange, unrequested
TV repairman (Don Knotts) gives them a remote to replace their
recently shattered one, after quickly quizzing David as to his
knowledge of Pleasantville.  After his departure, the two teens
quarrel in an effort to win the remote.  During the fight, a button is
pushed, and the two are transported into the very fictional, very
colorless world of Pleasantville.
        David, realizing that if they wish to get out soon they
can't tinker with the mindset of pleasant-folk, urges Jen to do the
same, and play along.  While she starts out well, she quickly loses
her balance, creating a domino effect of immense proportions, after
introducing the element of sex to the quirky little town.  Soon,
the black and white universe begins to sprout color.  Among the
newly enlightened, the perfect Pleasantville mother, Betty
(Joan Allen).  But, it's not just about sex.  Color can appear as
a result of love, compassion, anger, or hate.  It is about
individuality, the free agency to choose between what is right
and what is wrong, rather than stay confined to a "normal" and
supposedly perfect world.  We cannot become perfect by force, but
must be allowed to make mistakes, and strive to ascertain it
through correction and discipline.
        One of the film's few missteps hits when it fails to actively portray
some of the unfavorable consequences that can result from such
promiscuous behavior, as our society learned quickly after the sexual
revolution of the 1960's. Though it maintains the absurdity of racism,
another immorality.
        And while, throughout the film, Director Gary Ross may trip a bit with
his "hang on a sec while I beat you over the head with my message so
hard you won't soon forget it" strategy, such as the inclusion of signs
stating "No Coloreds", it does work, something that is a credit to his
history as a screenwriter.  He's also assembled a very capable cast,
including supporting actors Jeff Daniels (Dumb & Dumber), William H.
Macy (Fargo), and the late J.T. Walsh (Breakdown, JFK), as well as the
two leads and Allen (Face/Off).
        The cornerstone of the movie, the gradual inclusion of color
as the town progresses, also has a wide range of integrity, and is
constructed with great subtlety and detail.  It alone is a good reason
to see the film.
        The bottom line is that Pleasantville is a fantastic vision of
our society as its progressed, and while many may still hope and
remember the "good old days", we always must focus ahead on
what will be, not what could've been.
