Authors
Dan Navarro (eldorado@jetlink.net)
Number of Reviews
5

Title
Review for Switch (1991)
Blake Edwards' "Switch" -- a "Message Movie" for the '90s 
        Have you ever wished for a modern movie that could deliver a strong, 
uplifting spiritual message without being boring?  Once upon a time, 
Hollywood could accomplish that feat with ease.  But in today's 
sex-and-sensationalism market, films with spiritual themes are mocked, 
patronized, or even worse, ignored.  That's why Blake Edwards' 1991 comedy 
"Switch" (Warners-HBO Films) is such a serendipitous find:  A bawdy 
rib-tickler with ribald humor aplenty, yet one that delivers the spiritual 
goods along with the comedic ones.
        To be sure, the fabled Edwards raunch is intact in "Switch".  The 
film is sexy, funny, and cheerfully vulgar, with enough Rabelaisian humor to 
fuel a Joe Bob Briggs special.  But there is a sweetness here also, a frank 
admission that some things are more important than animal appetites, for 
example the salvation of one's soul.  Against all odds, "Switch" not only 
delivers that message, but does it in a positive, exhilarating way that 
rivals the best work of Preston Struges and Frank Capra.
        In "Switch"'s opening reel, a smug chauvinist named Steve (Perry 
King) is murdered by three women who once loved him.  Steve's soul descends 
into purgatory, where he is informed by God that he cannot gain admission to 
Heaven until he atones for his many offenses against womankind.  So Steve is 
returned to Earth for his second chance, with the admonition that he cannot 
enter Heaven until he finds one female who likes him.  To make things 
tougher, the womanizing Steve is reincarnated as Amanda (Ellen Barkin), a 
woman with the sort of dynamite body that has been Steve's lifelong 
playground. 
        To this point, you may sense a preachy feminist tale brewing, a 
cinematic lecture on how women think men ought to behave.  But Edwards has 
other fish to fry.  What ensues is a comedic tour-de-force by Barkin, who is 
splendidly funny as a man trying to cope inside a woman's body.  She wobbles 
shakily on stiletto heels, struggles to sit demurely in short skirts, and 
suffers a storm of sexual confusions when confronted with Steve's former 
girlfriends.  Even when Amanda is with a genuinely nice guy (Jimmy Smits), 
she cannot warm up to him, because inside she still thinks like a man.
        But the comedy is being played out against a deadly serious bass 
motif, the struggle for Steve/Amanda's immortal soul.  Satan wants it too, 
and he appears to Amanda with an offer to release her from her tortured 
existence, if she will consent to join him forever in Hell.  Horrified, she 
refuses.  But she knows, and we know too, that her time is growing short; for 
after weeks of searching, she has failed to find one female who likes her in 
either incarnation.
        In the early 1940s, Preston Sturges' seriocomedy "Sullivan's Travels" 
told the story of a man who is thrust into a world completely alien to his 
own, but a world in which he learns truths that would enrich his life 
forever.  Frank Capra's superb "It's a Wonderful Life" (1946) used the same 
idea in a different way, creating an epiphany that has made that movie a 
perennial favorite, one of the most loved films of all time.
        Unlike the Sturges and Capra heroes, "Switch"'s protagonist is no 
innocent, but an unrepentant heel suddenly challenged by fate to amend his 
miserable life.  But this is precisely what makes the message even stronger. 
All souls are equally precious to God, are they not?  Because "Switch" is a 
comedy, it does not seem unfair to disclose that in the end, the redeemed 
sinner does, indeed, gain admission to Paradise.  But the resolution that 
triggers this happy ending is a wondrous twist, a plot element strikingly 
outside the standard routine of modern sex comedies.  For it is nothing less 
than a cogent example of what is meant when people speak of the 
all-conquering love of God.
        Edwards' deus ex machina is no heavenly puppetmaster pulling strings, 
but a benevolent God who helps those who help themselves.  Seek and you shall 
find.  To find that point driven home so forcefully in a '90s sex farce like 
"Switch" is more than surprising, it is miraculous.  Sturges and Capra would 
have approved.

Title
Review for Destry (1954)
        "Destry Rides Again" (Universal, 1939) is usually accorded 
near-mythic status in books and film commentaries.  It teamed James Stewart, 
a hot new star fresh from his triumphant "Mr. Smith Goes to Washington", with 
the glamorous Marlene Dietrich in the story of a gun-hating deputy sheriff 
who succeeds in cleaning up a lawless town.  The film was so well-received, 
its title is nearly always mentioned in lists of the great films of that 
banner year, 1939.
        But "Destry Rides Again" is not the last word.  The film was remade 
as "Destry" fifteen years later by the same director, George Marshall, this 
time in Technicolor, with Audie Murphy in the central role of the gun-shy 
deputy.  The slick patina of the Stewart-Dietrich version, combined with the 
celebrated legend naming 1939 as Hollywood's Greatest Year, have worked to 
downgrade the 1954 "Destry" in the public's mind as an inferior remake.  It 
is nothing of the sort.  "Destry" is a near-classic Western, complete and 
satisfying in every way, and it boasts performances that in some ways eclipse 
the efforts of the 1939 cast. 
        In the old West, a small frontier town named Restful is anything but. 
 Hooligans roam the streets freely, random gunplay erupts everywhere, and 
peaceful citizens live in fear for their lives.  The town has an overworked 
sheriff, but the real power in Restful resides with Phil Decker (Lyle 
Bettger), a corrupt saloon owner who is the equivalent of a big-city crime 
boss.  Decker and his cronies operate in league with the slimy local mayor 
(Edgar Buchanan, magnificent in a rare villainous role) and Decker's own 
dance hall girl, Brandy (Mari Blanchard, so luminous she almost gives 
corruption a good name).  
        When the sheriff tries to interfere in one of Decker's crooked 
schemes, Decker has the lawman casually gunned down.  Then, in an effort to 
insulate himself from further interference, Decker arranges to have the town 
drunk, Rags Barnaby (Thomas Mitchell), named the new sheriff, thinking he 
will be ineffectual.  But Rags surprises everyone by taking his new 
appointment seriously.  He goes on the wagon, then sends for Tom Destry, the 
son of a former two-fisted lawman, to be his deputy.
        Tom Destry (Audie Murphy) arrives in Restful, looking nothing like 
the swaggering he-man the sheriff had in mind.  In fact, Destry doesn't even 
carry a gun.  The new arrival is soft-spoken, polite and deferential, the 
antithesis of the intrepid Western hero of legend.  And Destry does let 
himself get pushed around -- by Decker, by his gunsels, even by the femme 
fatale, Brandy.  But director Marshall is just setting us up, and we know it. 
 We watch in silent glee, waiting for the inevitable moment when the worm 
will turn, and the meek will inherit the earth.  When Destry's controlled 
rage surfaces at long last, he smites the villains mightily, with a vengeance 
that out-Shanes "Shane".   
        Marshall's chief asset in this retelling of the Destry story is, of 
course, Audie Murphy.  In World War II, Murphy had won the Congressional 
Medal of Honor for valor in combat, as well as 23 other decorations; and yet, 
this heroic fighting tiger turned out to be diminutive and baby-faced.  
Standing no more than five feet eight, with the angelic face of a 
well-scrubbed choir boy, Murphy must have seemed a "natural" for the role of 
the reluctant gunfighter Tom Destry.  As it turned out, not only was his 
physical appearance ideal for the role; his acting style, always low-key, fit 
the Destry mold perfectly.  
        James Stewart was, of course, one of the finest actors ever to appear 
in American cinema, and he was eminently qualified for most of the roles he 
played.  But at well over 6 feet tall, he towered over his fellow cast 
members in "Destry Rides Again", and was by nature unable to project the 
vulnerability his role demanded.  (Perversely, the casting department gave 
the role of Destry's chief nemesis to the shorter-than-average Brian 
Donlevy.)  Stewart also had a habit of punctuating his most intense dramatic 
moments with the dark, wild-eyed visage of a deranged man.  We can see that 
look in "It's a Wonderful Life" (1946), when Stewart's George Bailey is 
confronted with a nightmarish vision of the world, and in that sequence his 
expression was most appropriate.  But he uses the "crazy George Bailey look" 
four times in "Destry Rides Again", and it's unsettling, because we never 
expect to see the easy-going, nonviolent Tom Destry look that unstable.
        Audie Murphy's Destry is, by contrast, calm and friendly even in his 
most trying moments, as when he is forced to break up some recreational 
gunplay by local toughs.  Instead of glaring daggers at them, he smiles and 
graciously asks the men to let him borrow their guns.  Amused, they decide to 
humor the pint-sized pacifist by handing him their guns, because up until now 
they have had no reason to fear him.  All that changes, as Destry rapidly 
empties the pistols by picking off twelve tiny furniture knobs from a 
distance, in a dazzling display of marksmanship. In that instant, the lamb 
shows his fangs.  It's a defining moment in the film.  Even if you knew it 
was coming because you saw the 1939 version, it still catches you by surprise 
because this time around, Destry has seemed like such a powerless little 
pussycat.
        Mari Blanchard sparkles as Brandy, the amoral saloon queen.  She 
plays Brandy with a sexy exuberance, perhaps mindful that she was enjoying 
the best role of her career, after a string of small parts in B-pictures like 
"The Brigand" (1952) and "Assignment Paris" (1952).  Brandy is an intriguing 
puzzle: A bad girl who cheerfully aids and abets her lover, Decker, as he 
runs crooked poker games and fraudulent land schemes -- but who is 
nevertheless attracted to the peace-loving Destry and his basic decency.  
Blanchard also gets to sing and dance to three numbers composed for the film 
by Frederick Herbert and Arnold Hughes, although an upbeat tempo can't 
disguise the fact that one of the songs, "Bang! Bang!", is basically the same 
tune as "See What the Boys in the Back Room Will Have", sans Dietrich's husky 
tremolo.
        "Destry"'s dramatic stability is provided by the redoubtable Thomas 
Mitchell, as the town drunk turned sheriff.  The veteran screen actor had won 
an Oscar (for "Stagecoach", 1939) and two nominations, and was clearly the 
class of the "Destry" cast.  There is hardly a moment in any of his scenes 
when he does not own the camera.  Every inflection in Mitchell's voice, every 
nuance of expression, is done with authority.  Watch him in the scene where 
Rags Barnaby is informed, upon being awakened from a drunken stupor, that he 
has been named the new sheriff.  He steadies his bloodshot eyes, firms his 
jaw, flings away the bottle he was holding, and declares, in the voice of a 
man who's trying desperately not to sound inebriated, "A man's got to choose 
between th' bottle and th' badge!"  And with head held high, he marches away 
on wobbly legs that haven't quite sobered up yet.  It's a moment of bravura 
acting by an old pro who understood what screen acting was all about.
        But the enduring image in "Destry" is of Audie Murphy as the quietly 
courageous man of peace who, in the end, is forced to take up arms against 
the forces of evil.  The moment when Destry finally, reluctantly, straps on 
his gunbelt and heads out the door to take care of business is one of the 
great scenes in Western films.  It is beautiful, as justice is beautiful.  
And we have been so carefully set up for this moment that we are no longer 
sophisticated observers; we are little children again, cheering in the 
knowledge that soon, all the ugliness will be wiped out, and the world will 
be a happy place again.
Dan Navarro -- send mail to: eldorado@instorm.net

Title
Review for Roberta (1935)
        "Roberta" was one of the major musical triumphs of the
1933 Broadway season. Set in a glamorous Paris between the two
world wars, the play oozed romance, elegance, and continental
sophistication... or at least enough of those qualities to divert
attention from its absurd plot. A winning score by Jerome Kern
lifted "Roberta" several stratospheres above its banal libretto;
a good thing too, because without that boost, the show might
never have been translated to the screen to become the perfect
showcase for the talents of Fred Astaire and Ginger Rogers.
        Reams have been written, and will continue to be written,
about the superb dance partnership that was Astaire and Rogers.
In their initial pairing as supporting players in "Flying Down to
Rio" (1933), they captivated the public, and soon became the
movies' most famous dancing couple. But a quirk of fate has,
until quite recently, shrouded what is arguably their finest
collaboration, in RKO's 1935 movie version of "Roberta".
        Because M-G-M bought the rights to the musical in order
to create its own version, "Lovely to Look At", in 1952, the RKO
movie was kept off television and off video dealers' shelves
until the 1990s. Whole generations of film fans have grown up
loving Fred and Ginger in classics such as "The Gay Divorcee"
(1934) and "Swing Time" (1936), without ever savoring the one
film -- "Roberta" -- that really established Astaire and Rogers
as superstars. But now, at last, "Roberta" is available to view,
to analyze, and simply to enjoy. This is dancing at its
endlessly watchable best.
        The plot, such as it is, concerns American football
player John Kent (Randolph Scott), who inherits his aunt Minnie's
successful dress salon ("Gowns by Roberta") in Paris. There, he
falls in love with the firm's head designer, Stephanie (Irene
Dunne), who turns out to be an exiled Russian princess in
disguise. Boy gets girl, boy loses girl, then girl storms back
like the cavalry in the last reel to save the faltering business
by staging a mammoth fashion show, complete with beautiful
models, and lots of singing and dancing. Finis.
        Fred Astaire plays Huck Haines, a struggling bandleader
and the hero's best pal. Ginger Rogers is Huck's old childhood
flame Lizzie Gatz, who is in Europe masquerading as a Polish
countess, Tanka Scharwenka. Perhaps because they have little
responsibility for carrying the burden of the plot, Astaire and
Rogers seem positively liberated in their roles, and their
dancing together seems more spontaneous than ever.
        Lizzie, using her fake title as leverage to persuade a
reluctant impresario (Luis Alberni), gets Huck's band a job at
the Caf=E9 Russe, where she sings as Countess Scharwenka. Then,
during a rehearsal session with the band, Lizzie sings the Jerome
Kern-Bernard Dougall ditty, "I'll Be Hard to Handle", complete
with phony accent and much sly humor... and in so doing, she
launches one of the great Astaire-Rogers dance duets. The song
is sweet and hot, two choruses and it ends, and we think the
number is over. But it isn't, yet. While the band vamps lightly,
Huck and Lizzie begin a friendly conversation, reminiscing about
the old days; then, in the most casual, spontaneous way, they
begin dancing together. Lightly they sway, then so gradually
that we don't realize it's happening, their dance becomes a major
musical event.
        Arlene Croce, author of a definitive volume on Astaire
and Rogers, says of "I'll Be Hard to Handle": "This is the big
event of the film, the number in which 'Fred and Ginger' became
fixed screen deities."  It certainly gets your attention. They
start with a rhythmic shuffle, then after eight bars he gently
takes her by the waist and together they spin around and around,
settling at last into one of the most brilliant and inventive tap
duets ever filmed. Halfway through the number, they separate and
have a tap "conversation", each taking a phrase, then each
responding with a salvo of taps. The band strikes up a bugle
call, and Rogers snaps to military attention, only to be
distracted by Astaire's invitation to resume their buoyant pas de
deux. They continue the breathtaking duet as the music rises to
a new wave of excitement; then, just as our hearts are ready to
burst with exhilaration, they whirl one last time and collapse
into two chairs.
        As satisfying as the number is, "I'll Be Hard to Handle"
seems to resonate with us out of all proportion to its value as a
screen event, to move us in a way few movie dance numbers ever
have. Now that we have videotape that can be played and replayed
endlessly, at last we can put our finger on the number's special
ingredient: The entire sequence -- three minutes of exquisite
skill and grace -- is filmed as a single shot, with no breaks in
the action, no skewing of camera angles, no interruptions in the
flow of the dance. Knowing that Astaire was a perfectionist who
sometimes demanded as many as eighty takes before pronouncing a
dance number fit to be seen, we can appreciate how pleased he
must have been with this particular take, to let it occupy three
minutes of uninterrupted screen time, with no cuts. And he was
right: This performance is perfection itself. There would be
other great dance duets by Astaire and Rogers, and by other
dancers; but prophetic title and all, "I'll Be Hard to Handle"
would be tough to top.
        "Smoke Gets in Your Eyes" is probably the most famous of
the "Roberta" songs. In the film it is sung by Irene Dunne as
Princess Stephanie, and is later reprised as a romantic adagio by
Astaire and Rogers. Astaire once told this reviewer that he
didn't like to do love scenes -- and, sure enough, there are very
few conventional love scenes in the Fred Astaire oeuvre; he
always preferred to express his feelings for his partners through
their dances. His choreography for "Smoke Gets in Your Eyes" is
like a love scene, treating Rogers both like a queen and like a
delicate rose. There is a moment where they walk side by side,
he pressing her head lightly against his shoulder. The dance
casts a powerful spell, but it is kept short, and it ends with us
wanting more.
        "I Won't Dance", another well-known standard associated
with the show, originated not in the stage play "Roberta", but in
a 1934 London musical, "Three Sisters". It had a different lyric
then (by Oscar Hammerstein II) but for the movie the lyric was
revised by Dorothy Fields and Jimmy McHugh. This is the number
that Huck sings to a flirtatious Lizzie, explaining to her that
dancing just leads to romantic entanglements, and so "I Won't
Dance". But he protests too much, so two giant Cossacks carry
Huck to the dance floor, where he does a wonderfully inventive
solo involving tap dancing, jazz, swing, and several balletic
pirouettes.
        The climactic fashion show, showcasing the new gowns by
Roberta's dress salon draped on several gorgeous models (Lucille
Ball among them), is played out to "Lovely to Look At", a
romantic ballad written by Kern for the film. Irene Dunne sings
while the models parade their stylish frocks, and soon afterwards
the temporary conflict between Stephanie and John Kent is
resolved. The lovers embrace, romance is in the air, and it
seems to be contagious; even Huck and Lizzie make tentative plans
to marry.
        RKO, which was gleefully raking in the gate receipts from
the previous Astaire-Rogers film, "The Gay Divorcee", while
"Roberta" was in production, wisely chose to close "Roberta" with
a shot of Astaire and Rogers, the new superstars, rather than the
top-billed Irene Dunne. The die was cast. Cite "Flying Down to
Rio" as the first film to pair this extraordinary duo. Credit
"The Gay Divorcee" for being their first starring vehicle. But
salute "Roberta" as the film that finally distilled the essence
of Astaire and Rogers, and sent their lucky star spinning into
permanent orbit.
Dan Navarro -- send mail to: eldorado@instorm.net 

Title
Review for No Small Affair (1984)
        About halfway through "No Small Affair", there's a scene where
Laura, the singer played by Demi Moore, belts out a knockout rendition
of the Madeira/Dorsey standard, "I'm Glad There Is You."  It's a jazzy
paean to romance.  Watching the movie again recently, I was jolted
when Laura sang the line about "underrated treasures", because it's a
capsule description of the film itself.  "No Small Affair", unheralded
in its day and rarely revived since, is itself a treasure, a gem among
the gravel of cynical 1980s films.
        It's a coming-of-age tale, chronicling the conversion of
Charles Cummings (Jon Cryer) from gawky teenager to confident young
adult.  Nothing new there, except that director Jerry Schatzberg and
screenwriters Charles Bolt and Terence Mulcahy have fashioned a
charming film that sings with a bittersweet passion about Cummings'
wrenching transformation.  His catalyst is Laura, the 23-year-old
saloon singer played by Demi Moore.  With her youthful yet worldly
manner, and her scratchy violin voice playing its siren song on
Cummings' sensibilities, the lad is a goner.  What ensues is a funny
and endearing rite-of-passage story with brilliantly clever
complications.
        Cummings -- he prefers not to be called Charles -- is a
16-year-old amateur photographer who likes to shoot pictures of
colorful San Francisco locales.  One day, when Laura and a friend
wander into camera range, Cummings waves them off, but not before he's
snapped a few shots of Laura's beautiful face.  Seeing that face later
in his proof sheets, Cummings is hooked.
        Infatuated beyond reason, Cummings searches for his new
beloved.  He begins by staking out the dock where he first saw her.
After several hours of fruitless waiting, he sulks: "Someone said, if
you stand in one spot long enough, the whole world will pass by.  I
don't know who said that, but he's an idiot."
        Fortune finally smiles on Cummings on a night out with his big
brother Leonard (Peter Frechette) and Leonard's fiancee Susan
(Elizabeth Daily).  Armed with a fake ID, Charles joins the pair at a
downtown nitery, and there, on the tiny stage, the object of his
affections warbles into a hand mike, barely audible above the blare of
a heavy-metal band.  But the next morning, Cummings' exhilaration at
finding Laura is tempered by the news that her band is breaking up,
and the lady may wind up out of a job.
        Worlds above Cummings in sophistication, Laura nevertheless
turns to her new friend for comfort when her career goes sour.  One
afternoon, she accedes to his request to pose for his camera, and we
can feel their deepening friendship as the hours pass by and Cummings
shoots roll after roll of film, happily taking pictures of this
glowing Circe in front of some of San Francisco's most picturesque
landmarks.  Night falls, and the pair are tired, hungry, and broke.
So they decide to crash a wedding reception and help themselves to
food and drink.  When they are caught by the father of the bride and
threatened with arrest, Cummings makes a deal with the irascible
paterfamilias: Let Laura sing for their supper.  To everyone's
surprise, including Laura's, her rendition of a classic ballad (the
above-mentioned "I'm Glad There is You") is a big hit.  Who knew this
grunge diva could sing pop?
        This revelation inspires Cummings to take drastic action.
Rounding up his life's savings, he pays to have Laura's likeness and
telephone number posted on taxicabs all over the city.  He's hoping
the publicity will attract attention to Laura's talents, but at first
it seems only to attract heavy-breathing weirdos.  Exasperated, Laura
pulls her phone out of the wall.  But a newswire service picks up the
story about the young fan and his generous gesture and prints it, and
soon the phones are ringing at Laura's old place of business.  The bar
owner, Jake (George Wendt), pleads with Laura to return and sing at
his establishment.  She agrees, but she is still furious with
Cummings.
        Laura's "debut", in front of a packed house that includes
record company talent agents, is a success.  She is offered a
recording contract, and the possibility of stardom beckons.  But now,
in a neat reversal of the first half of the film, the hunted becomes
the hunter, as she tries frantically to locate Cummings and thank him.
        What makes "No Small Affair" so winning is the delicious array
of comedy performers director Schatzberg has united for his film.  Jon
Cryer, making his first film at age 19, has all the right moves,
whether making sheep's eyes at his costar or doing a nifty moonwalk
upon receiving a bit of good news.  Demi Moore, in her first starring
role, makes Laura tender/tough, a savvy woman who combines a strong
sense of independence with a most touching vulnerability.  (In one
climactic scene, Laura wraps her arms around her young benefactor and
says, "When I grow up, I want to be just like you.")
        Among the supporting players, none resonates more delightfully
than Judy Baldwin as Stephanie, the elegant call girl Cummings meets
at his brother's bachelor party.  Baldwin's bit is little more than a
cameo, but her luminous and hilarious scene with Cryer will be
remembered long after most of the other performances are forgotten.
        "No Small Affair"'s penultimate scene reunites the two
protagonists, briefly, just before she is to leave for Hollywood and a
career.  In a sweetly written scene, they swear eternal friendship,
then surrender to the stirrings within.  Cummings is initiated at
last.  But his moment of glory is at once his triumph and his
Waterloo, for now that he has touched Laura's soul, he must let her
go.  It doesn't seem fair.  Welcome to the real world, kid.
        Still, this is a comedy; so don't be surprised to find the
bittersweet ending leavened with a bit of sugar, in the person of
Cummings' pretty classmate Mona (Jennifer Tilly).
        Along with the performers mentioned above, splendid turns are
provided by Hamilton Camp as the cranky father of the bride, Ann
Wedgeworth as Cummings' ditsy mother, and singer Chrissy Faith,
whose excellent voice was used to dub Laura's vocals throughout
the film.  

Title
Review for Kiss Me Kate (1953)
        It's a moviegoer's maxim that, when a film is based on material from 
another medium -- a book, a play, a TV drama -- "the movie will always be 
inferior to the source material."  But that tired notion is eclipsed, if not 
demolished, by M-G-M's "Kiss Me Kate" (1953), a sparkling and energetic 
version of the 1948 Broadway musical triumph written by Sam and Bella 
Spewack, with a dazzling score by Cole Porter.
        Much has been written over the years about the charm and durability 
of Porter's melodies and the cleverness of the Spewacks' libretto.  
Well-deserved tributes, both; but not enough has been said about the 
imaginative ways in which the movie version of "Kiss Me Kate"improves on the 
stage original.  The Spewacks crafted an ingenious, double-tiered story about 
a play within a play, in which the stars' backstage bickering mirrors the 
bickering of the characters they play on stage.  For the movie, Dorothy 
Kingsley re-fashioned the libretto into a seamless shooting script that 
"opens up" the story and smooths out some of the rough edges.
        The story concerns a group of actors performing a musical version of 
Shakespeare's "The Taming of the Shrew".  The male star and director of the 
show, Fred Graham (Howard Keel), was once married to his leading lady Lilli 
Vanessi (Kathryn Grayson), for whom he still carries a torch.   Lilli is 
temperamental and a spitfire, but still capable of great affection if a man 
proves himself worthy of it.  In this uneasy atmosphere, they launch their 
new collaboration: He as Petruchio, she as Katharine, the shrew Petruchio 
must tame.
        Complicating matters is the presence of a supporting actress, Lois 
Lane (Ann Miller), who is to play Bianca, the younger sister of Katharine.  
Lois and Graham have a light flirtation going, but she is no more constant 
than Lilli is; in fact, Lois is semi-engaged to Bill Calhoun (Tommy Rall), a 
dancer who will play Lucentio in the show.
        The first evidence of Kingsley's genius (and that of director George 
Sidney) is seen right after the opening credits.  In a scene not in the stage 
original, the fade-in takes us to Fred Graham's apartment, where he is 
welcoming Lilli, Lois, and Cole Porter himself (in the person of actor Ron 
Randell).  They discuss doing the show, Fred and Lilli sing the beautiful 
love duet "So in Love", then Lois does a sizzling, take-no-prisoners tap 
routine to the lively "Too Darn Hot".  The dance is so spectacular, as Lois 
whirls about the room in a skimpy red dress trimmed with fringe, it 
invariably draws wild applause from the audience whenever the film is 
revived.  Today, "Too Darn Hot" is usually cited as "the definitive Ann 
Miller number" by fans of her musicals.
        Dazzling though her dance routine is, Lois is soon informed by the 
two men present that the song has been taken out of the show.  "There's no 
place to put it", explains Porter.  That might have been an in-joke in 1953, 
because in real life that was almost the fate of the song, in the original 
stage play.  "Too Darn Hot" has no real place in the narrative of the show, 
so it is usually sung by a chorus of dancers performing between acts of the 
play within the play.  It was considered so expendable that, in 1958, when 
NBC-TV staged a performance of "Kiss Me Kate" as part of its prestigious 
Hallmark series, "Too Darn Hot" was simply dropped from the show.  But it 
lives on, spectacularly, in the movie.
        Howard Keel's Fred is self-absorbed and vainglorious, but at least he 
isn't the insufferable ham played by Alfred Drake in the stage play.  Drake's 
broad, extravagant gestures may have played well to the balcony, but in a 
film, restraint is called for, and Keel provides it admirably.  Grayson, for 
her part, gives us an interesting Lilli/Katharine, a shrew with a heart.  In 
both roles, she lets us see her own vulnerability, even as she is throwing 
dishes or throwing a punch.  This is a shrew made to be tamed, by the right 
man.
        When Fred and Lilli's bickering escalates into all-out war -- on 
stage, on opening night, in front of a packed house -- she ad-libs insults, 
slaps, kicks... until finally, exasperated, Fred puts his ex-wife and co-star 
across his lap and gives her a sound spanking in front of the footlights.  In 
the stage version with Alfred Drake and Patricia Morison, as in every stage 
revival of the show since, this scene was performed as part of the show, on 
center stage, under the proscenium arch.  But for the film version, director 
George Sidney had it photographed from behind the two stars, so that the 
movie audience sees a background of perhaps 2,000 first-nighters viewing the 
scene from their theater seats.  In a uniquely cinematic moment, we are made 
aware that we are witnessing the most public spanking of all time.
        But Fred Graham's "triumph" is short-lived.  Backstage during 
intermission, Lilli belts him again, then angrily announces that she is 
walking out on the show.  He does manage to keep her onstage (through a 
comedic subterfuge), and by the fade-out, you get the feeling that these two 
sparring partners are ready to hang up their gloves.  Somehow, you doubt that 
their fragile egos can survive together for very long; but for now, at least, 
all is Edenic bliss.
        Good as the leads are, the movie version of "Kiss Me Kate" belongs to 
the dancers.  Ann Miller had the best role of her career, and she responded 
with some of the finest dancing ever seen on the silver screen.  In this, she 
had a formidable team to work with: Choreographer Hermes Pan, and fellow 
dancers Tommy Rall, Bob Fosse, Bobby Van, Carol Haney, and Jeannie Coyne.  
Miller's dance duets with Rall are sharp and inventive, in particular "Why 
Can't You Behave?", danced on a Manhattan rooftop (another example of the 
camera's ability to "open up" a scene), and the slyly erotic "Always True to 
You Darling in My Fashion" (Pan makes a brief appearance here, as a sailor on 
the prowl).
        As was customary in M-G-M musicals in the Golden Age, the best number 
is saved for last; and a delectable treat it is.  In one last, bravura 
display of the film's superiority to the stage play, the final dance number 
uses a song, "From This Moment On", that was not in the original play, but 
was lifted from a 1950 Cole Porter show, "Out Of This World".  It is an 
inspired choice.  Hermes Pan uses all six lead dancers in a brightly-colored, 
lively and kinetic mating ritual, with the dancers taking turns pairing off 
in separate pas de deux.  Tommy Rall and Ann Miller dance the first sequence, 
giving way to Bobby Van and Jeannie Coyne.  Then, for the third duet, we get 
to see the only dance in the movie not choreographed by Hermes Pan.   This is 
Bob Fosse's turf: We see Fosse and the wonderfully agile Carol Haney take 
center stage in a finger-snapping, back-flipping, jazzy interlude that sets 
the screen ablaze.  Their duet lasts only 1 min. 6 sec., but for that one 
minute the screen is on fire.  
        Katharine's final speech is truncated Shakespeare: "I am asham'd that 
women are so simple... To offer war where they should kneel for peace....", 
but Grayson makes the most of it; and, in yet another triumph of the screen 
version, this time the speech is spoken rather than sung, as it was in the 
play.  This allows Katharine to put a neo-feminist "spin" on the words, 
implying through inflection and gesture that Petruchio may have tamed his 
shrew this time, but he had best watch his step in the future.  This is no 
surrender, it's a marital detente.  And it is the genius of "Kiss Me Kate" -- 
both the play and the film -- that we feel the story's happy resolution on 
two levels at once: Between Petruchio and Katharine, and between Fred and 
Lilli.  That's the magic of great story-telling, and it is the particular 
magic of "Kiss Me Kate".
Dan Navarro -- send mail to: eldorado@instorm.net
