Authors
Chris Palmer
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Rescuers Down Under, The (1990)
     I went to see THE RESCUERS DOWN UNDER this weekend and was totally
impressed by how wonderful the animation was.  In characterization and
plot tension, it wasn't up to the standards of THE LITTLE MERMAID, but
it was very funny and quite exciting.
     This movie was a showcase of almost every type of animation
possible.  Extensive use of multi-plane cameras, roto-scoping (Cody's
mother and the rangers), and, best of all, some amazing computer
animation.  By creating computer models of vehicles, buildings, and
backgrounds, the animators were allowed a greater degree of freedom.
With the exception of the opening scenes of Ayer's Rock, the
message-sent-around the world, and the New York flying scenes, all of
the computer animation was rotoscoped by the animators so there was no
discontinuity between the hand-drawn cels and the computer aided cells.
All you see is amazingly complex, full-perspective motion.  McLeach's
vehicle has to be seen to be believed.  Some computer animation was also
present in the short feature, "The Prince and the Pauper," notably the
snow (quite nice) and several shots of the King's wagon.
     I'm sorry if this has been a strictly technical review so far.
This is a very good children's movie, but I think anyone should enjoy
it.  However, if you are cynical or find too many faults in the plot,
you can always fall back on looking at the pretty pictures.
     THE RESCUERS DOWN UNDER is a sequel to THE RESCUERS (Duh).  It is
about a young Australian boy named Cody who is kidnapped by the evil
poacher, McLeach, who wants him to reveal where the nest of the giant
eagle is located.  Through the R.A.S.  (Rescuers Aid Society) network,
Cody's plight is relayed to New York and Bianca (Zsa Zsa Gabor) and
Bernard (Bob Newhart) are chosen to fly to Australia to rescue him.  Air
travel is courtesy of Wilbur (John Candy) an albatross (brother to
Orville of the first film).  Once in Australia, there are aided by
Jack?John?  (drat) (voice by Tristan Rogers), a cross between Crocodile
Dundee and Indiana Jones.  Along the way, they encounter many different
Australian animals, some animal-like and some characterized.
