Authors
Miriam Nadel
Number of Reviews
6

Title
Review for Tampopo (1986)
     Imagine what would happen if Bill Forsyth and Julia Child had a son who
lived in Japan.  The result might be something like TAMPOPO.
     The basic story of this movie involves a truck driver who is determined
to make the title heroine into a first-rate noodle cook.  Interwoven with
the plot are a series of sketches that involve food, in various ways.  Most
are funny--like a very proper lady trying to teach a bunch of young
women how to eat spaghetti without making noise, while a man in the restaurant
loudly slurps his pasta.  Some are erotic--as the one in which a man and
woman pass an egg yolk back and forth between their mouths.  Some are just
weird, at least to a Westerner, but none fall flat.  
     The main plot is also quirky with lots of laughs.  In the pursuit of the
perfect bowl of noodles, Tampopo encounters a band of vagabond gourmets,
helps a choking victim by using a vacuum cleaner, and cons a rival chef into
revealing how long to leave the dough sitting.  The unexpected is constantly
happening, which is an all too neglected element in many recent comedies.
     At a more serious level, I also learned a lot about Japanese cultural
values--only in part associated with food.  The attention to detail associated
with the preparation and eating of noodles is also a reflection of the
attention to societal roles and this is lightly touched on in a few of the
sketches.
     Overall I can think of few better ways to spend an evening than going out 
for a sushi dinner followed by seeing this movie.  Four stars.
Miriam Nadel
mhnadel@gryphon.CTS.COM       {philabs, trwrb}!cadovax!gryphon!mhnadel
      {hplabs!hp-sdd, sdcsvax, ihnp4, nosc}!crash!gryphon!mhnadel

Title
Review for Scenes from the Class Struggle in Beverly Hills (1989)
     I went to see this SCENES FROM THE CLASS STRUGGLE IN BEVERLY HILLS for
pretty much the same reason that everyone else who's seen it did -- I thought
Paul Bartel's EATING RAOUL was hysterically funny and was looking forward to
more of the same.  Unfortunately, the operative word in the title is "scenes."
Some individual scenes are very funny but the movie as a whole would have
benefited from judicious editing -- including the removal of at least two of the
numerous subplots.
     The plot is basically one of everyone trying to sleep with everyone else.
Frank is trying to seduce the recently widowed Claire (played with  surprising
humor by Jacqueline Bisset) in order to win a bet he has made with Juan; if he
wins the bet he gets Juan for a night.  In the meantime, he's also carrying on
an affair with Claire's daughter.  Meanwhile, Juan, who happens to be Claire's
houseboy, is trying to seduce Frank's employer -- usually referred to as "the
divorcee" -- so he can win the bet and get the money he needs to pay a gambling
debt.  Now, the divorcee's ex-husband (Wallace Shawn overdoing the pathetic
whiny part in the most disappointing performance of the movie) also shows up
only to discover that the woman he had run away with is now married to his
ex-wife's brother, a playwright who gets into the act by entering the
competition for Claire.  Rounding out the cast are a diet doctor (played by
Bartel), the divorcee's crippled son who has the hots for Claire's daughter but
is willing to settle for his new aunt, an Aztec housekeeper, with a penchant
for dire predictions involving jaguars tearing people apart, and the ghost of
Claire's husband who is trying to keep his marriage alive, even if he isn't.  
     Now this has a fair amount of potential for comedy.  However, Bartel seems
to have had trouble remembering that comedy is most effective when it is
unpredictable.  He's certainly capable of great moments -- the opening sequence
is one of the funniest I've ever seen -- but the middle of the movie lapses into
predictable "musical bedrooms" and, with one exception, the ending is obvious.
     Overall I'd give it 2 stars.  Wait for a bargain matinee or, even better,
a videotape so you can fast-forward over the parts which plod.
Miriam Nadel
mhnadel@gryphon.COM !gryphon!mhnadel   nadel@aspen.aero.org

Title
Review for Baby Boom (1987)
     By now you probably know the premise.  Diane Keaton plays J. C. Wiatt,
"The Tiger Lady," and a stereotyped yuppie marketing manager, on the verge of
being promoted to a partnership in her agency.  Then she inherits a baby from a
distant relative.  Ignoring the suspension of disbelief inherent in the way the
movie shows the adoption process, J.C. ends up trying to be super-Mom--and
still work 70 hours a week.  
     The plot turns on J.C. finding a clever way to deal with her situation.
There is also a romantic interest, J.C.'s live-in lover having walked out once
the baby came.  Unfortunately, the ending is completely predictable by the
middle of the movie, though it's still handled well.
     The pluses--some very funny moments, especially those centering on yuppie
cliches  (e.g. J.C. learning about how important it is to get baby Elizabeth 
into the "right" pre-school), a nice conciousness of feminist values (which
includes some indication of men as nurturing parents as well) and some nice
scenery in Vermont.
     The minuses--the baby is just a little too sweet, the plot is a little too
pat, Diane Keaton is far too unbelievable in her "successful businesswoman"
persona (unless you think that marketing executives stammer and giggle "gee,
that's really great" when a potential promotion is discussed) and nobody in the
cast had ever bothered to find out what a Vermont accent really sounds like.
     Overall, the plusses outweigh the minuses.  3 stars.
mhnadel@gryphon.CTS.COM       {philabs, trwrb}!cadovax!gryphon!mhnadel
      {hplabs!hp-sdd, sdcsvax, ihnp4, nosc}!crash!gryphon!mhnadel

Title
Review for Sweet Lorraine (1987)
     There used to be an ad for Levy's rye bread which said, "You don't have
to be Jewish" and the sentiment is appropriate for this movie as well.  The
"Sweet Lorraine" of the title is a small Catskills hotel, suffering from
competition with ritzier places.  The plot is a simple one--Molly Garber, the
granddaughter of the Lorraine's owner, arrives to work for the summer and falls
in love with the hotel, while her grandmother is debating whether or not to
sell and close the place.  
     What really makes this movies work is the small touches.  The actors are
all wonderful, making you believe these characters are really part of your own
family.  Maureen Stapleton plays Lillian Garber, the hotel owner, and
everyone's grandmother (or at least favorite aunt.)  She is surrounded by such
quirky characters that there are plenty of laughs to round out the warmth.  It
would probably take more than one viewing to catch all of the little jokes--
from the social director's "aerobics" classes to the inter-hotel softball games
(the Lorraine's team is called the "Lox Sox") from the mahjongg games to the
waiter who dyes his hair red, white, and blue for the 4th of July party.
     Intermeshed with the fate of the hotel and the slice-of-life humor, there
are three love stories.  Molly falls in love with the hotel handyman (who isn't
Jewish but Lillian lets her get away with it.)  Lillian herself has a lover,
Sam, who runs the kitchen.  One of the nicest touches is the portrayal of 
Lillian and Sam's relationship, which treats the love between two elderly
people more respectfully than any movie since ON GOLDEN POND.  Finally, there
is the love affair between all of the staff and guests and the hotel itself.
Miriam Nadel
INTERNET:     mhnadel@gryphon.CTS.COM
UUCP:         {hplabs!hp-sdd, sdcsvax, ihnp4, nosc}!crash!gryphon!mhnadel
UUCP:         {philabs, trwrb}!cadovax!gryphon!mhnadel

Title
Review for I've Heard the Mermaids Singing (1987)
     I went to see I'VE HEARD THE MERMAIDS SINGING partly because the trailer
was amusing and partly because the reviews I'd seen made it sound like a real
feminist classic.  Unfortunately, every amusing line in the movie is in the
trailer and the only feminism exhibited is a demonstration that women can treat
other women as badly as men do.
     The movie is focused around Polly, a Girl Friday.  Actually, she's now a
Person Friday which, not only doesn't change the job, doesn't make her any
better at it.  Her life is neatly divided into work and her hobby of
photography--which she also isn't much good at.  One day, the agency sends her
to a new job at an art gallery and Polly falls in love with the gallery's
curator, Gabrielle.  There's some fine potential for mocking the pretensions of
the arty crowd, but most of the mockery is so  heavy handed that it falls flat.
     Gabrielle also has a lover, Marie, which should provide an opportunity for
Polly to show some human emotions, like jealousy.  But her adolescent hero
worship (she even spies on Gabrielle's private conversations with the help of
the gallery security system) is too shallow to permit her to do more than dream
and fantasize.  Marie, for her part, rightly doesn't see Polly as much of a
threat.  Unfortunately, one gets no idea whatsoever of what Marie does think as
she mostly follows Gabrielle around virtually silently.
     Overall, this is a dull movie about nasty, manipulative people who are
incapable of thinking about anyone other than themselves.  There's no reason to
care about any of the characters, least of all Polly; in fact, I spent much of
the movie wanting to grab Polly by the shoulders and shake some common sense
into her.  One star--see the trailer and skip the movie.
Miriam Nadel
mhnadel@gryphon.CTS.COM       {philabs, trwrb}!cadovax!gryphon!mhnadel
      {hplabs!hp-sdd, sdcsvax, ihnp4, nosc}!crash!gryphon!mhnadel

Title
Review for Eat the Peach (1986)
     When I told a friend I had gone to see this movie he immediately asked me,
"Why?  You don't like motorcycles."  Well, motorcycles do play a big part in
EAT THE PEACH but they aren't the point of the movie.  
     It's all based on a true story about an unemployed Irish laborer who sees
a stunt in a videotape of the old Elvis Presley movie, ROUSTABOUT, and becomes
obsessed with duplicating the "Wall of Death."  Vinnie's got the tools to build
the wall because a Japanese company left their machinery behind after deciding
not to construct their new factory in Northern Ireland.  He's also got a grasp
of mechanics that would be the envy of any engineering undergraduate.  What he
doesn't have is the money for wood - but a bit of smuggling can supply that.
     Unfortunately, at that point the movie falls apart.  The "Wall of Death"
itself is treated almost entirely for suspense while the smuggling is treated
largely for comic value.  The whole quirkiness of the situation is underplayed,
which is a pity because this could have been a very funny movie in the hands of
someone like Bill Forsyth.  But director Peter Ormrod can't resist the urge to
melodrama and focuses on too few characters for too long.  There was plenty of
potential for this to be a truly funny movie or a really moving drama but it
just can't be both at the same time.  
      Still, there is an interesting plot, likeable characters, and a rare
opportunity to see how pervasive the influence of the U.S. is on another
culture.  And you do come to care about Vinnie and his dream.  Two and a half
stars.
Miriam Nadel
INTERNET:     mhnadel@gryphon.CTS.COM
UUCP:         {hplabs!hp-sdd, sdcsvax, ihnp4, nosc}!crash!gryphon!mhnadel
