Authors
Eric Vinegart
Number of Reviews
4

Title
Review for American History X (1998)
Directed by Tony Kaye. Written by David McKenna. Running time: 118
minutes. Rated R (for graphic brutal violence, including rape,
pervasive language, strong sexuality and nudity).
Tempe, AZ -- "American History X" is one of those movies riddled with
problems that somehow escapes the benefit of audience testing and is
released anyway.  I wasn't too amused with all the confusing scene
shifts from past to present tense, only to recover by recall from
memory to keep things together (very distracting).  Without the
movie's change from color to black-and-white and Derek's change from
hair to skinhead, we would've all been lost.  And the script has
issues running in different directions without really gluing them
together, and we're not totally certain of a focused theme.  The
investors must be really pissed that some lame-ass didn't put all the
money in the right places, and probably spent a lot instead on
self-aggrandizing expenditures.  Standard fare for a lot of dweebs in
drug-infested Tinsel town today, I'm sure, where a lot of production
never quite makes it off the ground.
As is the case with any highly publicized movie, lots of reviews get
written (those advertising dollars build fires under people's asses),
and after reading many of them, I was left wanting more, as I felt I
wanted after watching the movie.  I longed to see if any critic delved
into the deep reaches that this theme explores, and read first-hand
the message I felt that came through loudest for me while viewing
"American History X".  But not one did, and most critics sang the same
old tune, which was to summarize the story, comment on the
special-effects crap, the actors and their dimension, dialogue, score,
cinematography, and how much or how hard the sex was and all the other
stuff to ad nauseam.  Like me, you probably are looking to see what
others have to say about this movie, and you already know all the
trivia shit.  And we want a little more meat.
The most pivotal point in the movie is during a flashback when Derek
(Edward Norton II) is in the prison laundry with Lamont, the black,
stand-up comic inmate (Guy Torrey).  We already know how much hate
Derek has had, given his father was killed by black drug addicts, and
dinner-table indoctrination against the evils of affirmative action.
When Lamont gives Derek direction on how to treat a woman so as not to
lose her while in the joint, each word punctuated with a sex-act
stroke (belly-laugh funny), the spectacle is too much for Derek to
remain angry any more and he can't help laugh with what must surely be
the first time ever with a black person.  We witness a friendship form
here, and when Derek finds out Lamont got six years for stealing a
television, Norton's superb acting convinces us that his character no
longer believes the enemy to be blacks, Koreans, border jumpers, and
illegal Hispanics, but instead a corrupt economic and social system
collapsing under its own weight.
At this point in the movie I expect and want a hero to rise up against
the real enemy -- the individuals responsible for corruption -- and
set out on a search-and-destroy mission.  But that doesn't happen.
Even though we have had superb character transformation and
motivation, Derek doesn't want to go on to do anything except turn on
his followers and try to save only his own ass and his brother.  We
really are cheated from what could become a greater movie.
There are problems telling stories about racism, the same as with
politics and religion (and now feminism, too).  We don't get to see
the true cause of Derek's hatred, which has less to do with his father
who was killed by blacks, and more with a society top-heavy with
blood-sucking parasites who skim all the cream from the top, leaving
the rest of us to fight over what is left.  In a world of plenty,
people don't argue over anything.  When was the last time we heard of
a feud between fat-cats?  Jews and Hispanics in Hollywood don't fight.
Neither do black and white athletes with seven-figure incomes.  But
they do in real life where competition and slimmer pickings can mean
you come up short.  Or when it means you get beat out of a job to a
border-jumper.
Problems today in society are so monumental, barely one person is left
who still sees real truth.  It's designed this way on purpose, the
same as SWAT teams use stun bombs to confuse and catch hostage-takers
off guard.  Our government does not want us to rise up against their
insane policies, much less find out, least they again experience Viet
Nam-era riots throughout the land.  I'm left wanting "American History
X" and Derek to pound home this message, but they don't.
Television is replete with newscasts daily of celebrity or
professional athletes who enter drug-treatment centers.  And how many
are ever convicted for possession and sentenced to twenty years in
prison?  America has a near-one-million felons in prison on drug
offenses, and barely a single one is a celebrity or of wealth.  This
is real injustice, and for one in which we want a Derek to rise up and
unite all against.
Racism has more origin in a corrupt and unfair system, than it does
with any dislike that one class of people may have for another.  Like
drinking-and-driving accidents produce hit-and-run felons, because the
consequences for accountability are so severe, corporations no longer
have compassion for employees because it's too expensive and the
consequences too grave -- bankruptcy.  And so, in a system where it's
every-man-for-himself mentality, justification for our capacity to
step on our fellow man is easy in a world with a press eager to help
demonize the poor who must now, just to survive, resort to theft,
deception and crime, and who most always are black, border-jumpers and
poor.
While "American History X" depicts an over-crowded America replete
with exploiting free-loading border-jumpers and unemployed blacks, it
fails to bring the real problem into focus.  We sense that Derek sees
through all the bullshit and now knows the real enemies,
profit-seeking structures and tax-fed organizations, which can no
longer flourish without a growing consumer base to draw from and sell
to.  And so borders are left open and families (and single women) are
encouraged, allowed, even motivated to multiply as quickly as biology
allows.  Naturally, as with any activity that makes money, Madison
Avenue successfully dupes mothers to produce at breeder-cow rate,
using slick pictures and detailed copy instructions in big-circulation
magazines and sit-com TV shows, and little if any thought is ever
given to the horrible consequence for offspring in an already
over-crowded, over-used world.
Overall, "American History X" is still a fair movie.  But its
producers blew a wonderful opportunity to make a statement for the
origins of racism, and leave a warm fuzzy feeling as was so eloquently
done in, for example, "Billy Jack" and "To Sir With Love".  A script
going in a different direction from Derek's transformation would have
helped solve this problem.

Title
Review for Night at the Roxbury, A (1998)
Saturday Night Live regulars, Will Ferrell (left) and Chris Kattan,
play joined-at-the-hips (and neck) brothers in A Night at the Roxbury.
Directed by John Fortenberry and Peter Markle.  (see image at:
http://thevinegar.webjump.com/home.htm
TEMPE MILLS CINEMA, AZ--This movie had us in non-stop stitches from
beginning to end. All those promotional clips that have been on TV for
the past month came from the first five minutes of the movie. If you
thought they were funny, see the rest of the movie. It's hilarious.
How does one go about making a movie about a couple guys whose only
claim to fame is synchronized head-bopping on SNL to exactly one song?
Easy. Write an interesting script around tried-and-true ideas, add
some good lines and satire, and voilŕ, you end up with an excellent,
well-done, very entertaining flick.
Will and Chris are idiot brothers forced by their father to work
begrudgingly in the family flower business during the day. At night
they pursue their life-long ambition to loose their virginity in
failed attempts to get into the Roxbury in Beverly Hills, CA, the only
disco act worth going to. The only problem, the place is so popular
and the waiting line so long that by the time the brothers make it to
the front door, The Roxbury closes, all the while bearing witness to
guys with one-hundred-dollar bills and movie stars like Richard Grieco
who get past the doorman without fuss.
The script authors (Steve Koren, Will Ferrell and Chris Kattan)
cleverly devised a way for our boys to get into the Roxbury. Their
flower-shop van is rear-ended by Richard Grieco, who fears a law-suit
and is surprised to see the idiots are too star-struck to think about
the car accident they just had, but not about getting into the
Roxbury. Grieco happily takes them in, even introduces them to the
owner, which has the added benefit of enhancing the financial
appearance of the idiot brothers in the eyes of a couple of gold
diggers (Elisa Donovan and Gigi Rice) who bet their time and bodies on
Will and Chris. What follows are some of the best slap-stick dancing
routines ever. The music is superb, and could have only been made
better had the producers added Patrick Hernandez's Born To Be Alive.
The Choreography at times was a parody of an era gone by, for example,
the Bee Gees and their Stayin' Alive. It is nostalgic for those of us
who remember that far back, and the technique is a clever adaptation
that worked well in Forest Gump.
One of the funniest scenes is when the gold diggers discover that Will
and Chris don't have any mone y, and dump both on the spot, even
expressing violence and anger that they gave sex away. An
art-imitates-life poke at shallow women. It's a scene that's an
approximate parody of The Vinegar's own Rolf Luedeke's editorial this
week National Organization for Men (NOM) Replaces NOW. Ted "Unabomber"
Kaczynski, himself rejected for not having money, will identify well
with this scene, if he ever watches the movie.
Of course, the script wouldn't be complicated enough without adding
Molly Shannon, the girl next door who has had a crush on Will since
they were kids, and who Will has had an aversion to in quest of
good-looking disco blondes (proof that men will turn down perfectly
good women when there are Bay Watch babes always lurking nearby).
Nevertheless, Will's father wants him to marry Molly anyway, but
thinks idiot Chris is standing in the way and sends him into
guest-quarter exile. During the wedding ceremony, Will's heart isn't
exactly into getting married, and when his brother appears on the
balcony with a ghetto blaster and more head-bopping music, Will thinks
worse of the knot-tieing idea and runs to Chris. Definitely an SNL
parody of The Graduate where Katharine Ross changed her mind for the
screaming Dustin Hoffman in the church balcony.  I found this scene a
riot, however, it went over Brandi's head -- she was born seven years
after The Graduate first appeared. The scene has a good punch line
when Molly Shannon marries, instead, the step-in buddy/weight-lifter
(who looks like he could pass for the son of Gary Busy) and who has
been lusting for a good-looker for a long time, but ready now to take
anyone. More art-imitates-life stuff -- not even muscles can
substitute for money in the real world.
The idiots' mother is played by Loni Anderson, whose Barbie-doll looks
don't play well anymore (she's a bit old), and whose cleavage looks
like someone botched a tracheotomy too low down.
I recommend this movie for anyone who wants to have a lot of fun or in
need of a lot of laughs. Go with a date. Brandi laughed non-stop, as I
did, and a deaf-mute might have concluded I was tickling her
continuously for 105 minutes.
Š Copyright 1998 The Vinegar.    All rights reserved.
More good stuff at:  http://thevinegar.webjump.com/home.htm

Title
Review for Psycho (1998)
Written by Robert Bloch (novel) and Joseph Stefano
Friday, December 4, 1998, Tempe, AZ -- When I first heard about
another release of "Psycho", I wondered how on earth could anyone find
another way to beat this one to death.  But when it turned out this
one is a total clone, that piqued my interest.  Alfred Hitchcock's
1960 release was a favorite of mine when I first viewed it in the
seventies, and has stood the test of time whenever I saw it again.  In
fact, when I last experienced the classic about 10 years ago, I liked
it more than ever.  Seeing this new rendition seems like an exciting
opportunity to re-visit the original, only from a color and 1998
perspective.
Actually, I'm here at the AMC Laguna Theaters because my buddy,
Brandi, is absolutely crazy about "Psycho" and Anthony Perkins.  She's
been reminding me for more than a month now about this opening day,
and now that we are here, you'd think her excitement level was about
as high as someone who finally boarded a vacation flight for Europe,
after waiting a full year.  Brandi has seen all versions up to "Psycho
4", and I swear she has each scene memorized.  Talk about spectator
enthusiasm from someone who was not even born yet in 1960.
The story chronicles Marian Crane (Anne Heche), a Phoenix secretary
who steals $400,000 from her boss's client.  On her way out of town to
meet her boyfriend (Viggo Mortensen), she checks into the Bates Motel
for the night, which is owned by lives-with-a-corpse Norman Bates, a
taxidermist and dual-personality guy who is pleasant and engaging when
he is himself, but a psychopath when his dead mother's personality
takes over.  Marian is murdered in the shower, and her sister
(Julianne Moore) and private investigator (William H. Macy) begin a
search.  Eventually, we learn Norman murdered his mother and lover
years earlier, then exhumed and stuffed her to keep her memory alive,
all of which explains the dismal action of a psychopath.
I'm one who always must be seated before the movie starts, preferring
to glue my eyes to the credits while everyone else is still buying
popcorn and trying to find a seat (usually right in front of me).
Most people care little about the credits (or being rude by arriving
late), but some of the best photography takes place at the beginning.
It's the director's opportunity to set the stage.  But during the
beginning in "Psycho" (1998), there is no photography -- only credits
and music.  And I've got to admit, everyone in the theater is
spell-bound by the opening soundtrack.  No one's buying popcorn or
coming in late to this movie.  The trademark staccato violins are
magnificent.  And Brandi tells me she's got to have the soundtrack --
even before the credits finish.
So much has been said for the original classic (1960), which has its
share of flaws.  And I think the fanfare surrounding the original
"Psycho", though a masterpiece, has less to do with quality and
artistry, and more with the conscious-shocking value of a movie first
released during a time when social conservatism was much, much higher
than today.  It outraged a lot of people, and consequently received a
lot of notoriety, too.
I'm surprised the producers of this movie didn't find it odd to
re-make a movie using 1998 tense  and the original 1960s script nearly
verbatim.  It's simply not realistic for anyone today to pay cash for
any big-ticket purchase, and when I see the rancher belly-up $400,000
($40,000 in Hitchcock's "Psycho") in a downtown Phoenix real estate
office, I wonder, "Come on, get real".
Just try to buy a ticket at the airport today using cash.  Someone
will call the DEA and the drug-sniffing dogs, after which they'll take
away all your cash, even if they don't find contraband.  Of course,
had "Psycho's" tense been left intact, I believe this remake would
have turned out a lot better.  Doesn't it make us wonder why the
producers updated the script from $40,000 to $400,000?  Supposedly to
add more realism for 1998?  Okay, so why not make everything more
realistic?  I'd like to see Gus Van Sant pull this off with "Gone With
The Wind".
Marian Crane's (Anne Heche) encounter with the law is no less
unrealistic.  Even for anyone who has never watched "Cops", we all
know the police today will go off the deep end whenever they're
suspicious.  With their favorite weapon, the RICO Law, they always
find the slightest excuse to search your car so they can steal your
possessions and forfeiture your wheels.  Of course, this exact scene
in the original masterpiece plays well, given the 1960 era.  But it's
way out of character for 1998.  I can just visualize all the police
who are going to watch this new movie, and then water-at-the-mouth at
the sight of all that cash.  They'll also give the state trooper an
imaginary dope slap on the old noggin for not ceasing the money, which
is enough to promote the dweebiest cop who finds it to captain.
The shower scene is intense, and I can imagine that the impact on a
1960's audience would've been more shocking.  I really do think they
could have done without the bare-ass nude scene.  Who wants to look at
someone's butt anyway?  Maybe market research reveals that half the
movie-viewing audience now is perverted, and so directors, anxious to
squeeze the last dollar, want to appeal to everyone.
The violins are superb, and there's no mistaking the hopelessness of
Crane on her way, alone, into the next world.  Of course, the music
stands on its own, but with modern technology in music delivery today,
the screeching violins are too much for me.  I'm one who wants to
punch-out anyone who deliberately scratches a black board.
Brandi says she likes Anthony Perkins in this role better than she
likes Vince Vaughn.  Me, I like Vince better.  I absolutely love
actors who can play a psychopath -- charming one minute, cold and
calculated the next -- never nervous.  The guy next door.  Roddy
McDowall can do it (Martin Ashley, "Shock Treatment", 1964), and here
in "Psycho" I can see Vince doing an excellent job.  He's not as
serious as Perkins was in 1960, nor as one-dimensional, and displays a
much broader range of acting and personality.
Even though he didn't play the part of a psychopath, William H. Macy
demonstrated the same skill in "Fargo".  Here, as the investigator,
and given his talent, I'm expecting more from Macy.  But being
realistic, he would have to play Bates for that to happen.
"Psycho" is less of a remake and more of a scene-by-scene duplication,
with most, if not all, of the original script intact.  Which means the
flaws from 1960 will carry over.  Some of the scenes should've been
updated to convey more passage of time and distance.  I feel cheated
whenever a movie covers a lot of ground with too few transition
scenes.  In one setting, for example, Mortensen convinces his
girlfriend to stay at the store while he visits the Bates Motel, and
in the next he's already there.  Is this flop house across the street
or what?  Give us some sense of time and distance, so we don't wonder
why Marian didn't just keep her eyes open five minute longer and drive
to her boyfriend's place instead of staying at the motel.  The movie
is full of these flaws, all the way to the end when Bates is confined
in a jail cell in one scene, and in the next the psychiatrist offers
dual personality as explanation for the psychopath in him.  Remakes
should at least improve a movie, but we don't get that here.
An interesting footnote I learned is that Robert Bloch, the author of
the original story, is still alive, and that his book is based on a
real cannibal from Wisconsin.  Alfred Hitchcock purchased Bloch's
rights to "Psycho" for a mere $9,000.  Granted, that was almost fifty
years ago, so maybe that was a lot of money back when it would buy
four cars.  Today, however, would anyone trade screen rights for four
vehicles?
Psycho is a good movie.  Brandi gives it four stars, and not wanting
to be all together contrary, I'll go along with her.  Between you and
me, however, three and a half would be more like it.  It was fun to
see the story in color and from a new pair of eyes, and share it all
with one hell of a "Psycho" (and movie) enthusiast.

Title
Review for Armageddon (1998)
TEMPE, AZ -- I wanted to see American History X today, with the idea
of writing a review for The Vinegar, however, Brandi and I have been
hiking in Phoenix's South Mountain Park too long, and now we've run
out of time in order to catch the beginning of the movie.  A quick
check of the cinema listings in the newspaper lets us know that
Armageddon starts in 15 minutes at a nearby theater, so we settle on
that plan, instead.
Brandi and I have been spending the day together (her only day-off
since last Sunday) in the beautiful outdoors of 80-degree Arizona in
what must now be winter for most other parts of the U.S.  Both of us
absolutely love hiking, especially the remote reaches of Arizona, and
had Brandi not discovered a nice little cave accessible by only
employing small lie-back and arm-bar moves (that's technical
rock-climbing parlance for the extreme-sport-challenged), we would've
never been delayed to miss our plans to see American History X.
Oh well.  Ask me if I care!  I'm approaching mid-life-crisis age, and
when I'm in the company of a beautiful 23-year-old woman, I'm happy to
be anywhere.  If I were serving a life-time prison sentence, it'd be
Seventh Heaven so long as a woman like Brandi was in my cell with me.
For any of you wondering what quality I may posses that attracts
Brandi to a man roughly the age of her father, you might be better
served to find the answer by directing your curiosity not towards me,
but instead to Brandi and her qualities.  She's not easily impressed
by popular-culture bullshit.  In other words, she's a thinking woman,
fully capable of arriving at truthful and accurate conclusion --
unaided by back-seat coaching from all the know-nothings on media
pedestals.  And if she suspects a man wants her only for her body,
he's dead meat.  Even if he's smarter than her, she can't be fooled.
Anyway, Armageddon has been out now way too long to demand another
review.  The Internet Movie Database lists more than 140 already, and
who the hell needs another critic?  But in Armageddon there is one
scene (actually a thread) that Brandi reacts to in exactly the same
way I do.  It's what I want to focus on today, and it's what helps
illustrates an interesting point.  And I'll bet real money that none
of those other reviews makes mention of it.
Armageddon is about a Texas-sized asteroid on a collision course with
earth.  NASA recruits a roughneck drilling team (not unlike the Dirty
Dozen, but who prefer crap tables, tattoo parlors and whore houses),
fast-tracts them to become astronauts, then launches them via space
shuttle into slingshot orbit around the moon so they can land on the
doomsday asteroid.  There they drill an 800-foot core, implant a nuke,
detonate it, and save the world.  The crew (what's left of them)
returns safely to earth, where they are given a hero's welcome.  Each
crew member has been facing deep personal issues, and it is the
challenge of Charles "Chick" Chapple (Will Patton) that caught
Brandi's eye (and mine).
On the eve of their launch, roughneck Chick shows up on the doorstep
of his ex-wife (Judith Hoag) who has had a restraining order against
him.  Playing in the front yard is Chick's small son who he sees for
the first time.  It's obviously a last-ditch effort to finally see his
7-year-old child, knowing full well he'll probably be killed on the
asteroid mission he's about to embark upon.  The mother, not wanting
her son to know his father, introduces Chick as a salesman.  Obviously
delighted to meet his son under any circumstance, Chick only wants to
see him for the first time, and perhaps the last.  He tells his ex
he's going on a mission tomorrow that might make her proud, and
presents his son with a model copy of the space shuttle.
Because the audience already knows where this scene might go, it's a
moving moment for everyone, I'm sure.  Will Patton superbly conveys
Chick's anguish of loneliness and the empty life of a person denied
the companionship of those he loves.  Contrasted to the fact that this
man may well never return to realize happiness with his son and the
woman he has loved, it's a powerful, pivotal message.  It's obvious
that Chick has been at wits end for ways to please his former wife.
When he said that he's going on a mission that may make her proud, we
know that he has always wanted her and that he has been living a hell
in isolation and loneliness.  Patton has no trouble conveying this
message to all but the brain-dead in the audience.  And for anyone
wondering why men commit suicide at four times the rate that women do,
the movie should illustrate the gut-wrenching frustration leading to
it --  but probably doesn't.
Brandi's comment while watching this scene is one word,
"Disgusting!!!"   "Disgusting" that any woman would hold so much
contempt for a man to not let him ever meet his very own son.
Disgusting because his ex once held Chick in high enough regard to
marry him, but then discarded him because he had not lived up to HER
expectations.  In other words, a low-life roughnecker isn't exactly
the man portrayed by popular culture that even the lowest form of
woman should aspire to for her Mr. Right, and instead is an expendable
animal easily replaced.
"Yeah right."  "So why is she still single?", wonders Brandi.
Brandi lost her father to an automobile accident when she was about
the age as Chick's son, and who knows better than her what it's like
to live in a world where everyone has had a father but her?  It's one
thing for God or fate to take your daddy away, but quite another for
your mother to do it for you.  Obviously, Brandi sees not Chick as an
evil monster here, but his ex-wife as a despicable,
belly-low-to-the-ground critter wrought with enough anger sufficient
to deny a fatherless life for her own flesh and blood.
"I wonder how many people see this scene for what it really is?",
Brandi wants to know.
When I comment that the screen writer probably inserted this scene as
satire against modern-day relationships, Brandi is not so sure and
wonders how many others see this scene as we do.  Given the trash and
fluff that's been coming out of Hollywood, Armageddon's screen writer
may be just as clueless.
Scenes like this one have been all-too-common during the last 30
years.  And it's not just portraying all but heroic men as outcasts,
but all except the most beautiful women, too, as losers.  Hollywood
has made a lot of money using women with narrowly defined qualities to
portray that which should be desired by all men.  Unfortunately, the
qualities more often than not center on physical attributes -- hair
color, breast size, height, and facial features -- and the harshest
form of satire is unleashed against virtue and asset as exemplified by
the likes of a Margaret Thatcher, for example.  In other words, unless
you're a Cindy Crawford, a Claudia Schiffer or a Liv Tyler, you're
trailer-park trash and should go away.
On launch day for the outerspace-ward roughnecks, every media
organization in the world dominates the news outlets, and when Chick's
ex-wife and his son surprisingly see him on television decked out in
an astronaut uniform in front of the space shuttle, Chick is no longer
a salesman.  Oh no.  The boy's mother now says, "That's your father".
It's a happy moment not for the father, but obviously for the boy who
for the first time learns that his dad is -- what else in any American
kid's life --  AN ASTRONAUT, for chrissakes.
Again, Brandi and I see this scene for what it really displays:
greed, selfishness, vice, betrayal and the worst form of child cruelty
-- denial for a boy who wants his father.
At the end of Armageddon, the crew returns home to a hero's welcome,
and Chick finds on the tarmac his son and an ex-wife glee-stuck that
her ex-husband finally realized pay dirt.  This scene really gripes
Brandi who says Chick is the exact same person he's always been.  And
only now that he's rich and famous does his ex-wife once again accept
him.  Chick isn't any better looking, any smarter, and his ex has no
proof he won't need daily doses of Viagra, but he's rich and famous
now, so that's all that matters.  And boy, does she want him back.
We're left thinking she'll need knee pads for a long time to come.
Fuel-my-hedonism-or-you're-a-sack-of-shit message is what popular
culture bombards the young, impressionable minds with daily.  People
are trash, zeros, scum and no good -- unless, of course, they have
blonde hair, big boobs or are rich and famous.  All other men and
women need not apply.
The plot-thread is a good ink-blot test, and an excellent tool for
anyone to see the source of their own reaction as either by-product of
bullshit or wholesome, mature outlook.
Brandi's healthy perception of life is why she accepts me as a person.
And she would've accepted you, too, for richer or poorer, had it been
you who drew the card on the day I met her.  So long as there's one
person left in the world to accept us as we are, we'll always be
blessed with at least a friend -- a friend hopefully who is generous,
forgiving, patient, realistic and accepting.
One last footnote about Armageddon.  Both of us absolutely love the
soundtrack.  Aerosmith's I Don't Wanna Miss A Thing puts Brandi's head
on my shoulder, and provides one of those moments, which I will always
recall whenever I hear the music, the same as many of us remember what
we were doing on that moon-lit night when Neil Armstrong first set
foot on the moon.  Brandi is impressed with Liv Taylor's presence, and
points out for me that she is the daughter of Aerosmith's Steven
Tyler.
After the movie, which we really enjoyed with reservation for some of
the unrealistic plot and special effects, neither of us is in any mood
to end the day.  A little hungry, too, we wander over to The Outback
in Tempe for a little vitals and libation.
There are scores of affluent people here -- even on park benches
outside -- waiting to be waited on and fed.  Most hail from the
surrounding neighborhood, which has homes complete with kitchens that
alone cost more than the average price of a single-family dwelling in
Arizona.  People pretty much around here no longer use their kitchens,
preferring the likes of The Outback, complete with cooks, waiters and
busboys -- all of whom are held in about as high regard as Chick
enjoyed from his ex-wife.  It's unlikely any family here tonight is
supported on roughneck salary, and from the looks of the size of some
of these families, complete with kids in tow, in toys and in diapers,
Brandi thinks some will be coughing up $200 and $300 just for Sunday
dinner.
Brandi and I are willing to eat at the bar, so we get to dispense with
that waiting-to-eat bullshit.  I'm always amazed how people haven't
time to mow their own lawn, but always plenty to wait in line for food
-- and every day for many.
Brandi helps me notice the spoiled students in here, obviously on
generous allowance to afford $4.50 for a mug of imported beer,
equivalent to an hour of after-tax minimum wage for those who have to
work and go to school.  Brandi was disgusted by the sight of a
blooming onion, which the gal down the bar a ways consumed all by
herself (about 2,000 calories, folks).  And I cringe now when I see
the same gal carving away and wolfing down what appears to be a
Porterhouse cut.  Her boyfriend seems to be competing with the steak
for her attention, but she's not yielding, not even between bytes.
Her obvious eating disorder may explain the thunder thighs and ugly
cellulite at the ripe old age of about nineteen.
The salmon we order arrives quickly, and it's a good thing because
we're tired of watching a bunch of gluttons on suicide missions.  It's
not like we're not culpable for our own vice.  After all, we are
drinking beer ($4.50/mug).
