Authors
Mike Turton
Number of Reviews
3

Title
Review for Diva (1981)
Diva
Directed by Jean-Jacques Beineix. Starring  Wilhelmenia Fernandez (Cynthia
Hawkins), Fredric Andre (Jules), Richard Bohringer (Gorodish),  An Luu Thuy (
Alba). A  Films A2 Greenwich Film Production / Les Films Galaxie production.
Runtime:   France:117 / USA:123  Reviewed by Mike Turton.
This stylish film has it all -- a complex plot, plenty of action, beautiful
music, exotic and interesting people, improbable relationships, a satisfying
ending -- even a few gratuitous breasts thrown in for good measure (this is a
French movie, after all).
_Diva_ tells the story of a mail courier in Paris who, among other things, is
the obsessed fan of a famous opera singer who has sworn never to make a
recording of her singing.  One day he secretly tapes her giving a concert. 
News of the tape gets out and he becomes the object of an intense hunt by a
comically sinister Japanese company eager to cut a record. At the same time,
in an entirely unrelated incident, a set of gangsters, under pursuit by the
police, ditches a tape which implicates a powerful politician in the carryall
of his moped.  The tapes become confused.................
There are so many things to like about this offbeat visit to Paris.  The
juxtaposition of intensely punk, strongly-drawn characters from the mean
streets with the unearthlyl beauty of the world of opera provides a kind of
postmodern mixture of frames of reference that gives the film a surreal,
kinesthetic feel. Jules the courier (and the viewer with him) is constantly
finding himself navigating in worlds whose boundaries and taboos are unknown
to him, pursued by the police, the mob, record companies and his own
conscience.  The film becomes the story of his on-the-fly improvisations.
Driving the film too is the threat and reality of violence, including a
terrific motorcycle chase through the streets of Paris, and a chilling killer
who speaks only once.  The tremendous presence of Fernandez and her amazing
voice anchor the film, giving it a psychic weight that prevents it from
becoming too light.
In sum, _Diva_ is one for curling up with your SO and a bag of popcorn.  This
reviewer gives it a 4.5 out of 5.
-----== Posted via Deja News, The Leader in Internet Discussion ==-----
http://www.dejanews.com/rg_mkgrp.xp   Create Your Own Free Member Forum

Title
Review for 20,000 Leagues Under the Sea (1954)
Produced by Walt Disney.  Directed by Richard Fleischer.  Starring Kirk
Douglas, James Mason, Paul Lukas, and Peter Lorre.  Runtime: 127.  Reviewed
by Michael A. Turton
This cinema classic still moves the heart and stirs the imagination even after
so many years have passed.
It is the middle of the 19th century.  A strange creature, perhaps a ship,
has been preying on the shipping of the world.        Sent to find and fight it,
three men, Ned Land (kirk Douglas), Professor Aronax (Paul Lukas) and his
faithful servant, Conseil (Peter Lorre) accidently find themselves aboard the
submarine of Captain Nemo (James Mason), who is moved by powerful, mysterious
passions which cause him to terrorize the world. A stirring adventure story
which everyone has read,  _20,000 Leagues Under the Sea_ remains a classic of
high ... er... low adventure.
Disney spent a bundle on sets, models and special effects, and all have held
up well over the years.  The scenes of the men moving underwater, the
submarine ramming the ships, the ships exploding undersea, and other effects
still excite, while the sets of the submarine, outre to begin with, have
become appropriately outlandishly age-of-iron over the years. Sadly, the
acting is spotty.  Mason handles the smolder of Nemo well, but his
impassioned outbursts sound forced. Lukas' monotone efficiently packs the
maximum of incomprehensibility into the minimum of emotion.  Peter Lorre is
badly miscast, sounding conspiratorial rather than timid.  Contrariwise, Kirk
Douglas is so full of vim and vigor, he sticks out like Sinbad at a garden
party.        Though the story too often depends on cliches, like the use of an
undiscovered island in the S. Pacific where Nemo has his base, its great
reach and stunning vision compel respect even in an age of technological
miracles.
Despite its flaws this film remains a great favorite of young males, many of
whom fondly remember it into adulthood.  A good offbeat choice for those
nights when the video store offers nothing but frustration.  4 out of 5.
-----== Posted via Deja News, The Leader in Internet Discussion ==-----
http://www.dejanews.com/rg_mkgrp.xp   Create Your Own Free Member Forum

Title
Review for Joy Luck Club, The (1993)
The Joy Luck Club
Produced by Hollywood Pictures.  Directed by Wayne Wang. Starring Kieu
Chinh, Tsai Chin, France Nuyen, Lisa Lu, and Tamlyn Tomita.  Runtime: 1:39.
Reviewed by Michael
Turton.
What a heap of limping, lurching cliches.  This tear-jerker, well-recieved in
the US, is a terrible movie which depends for its freshness on the Asian faces
and cliches with which US audiences are unfamiliar.
Many critics have already skewered this film, but I won't let that stop me
from piling it on.  Not only does this movie portray certain stereotypes
which others have pointed out, in some ways depends on the racism of
Westerners in order to work.  For example, most westerners can not/do not
discriminate between Asians of different ethnic origin, thus, for most
viewers, the use of actresses of Japanese and Vietnamese origin to portray
Chinese women was a success.
This film has come under much criticism for its allegedly "sterotyped"
portrayals of Chinese men.  As one who lives in Taiwan and is married to a
Taiwanese, I disagree.        It is relatively faithful in its portrayal of Chinese
men (women and children are still sold in China and Taiwan even today), where
it errs is in its relentless depiction of Chinese women as saints put upon by
males.        The behavior of the various mothers toward their children is not
overshadowed by the authoritarian patterns of dominance and control which
mark even the most well-intentioned interpersonal relationships in Chinese
society, but always by some dark secret in the past.  The mystifying behavior
(from the mother's point-of-view) of the daughters, which in real life would
be a struggle to move beyond this control, in the movie are generally
depicted as a mere cultural/generational clash. This is the sort of
white-washing one sees daily in soap operas on Taiwanese TV.
The acting is excellent, the directing competent, but the storyline is so
riddled with triteness nothing can save it.  The individual stories of the
aunties will be recognized by anyone familiar with romances, soap operas and
TV dramas in Asia.  The use of flashbacks is a good idea, but the pace is too
slow at times.
The film's strongest point lies in its depiction of Asians as people too. 
It's refreshing to see so many faces, marginalized in other films, stand tall
here. If only they'd been given something to really sink their teeth into. 
1.5 out of 5.
-----== Posted via Deja News, The Leader in Internet Discussion ==-----
http://www.dejanews.com/rg_mkgrp.xp   Create Your Own Free Member Forum
