Authors
L. G. Brossa
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Natural Born Killers (1994)
     At a time when the average citizen finds themselves surrounded by
real and imagined violence, Oliver Stone and associates have propelled
film violence beyond all previous rationalizations.  In his most recent
film "Natural Born Killers", the public is not just treated to a
panoply of gratuitous savagery, but also threatened with an
unprecedented wave of copycat violence.  As the film BONNIE AND
CLYDE, became the rebellious cult classic for the Sixties generation,
the psychopathic characters of Mickey (Woody Harrelson) and Mallory
(Juliette Lewis), promise a plethora of violent role playing for
rudderless youth of the Nineties.
     What is most impressive about Stone's recent contribution to our
cultural miasma, is the confused attempt to cloak this orgy of
unrelenting violence, within modern society's apparent inability to
control human conflict.  The audience is driven from one social malady,
to another, without a moment's reflection.  Of course, we're supposed
to intuit (with the subtlety of a bloodied sledge-hammer) that Mr.
Stone's artistic mission is to meld contemporary hyper- media
technique, with a message that America's drowning in brutality.  He
hides behind the idea of exposing the media's glorification of
mass-murderers, but only succeeds in accelerating the film's audience
down an interstate highway of ultra-violence!
     To the seasoned film freak, NATURAL BORN KILLERS is nothing more
than a synthesized high-tech version of CLOCKWORK ORANGE meets
BONNIE AND CLYDE.  Unfortunately, few young adults will have the
historic reference to gain from this bloody social commentary.
     The idea that our children have become innocent victims of the
Saturday morning cartoons, is alluded to with interspersed imagery of
these two murderers, rampaging through scenes as cartoon alter-egos.
This linkage of media with acts of youth violence, is so-o-o perceptive.
I will not hold Mr. Stone accountable for abrogating his
responsibility as his art might inadvertently impact the influential
craniums of today's youth.  I will not accuse him of hypocrisy, for
having used the same technologies to exploit the minds of the unwitting
audience; those same media techniques he purports to expose in his
film!  However, I will hold him morally accountable for the emulated
murders, that are sure to result from this film's release.
     I was surprised to find Mr. Stone joining the ranks of
media-maggots, who incessantly gorge themselves upon the limbs of
America's victims of murder ... all in the name of social commentary.
It was extremely disheartening to find the same brilliant artist--who
actually brought tears to my eyes in his production of JFK--succumb to
the production of the garbage entitled NATURAL BORN KILLERS.  I will
concede that the direction is impeccably brilliant.  Where else can you
utilize unflinching events-per-second editing, advanced image morphing,
cartoons and state of the art audio mixing, all devoted to the heedless
slaughter of numerous innocents?
     Like so many other "geniuses" in the film industry, the likes of
Oliver Stone will hide behind artistic temperament, thus avoiding moral
responsibility to their viewing public.  That same public that will
have to pay more--as a result of his self aggrandizement--than the
price of a ticket because of this film.  Like any other engineers of
social policy, the "Oliver Stones" remain economically buffered to the
devastating after-blast of their art.  I only wish, they someday find
themselves abandoned on the same highway of murderous images, they so
generously pour into the minds of pliant youth!
     In light of my obvious distaste for this man's film, I would ask
that every serious-minded individual, take the time to view this film.
Criminologists, law enforcement agents, psychotherapists, political
scientists and anyone concerned with human welfare, should take the
time to view this film.  You'll be forewarned as to what will no doubt
be a quantitative shift in mass-murders, throughout this nation.  True,
there will be scant evidence as to this films direct culpability in
each prospective murder scene.  Be assured, many of these murderers,
will have had more than coincidental knowledge of NATURAL BORN
KILLERS.
     Should you quickly dismiss my warning, ask why this movie devoted
so much attention to media's exploitation of violence, and the public's
ongoing preoccupation with it?  Could it be, Oliver Stone also
perceives the disappearing line between reality and phantasy in
high-technology cultural expression? That media's influence over
society is inseparable from the realities it portrays.  For my part,
I'm praying that my anxiety is the result of this film's powerful
imagery ... nothing more.
     At a time in history, when we all risk total immersion into a
swirling cesspool of uncontrolled societal violence; as our government
responds to public outrage at rampant crime, with counterproductive
criminal-code legislation; while grade schools struggle with ever
pervasive violence from errant students; and when the shrinking world
is ever more dependent upon the guidance of insightful men and woman,
we find in the midst of our entertainment industries ... natural born
traitors.
All threaded responses should be forwarded to
.  The reader is welcome to cross-post this
article to relevant discussion groups.
NOTICE!!!  No other reproduction and/or distribution rights--outside
Internet medium--is inferred by the public posting of this material.
Any form of commercial reproduction and/or distribution of the material
contained herein is expressly forbidden without the authors written
consent.
