Authors
Scott A. Borton
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Dog Day Afternoon (1975)
Title: DOG DAY AFTERNOON (USA 1975)
Directed by: Sidney Lumet
Starring: Al Pacino, John Cazale, Charles Durning, Chris Sarandon
   Unfortunately, I do not begin watching a movie without some preconceived 
notion about what the movie is going to be like. I started watching DOG 
DAY AFTERNOON with the idea that I was going to get a tight farce about 
two brain-dead bank robbers. Of course, films invariably differ from my 
conception, but with DOG DAY AFTERNOON I found that not only did I not 
get what I expected, I got nothing at all.
   DOG DAY AFTERNOON jumps right into the action, which involves three
freshman bank robbers scoping out and subsequenty robbing a neighborhood
bank in Brooklyn. Things begin to go awry when one of the robbers' number
chickens out of the operation. Despite all the robber's precautions, soon
the gig is up: the bank is surrounded by police officers. Robbers Sonny
(Al Pacino) and Sal (John Cazale) decide to hold out in the bank with
eight hostages until they figure out a way to escape cleanly. The
already-bad situation degrades when the press find out certain facts about
Sonny that could prove to be somewhat embarrassing. 
   Sounds interesting? It is, from a topical point of view. The robbers 
are delightfully goofy and clueless, and there are some humorous little 
moments that demonstrate how strange some situations can get. But that's 
as far as the comedy goes: light-hearted moments that don't add up to a 
larger comedy aesthetic. There are moments of drama, inserted in a seemingly 
random fashion and without cohesion. So what do you get in the end? A 
dramatic comedy? A comedic drama? Of course, it's always dangerous to 
classify films, but it seems to me that even the creators and actors of 
the film had no idea how the film should turn out. This lack of direction 
is magnified by the larger plot of the film: the film starts out funny 
but ends dead serious.
   There is simply nothing special about this film. The dialogue is 
ho-hum, the plot is simple and uninteresting (I really didn't even care 
if the robbers made a getaway or not), and the characters are dry and 
underacted. The only thing that I found funny about the film was the 
robbers' complete cluelessness about the art of bank robbery, but that 
idea was basically thrown away in favor of unclear drama. 
   One thing that I did notice and enjoy about the film was the depiction 
of the media covering the event. During the standoff in the bank, TV 
cameras are everywhere: there seem to be more media guys than policemen. 
There isn't a TV on without some report of the event blaring on it, and 
radio talk-show hosts even try to call and negotiate with the robbers 
directly. This is a delightfully understated comment on the media, and 
certainly more effective than some contemporary films (NATURAL BORN 
KILLERS leaps to mind). 
   Thus concludes my review of DOG DAY AFTERNOON. Now I will review the
Academy Award and Golden Globe nominations that this film received. My
main question is: what were they thinking? There were six Oscar
nominations and six Golden Globe nominations for this flick. _Maybe_ Al
Pacino (AAN: Best Actor) as Sonny deserved some special recognition for
acting the part of a goofy robber so... goofily. But John Cazale (AAN:
Best Supporting) as Sal, Sonny's partner? Naw. Sal was pretty
uninteresting. Charles Durning (AAN: Best Supporting) as the cop who tries
to coax the robbers out? No! He mostly shouted into a bullhorn throughout
the whole film. And Chris Sarandon (AAN: Best Supporting) as Sonny's gay
lover?  Certainly not. A totally unbeliveable character at most. 
