Authors
Eric G. Scharf
Number of Reviews
2

Title
Review for Fifth Element, The (1997)
"Buckaroo Banzai" with ten times the budget and one tenth the plot.
Despite several dire reviews and some wry personal criticisms, I felt
obligated to go see this, the first "summer movie" of the season. And
although I don't exactly regret seeing this movie, I do wish I had managed
to pay only $3.75 for the privilege.
"The Fifth Element" is remniscent of "Buckaroo Banzai" in that it drops
the audience straight into the action and rushes along without bothering
to explain odd details. But where "Buckaroo Banzai" told an interesting
(or at least novel) story with minimal reliance on special effects, "The
Fifth Element" spends millions on effects to dress up what is essentially
a drug-running plot from a "Miami Vice" episode. "The Fifth Element" makes
exactly zero (or negative, if you count the opportunity cost of the film's
underwriting) contribution to the field of science fiction cinema. Don't
bother looking for any explication of the political, technological, or
social developments of the 250 years that allegdly transpire between the
present and the film's milieu; the cinematographer's chief inspiration for
22nd century Brooklyn seems to have been Super Mario Bros. The "President
of the Federation" was inexplicably feckless;  I've seen more grace under
pressure (and better dialogue) from my local McDonalds night supervisor.
When the director's vision of the ancient race of interstellar good-guy
patrons turned out not to include the ability to stay a closing elevator
door, I knew the film was in trouble. 
"Buckaroo Banzai" was also a helluva lot funnier. The only (intentional) 
comic relief in "The Fifth Element" waits until two thirds of the way into
its 122 minutes to show up in the form of a refugee from a cancelled UPN
show, but who is supposed to be a DJ (apparently, the dominant form of
mass media in the 22nd century will be radio).  This might have been an
opportunity for yet another satire of the media, but even that would have
been preferable to the tiresome hysterics provided by this buffoon. 
The vast majority of screen time is taken up with either mediocre car
chases and gunfights or Milla Jovovich trying to duplicate Jodie Foster's
shameless Oscar grab in "Nell". Note that this movie was directed by Luc
Besson, the man who brought us "La Femme Nikita". Jovovich's character is
supposed to be this "perfect human" (think the title character from
"Species" with a heart (and an accent)), strong enough to rip through her
"unbreakable"  incubation chamber. She is even shown memorizing Earth's
library of martial arts. So what does Besson do? He exempts her, alone
among all the primary (and secondary) characters, from the Universal
Action Hero Immunity to Automatic Weapons. During the penultimate fight
scene, Jovovich is trapped in a ventilation shaft and fired on repeatedly.
Note that we also don't get to see her get wounded, which is the only
reason to wound a hero in an action movie. We simply don't see her again
until Willis has (after letting the aforementioned DJ grab far more screen
time than he deserves) dispatched the bad guys and comes back to rescue
her. The washed-up Special Forces guy turned-cabbie is better in a fight
than the interstellar female assassin/Avatar of Good. Right. 
Saving graces: Gary Oldman as Joe Bob Briggs, the (not really) 
surprisingly impotent arms-dealing mastermind and Servant of Evil
(everyone knows that the Mark of the Devil is secretions of Hershey's
Chocolate Syrup on the forehead, right?). Eric Serra's eclectic
soundtrack. 
Go see "Twelve Monkeys" instead. You'll come away with a much better
feeling about Bruce Willis, science fiction, screenwriting, French cinema,
and the future of humanity. 
--
Eric G. Scharf                                     escharf@seattleu.edu
http://www.seattleu.edu/~escharf/film/5thelement.html
http://www.seattleu.edu/~escharf/film/
http://www.seattleu.edu/~escharf/

Title
Review for Grosse Pointe Blank (1997)
Director: George Armitage 
Cast: John Cusack, Minnie Driver, Dan Aykroyd, Joan Cusack, Alan Arkin, 
      Jeremy Piven, Hank Azaria, Mitchell Ryan
Producers: Roger Birnbaum, Susan Arnold, Donna Roth
Screenplay: Tom Jankewicz, D.V. DeVincentis, Steve Pink, and John Cusack, 
            based on a story by Tom Jankewicz
Cinematography: Jamie Anderson
Music: Joe Strummer
Running Length: 1:47 
MPAA Classification: R (Profanity, violence)
What if Lloyd Dobler from "Say Anything" lost his nerve, ran out on Diane,
and became a hit man instead? That's just one of many ways to look at this
very complex, very funny movie. The first time I heard a critic pan a film
because "the script doesn't know what it wants to be" was in reference to
Joe Dante's delicious "Gremlins", and since then I have always translated
that particular criticism as "I don't know how to pigeon-hole this movie
and against which boilerplate genre-standards I should compare it".
Stepping off from a premise that would not have been out of place in a
conversation from "The Player": "a professional assassin (John Cusack)
goes to his ten-year high school reunion", Grosse Pointe Blank makes
non-chalant transitions from Action Comedy (Grocer (Aykroyd) shouting
"Workers of the world, unite!" as he plugs two gunmen who interrupt his
attempt to recruit Martin Blank (Cusack) into his nascent Assassin's
Guild) to Romantic Comedy (Debi (Driver) forcing Blank into an on-air
interrogation when he drops by her radio station to apologize for standing
her up at the prom ten years previously) to Action Thriller (Blank in a
surprisingly well-choreographed fight scene when a Basque mercenary
surprises him searching his old locker for that joint that's still there
after ten years) to Shameless Nostalgia (Blank discovering, to his
delight, that his old English teacher still has the advantage over him, a
professional killer) to Suburban Angst (Blank in a not-brief-enough visit
with his lithium-ridden mother, followed by a libation of Glenlivet at his
father's grave) to Understated Ironic Satire (Blank leaving solipsistic
rationalizations on the answering machine of Dr. Oatman (Arkin), a
therapist whom he doesn't pay but instead extorts into weekly
confessionals) to Existential Maunderings (Blank finally explaining to
Debi (and to us) how he came to the point where killing for money was
acceptable (and enjoyable)). 
All these shifts cannot help but break any mood that might have been
established, but I suspect director George Armitage accepted them (had the
film been by Lynch, they would have been deliberate (and tiresome)) as
necessary to showing the world of fractured relationships Blank lives
with. Dramatic manifestations of high school reunions have always featured
the theme of the gap between expectations and reality, and attempts to
contrive fictions to fill that gap. Unlike Romy & Michele, however, Blank
is well-practiced in self-examination and justifying himself, whether to
his secretary Marcella, his colleague Grocer, his "therapist" Oatman, or
to himself. I was quite bemused to note that with no important character
back in Grosse Pointe (nor with many unimportant ones) does Blank
embellish or obscure his personal history of the past ten years; he tells
them he is a contract killer, but no one takes him at his word.
Nevertheless, even though he is presented with example after absurd
example of fellow "Pointers" failing to live up to their expectations,
Blank still feels the sting of having stood Debi up, and he realizes that
neither the cynicism of his last ten years nor the disillusionment to
which he has returned relieves him of his obligation to make amends for
his original sin (sic). 
That it requires plot developments ranging from the treacly to the
homicidal for Blank to make this realization might say something about the
age demographic the film hopes to snare with its nostalgic trappings. I'm
always the first to sneer at age-based generalizations (read: market
strategies), but I'm not at all confident that my wholesale acceptance of
Blank's character, dialogue, and behavior has nothing to do with being
from the Class of 1986 myself (although I still didn't recognize half the
songs in the soundtrack). I didn't go to my ten-year high school reunion.
Had I known that Martin Blank would have been there, I still wouldn't have
gone because guys like Blank never talked to me anyway. 
--
Eric G. Scharf                               escharf@seattleu.edu
http://www.seattleu.edu/~escharf/film/gpb.html
http://www.seattleu.edu/~escharf/film/
http://www.seattleu.edu/~escharf/
