Authors
Howard Arthur Faye
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Sofie (1992)
[Please note: This film was screened at the Academy of Motion Picture
 Arts and Sciences as part of the Foreign Language Oscar nominating
 process; distribution may be delayed in the US]
(Directed by Liv Ullmann; Screenplay by Liv Ullmann and Peter Poulson;
Produced by Lars Kolvig; A cast including Erland Josephson, Karen-Lise
Mynster and Chita Norby; running time 152 minutes)
     This effort by Liv Ullmann portrays the history of a Danish-Jewish
family through their vivacious daughter's experiences from the year 1886
to the death of the family patriarch sometime before WWII.  The tensions
and experiences of the family, the Philipsens, is a microcosmic
consideration of the experiences of Jewish communities everywhere--
whether to retain traditions or assimilate, handling anti-Semitism, and
developing individual and collective identities in times of rapid
change.
     The title character Sofie is 29 years old and lives with her doting
parents (Erland Josephson and Chita Norby).  At a ball thrown by her
rich uncle, she meets the famous Danish painter Hojby, the essence of
nordic looks.  He falls in love with Sofie and asks to paint her parents
"sitting on a red velvet Christian XIII divan with gilded wallpaper in
the background-- the essence of Jewish spirituality."  After an
attempted seduction, Sofie accepts a marriage proposal from her
phlegmatic, dour distant cousin.  It isn't clear why this radical step
was taken; we are left to assume that religious  differences were the
cause.  Sofie's husband lives in remote Fredericia, and Sofie never
quite acclimates.  
     SOFIE is best when the narrative aspects are literal and aid in the
development of the story.  The interactions of Sofie's family for
instance are not clearly related to Sofie's experiences (although they
are extremely well staged).  The metaphor of the painting of Sofie's
parents has unclear meaning.
     There is something patronising about this effort at ethnography;
all of the Jewish stereotypes bandied by well-meaning non-Jews are
present-- fear and exclusion of outsiders, the tendency of the
successful to assimilate and hide their Jewish heritage, the
argumentative nature of Jews, and even the attempt to show that in spite
of Denmark's reputation for tolerance and its valiant efforts to
protect the Danish-Jewish community during WWII, anti-Semitism was
insidiously present in (gasp!) Denmark.
     Certainly the best aspect of the film was the costumes and 
scenography.  The settings in cobblestone row housed Copenhagen are used
well and the wing collars and four-in-hands are ubiquitous.
