Authors
David M. Arnold
Number of Reviews
14

Title
Review for Dil Se (1998)
A retrospective review by David M. Arnold
"Dil Se" ("From the Heart") is a tragedy in the Greek sense of the
term in which the protagonist is brought down by a character flaw.
In this case, Amar Varma (Shah Rukh Kahn)'s flaw is that he permits
his gonads overrule his common sense.  Amar is a radio journalist
who has a chance meeting with a young woman, after which his common
sense is not only vetoed, it doesn't even get a chance at the podium.
He follows this woman to the ends of the Earth (actually, to Ladakh,
which is pretty close to the end) in an effort to fling woo at her.
The woman, Meghna (Manisha Koirala) seems to have some Deep Dark
Secret that holds her back from falling for the guy.  Amar persists
despite warning signs that would scare off a more prudent man (like
being beaten to within an inch of his life by some of her
acquaintances).  Meghna gives Amar the slip, and we learn right
before Intermission that she is a member of a terrorist cell.
Amar goes back to his job at All-India Radio, and to get married
to Preeti (Preity Zinta) in a family-arranged meeting.  Preeti
is attractive and outgoing to the point of annoyance, and not
a little self-centered.  Yet, Amar convinces himself that she
would make an adequate wife, although he will never forget Meghna.
Then, on the eve of the engagement party Meghna shows up looking
for shelter and work.  Amar provides her both, and begins an edgy
menage-a-trois.  Slowly it sinks through his thick skull that
Meghna is in the middle of something awful.  Common sense would
dictate that Amar take what he knows to the authorities, but he
believes that he can save her, that through the power of love he
can heal her wounds and turn her back onto the right path.
If this were an American movie, Amar might have saved her.  And he
also might have located the jilted Preeti's ex-lover so that everyone
could have lived Happily Ever After.  One of the things that I am
beginning to admire about Indian cinema is the fact that it doesn't
play by the American rules, even though in this case I found myself
hoping that it would.
"Dil Se" worked for me, but not quite on the same visceral, emotional
level as "Henna" (1991).  I particularly enjoyed the craftsmanship
of director Mani Rathnam.   There is a scene in which Amar is
interviewing Meghna for an internship at the radio station.  They are
standing in a back hallway trying to have a private conversation, but
Amar's coworkers keep coming through.  Every time the hall door opens
and shuts the lighting changes from daylight to a deep blue artificial
light.  The effect is distracting, even annoying, but right on.  I
think we've all experienced trying to be discreet when the whole
world won't cooperate.
The location photography in Kashmir-Jammu is spectacular, and the
backstory about terrorists ("revolutionaries" they prefer to consider
themselves) is fascinating. Rathnam seems to go for stories that
put a political backdrop behind portrayals of human relationships.
The film shows the terrorists and their motives in what looks to me,
an outsider, as a quite well balanced and not unsympathetic light.
And, the portrayal of day-to-day Indian life and culture is always
fascinating to me.  His treatment of Amar's loving if cloying extended
family is quite poignant, especially as they get sucked into the
maelstrom.
Shah Rukh Kahn is Bollywood's Hot Property these days.  He's an
unlikely leading man. "Goofy looking" is the film's official
website's appraisal of him.  His film persona seems to be an odd
mix of Hugh Grant-style awkwardness and over-the-top egomania.
Nepalese native Manisha Koirala projects a wounded beauty as the
enigmatic, conflicted, haunted young woman at the center of so much
trouble.
I've heard affectionados express that the music is the soul of a Hindi
movie.  I enjoy Indian music, although my tastes run more towards the
classic ragas rather than the fusion Indopop film music.  It's a
little difficult for me to really get into the songs in "Dil
Se".  Perhaps it would help if the songs were subtitled along with
the rest of the dialogue.  I did enjoy the sheer production values
of the songs, though, in particular the number done atop the train.
Some Hindi films have plotlines that accommodate the songs seamlessly.
"Dil Se" is not such a film, and the songs seem to be punctuation
marks in the story line, representations of the characters hopes and
fantasies.
"Dil Se" runs 163 minutes.  Most Hindi films are long and to American
eyes could benefit from tighter cutting.  However, the length allows
the story to unfold like a lotus blossom, and allows the film to
explore some sights and sounds that a faster pace would prohibit.
"Dil Se" is available on NTSC-standard region 0 DVD from DEI.  The
video quality is good to very good.  The 1.85:1 transfer is a little
dark and not as crisp as some of DEI's other offerings. The audio
quality is very good sounding stereo that's a little on the hot and wet
side; although the disc claims to be multi channel, I could detect very
little front-to-back imaging.  Good sounding audio dramatically
improves one's enjoyment of the musical numbers.  Some older Indian
films have audio that's so overcranked and distorted that the musical
numbers are painful.  The disc is in Hindi with optional English
subtitles.
Essay copyright (C) 2000 David M. Arnold.  All rights reserved.

Title
Review for Mohra (1994)
India has one of the largest movie industries in the world yet its
product is nearly unknown to most Western audiences.  The staple of
Indian cinema is the long, stylized musical, with "musical" the
operative word.  There are musical comedies, musical romances, musical
action flicks, musical adventures, musical thrillers, musical mysteries
and no doubt musical war movies.  Last year, Indian movies began
appearing on DVD.  Many include English subtitles and this opens an
opportunity for Western audiences to be introduced to this interesting
and exotic genre.
I have a deep fascination with and fondess for Indian culture, history
and mythology.  The last time I visited our local Indian grocery and
spice shop, I noticed a stack of DVDs for rent.  I selected one, more
or less at random, titled "Mohra".
"Mohra", which I believe to be fairly representative of the Indian
action genre, concerns a pair of drug gangs in a turf war.  Vishal
(Sunil Sheety), the anti-hero in a Yojimbo sort of way, is freed from
prison as the result of the intervention of journalist Roma (Raveena
Tandon), and her boss Jindal (Naseeruddin Shah), a blind media tycoon.
Soon, Vishal is playing both gangs against each other and the body
count starts to mount.  Meanwhile, Roma falls for the film's hero Amar
(Akshay Kumar), a police officer assigned to drug enforcement.  Amar
and Vishal keep crossing each others' paths, until in the end they join
forces against a drug kingpin who is manipulating both crooks and
police in a grander scheme.
The plot is merely a framework on which to hang the musical numbers and
the fight scenes, which occur regularly and in about equal number.
Songs are so central to Indian cinema that the DVD includes a separate
chapter index organized by song.  The songs themselves are of the
Indopop variety -- a fusion of classical Indian music and modern pop,
and the musical numbers are sumptuously staged and photographed in a
way that often seems jarringly disconnected to the rest of the film.
The fight scenes are preposterous martial-arts extravaganzas, but I
ended  up admiring the level of effort, talent and training that must
go into staging one of these.
"Mohra" is very much over-acted and over-directed, but I'll have to
sample a few more titles before deciding whether or not this is merely
a characteristic of the genre.  The subtitles were helpful as I don't
speak Hindi, but some of the translations were unintentionally humorous
("I don't wish to pressurize you into talking about it").
I was suprised and pleased with the overall quality of the DVD.  The
image was bright, crisp and clear and letterboxed to 1.85:1 aspect
ratio.  I suspect that the film was shot in a 2.35:1 'Scope format
and a 1.85:1 flat extraction print used for making the video.  The
colors were vivid, although I saw several instances of poor color
timing towards the end of the film.  The audio was monaural and a
just a little harsh sounding.
I'm most encouraged by the approach that the Indian DVD distributers
are taking -- making high-quality, reasonably priced discs that are
NTSC standard and Region 0 (i.e. not region locked).  These discs are
priced so that pirating them simply isn't worth while.  Today, (2/2000)
Indian discs dominate the foreign film catalog at netflix.com, no
doubt the direct result of this open policy.  I'm hoping that this
strategy proves successful, and that other DVD producers will be
encouraged along these same lines.
Essay copyright (C) 2000 David M. Arnold.  All rights reserved.

Title
Review for Sunrise (1927)
Sunrise: A Song of Two Humans (1927, F. W. Murnau)
A Retrospective Review by David M. Arnold
"Sunrise" has to be the most romantic silent film ever made.
It concerns a man (played by George O'Brien) and his wife (Janet
Gaynor) who are nameless (although we learn from the original
photoplay that they are named Ansass and Indre).  It's better that
the film doesn't name them -- they become archetypes for all
couples.  They appear to be peasants living in a vaguely Eastern
European village, one in which the residents make a little extra
money by renting out extra rooms to summer vacationers.  Ansass is
smitten by a Woman From the City boarding at a neighboring farm
(Margaret Livingston, called "the Vamp" in the photoplay, using the
1920's argot), who convinces him to murder Indre, sell the farm and
move to the City.  He agrees to stage a boating accident and to leave
Indre to drown.
When the moment comes, Ansass is unable to commit the crime.  He rows
to shore and Indre, in a panic, runs and catches a tram into town.
Ansass jumps onto the tram and tries to comfort her.  During an
impromptu adventure in the City, he quells her fear and rekindles the
love between them. They renew their marriage vows, they have their
photograph taken, and they spend an evening in some kind of amusement
park that appears to be a cross between a state fair midway and the
Rainbow Room.
Then, after they have revitalized their relationship, the pair are
confronted with an ironic final crisis.
F. W. Murnau, along with Fritz Lang, were the two directors to emerge
from the post-WWI German Expressionist movement who revealed any
enduring  talent.  I believe Murnau to have been the better of the
two:  Unfortunately his career was cut short by an untimely automobile
accident, leaving only Lang to develop a significant canon of work.
Released in 1927, "Sunrise" was on the cusp between the true silents
and the talkies.  Fox had already developed their "Movietone" system,
an optical sound-on-film technique that they used for their newsreels.
"Sunrise" was distributed with a Movitone sountrack that included a
musical score and some sound effects but no dialogue.  Dialogue was
presented using the tried-and-true silent film technique of intertitles.
It would still be a few years before sound technology would be fully
shaken out, and before both filmmakers and their audiences had adapted
to the new medium.
"Sunrise" premiered at the Roxy Theatre in New York, accompanied by the
Roxy Orchestra conducted by Hugo Riesenfeld.  Microphones picked up
the score and the signals were transmitted via telephone wires to the
Western Electric labs where they were recorded and converted into a
Movietone soundtrack.  We are fortunate that the Movitone soundtrack
survived, even if the reproduction is crude by today's standards
(although I think the audio sounds better than many surviving late
'20's vintage phonograph records).
The Fox laserdisc of "Sunrise" offers two soundtracks:  The digital
track is a modern score for orchestra composed and conducted by silent
film accompianist Timothy Brock, and the analog track is the original
Movietone soundtrack.  Watching the laserdisc on home theatre equipment
featuring a big screen, and listening to Brock's score in high fidelity
stereo gives the viewer a taste of what a silent film experience must
have been like in a large, urban film palace with a live orchestra.
However, The true power of the film comes through when experienced with
Riesenfeld's original Movietone sound track.  As good as Brock is at
creating  silent accompaniaments (I admire his work featured on the
"Cabinet of Dr.  Caligari" laserdisc and DVD), Riesenfeld is the true
pro.  Riesenfeld's score truly enhances the moods and emotions of the
visuals.  The difference between the two scores is most dramatic at the
close of the film, Riesenfelds's rising to a crescendo to drive home the
theme of Love Victorious.  Brock's score evokes the original silent film
experience; Riesenfeld's score drives one to tears.
William Fox brought Murnau over from Germany after he made his film
"The Last Laugh", famous for not requiring a single title card.  Fox
wanted  "Sunrise" to be a showcase for his studio's abilities.  This
film has it All:  Huge sets built in forced perspective and using
children and midgets as extras to provide the illusion of great depth;
a tram track laid for the long, lyrical ride from the country to the
city; process shots (including Schuefftan effects and travelling
mattes); deep focus.
Murnau was a master at fluid camera movement.  A scene in which
Ansass trudges through a marsh on his way to his assignation with
The Vamp was done in a single shot involving complex camera tracking;
the effect is breathtaking.  Shots are taken while riding the tram
and on board boats.  Murnau was also a master of open form, suggesting
space outside the slightly claustrophobic, narrowed Movietone frame
by having action move in from the sides of the screen.
He also exploited multiple images in "Sunrise".  Some of the stuff
might seem a bit corny to modern viewers, but the World saw a lot of
it here first.  The only shot that doesn't work for me is the one at
the end of Ansass's and Indre's night on the town when they embrace
and the shot dissolves to them embracing as cherubs circle over them
looking like they were suspended from the blades of a spinning
Casablanca-style ceiling fan.
Janet Gaynor won the first ever Academy Award for Best Actress for her
work in "Sunrise", along with "Seventh Heaven" and "Street Angels".
Margaret Livingston is absolutely believable as the lascivious, amoral,
goldigging home wrecker.
One of the requirements that a film must satisfy before I consider it
to be a great film that it bear watching over and over again without
losing its freshness or appeal (it's funny, but silent films seem to
have an easier time satisfying this requirement).  "Sunrise" not only
bears repeated viewings, it deserves them.
"Sunrise" is available on VHS tape from Critics Choice Video.  This
version features the original Movietone soundtrack.  The Fox laserdisc
features a much cleaner print, and includes Timothy Brock's modern
score, along with the Movietone soundtrack, plus some supplementary
production material.
Essay copyright (C) 1999 David M. Arnold.  All rights reserved.
Sent via Deja.com http://www.deja.com/
Share what you know. Learn what you don't.

Title
Review for Sally of the Sawdust (1925)
"Sally of the Sawdust" is a pleasant film with some historical
significance.  It is a good example of late-career Griffith, it is one
of W.C. Fields's first major roles, and it is one of Alfred Lunt's few
films.
The story is of the relationship between juggler and carney "Professor"
Eustance McGargle (Fields), and Sally (Carol Dempster), an orphan whom
he informally adopts.  Sally matures into a dancer and an assistant to
McGargle in his acts.  She loves McGargle as if he were her father,
although she disapproves of his shell games and his 3-card Monte.
Eventually, McGargle becomes convinced that Sally should be reunited
with her grandparents Judge Foster (Erville Alderson) and Mrs. Foster
(Effie Shannon).  Through a number of contrivances, Sally is thrust into
contact with the Fosters without any knowing the other's true identity.
While Mrs. Foster basically seems kindly, Judge Foster is a flinty
curmudgeon with a particular grudge against show people -- he threw
Sally's mother out of the house when she insisted on marrying a
performer.  Sally also catches the eye of wealthy scion Peyton Lennox
(Lunt), whose father (Charles Hammond) conspires with the Judge to find
a way to keep McGargle & Co. out of circulation.
There is an aspect to Griffith's films that have always annoyed me:
Griffith never trusted the wits of his audience and he interspersed his
films with pontificating title cards that could very well have been
eliminated.  "Sally of the Sawdust" is not nearly as littered with these
as are Griffith's earlier works.  And, one does have to take the bad
with the good.  Over all, "Sally of the Sawdust" lives up to Griffith's
reputation as the founding father of American cinematic technique.  The
film's climax is yet another classic, requisite Griffith chase sequence,
as McGargle strives to rescue Sally from being sent to an Institution
for Wayward Girls.  Granted, the stakes in this chase aren't as high as
in "Intolerance" (in which the  hero's sweetheart races to save him from
the gallows), but the sequence comes off well.
The film belongs to Fields, who delivers an understated prototype of his
later film persona.  We get several chances to enjoy Fields's genuine
talent as a juggler -- I especially liked his entrance in which he
pretends to accidentally drop a ball.  A member of the audience jumps to
catch the ball before it bounces away, but Fields stomps on it, tips his
hat and catches the ball on the rebound.  I think that self-deprecating
physical humor is very difficult to do well. Fields's performance is
tour-de-force, right up there with the best of Chaplin and Keaton.
Fields also has a number of scenes involving a Ford Model "T" that would
have had the audience rolling in the aisles in 1925 (by the late '20's
the Model "T" had developed into a humor target similar to the Yugo in
the '80's).
Alfred Lunt was a very popular stage performer, and this film catches
him in his prime.  It's been said that a stage actor's most important
asset is his voice, while a film actor's most important asset is his
face.  Lunt's face is certainly adequately handsome for the romantic
lead, but being denied the use of his voice in a silent film must have
seemed a handicap.  Perhaps this is why he made only a handful of films,
and only 1 talkie.  Overall, his contribution to "Sally of the Sawdust"
is minimal.
The truly weak part of "Sally" is Carol Dempster's performance.  Sally
is supposed to be a girl on the verge of womanhood, say 15 or 16 years
old.  At 23, Dempster, looking a little like Susan Sarandon, seems too
old and too worldly to be believed (Lilian Gish could have pulled off
this role).  Dempster's dancing is unconvincing, and the majority of her
dramatic moments are way over the top.  I see a sincere effort on
Dempster's part, but depth and subtlety are lacking.  Dempster was
Griffith's protogee after Gish left his company.  Comparing Dempster to
Gish is a bit like comparing Cheri Oteri to Gilda Radner.
I'd recommend "Sally of the Sawdust" to silent film fans. It's not,
however,  one of those seminal silent films like "Metropolis", "The
Cabinet of Dr. Caligari", or "Battleship Potemkin" that serious film
buffs must sit down and consume, like Brussell sprouts, because it's
good for them.
"Sally" is available on DVD from Image that features a reasonably crisp,
sepia-tinted transfer, and an adequate but less than spectacular piano
accompiament based on the original cue sheets.
Essay copyright (C) 2000 David M. Arnold.  All rights reserved.

Title
Review for Henna (1991)
A retrospective review by David M. Arnold
My second foray into the exotic realm of Indian cinema yielded
up a film that really connected with me.  "Henna" is a story of love,
human goodness and sacrifice. It is also a powerful plea for tolerance,
peace and understanding between nations, and it is one of the most
beautiful specimens of cinematic art to have been produced anywhere
in the world.
The story, set on the border between India and Pakistan, follows
Chander Prakash (Rishi Kapoor), a young businessman engaged to
Chandni (Ashwini Bhave).  On the eve of their engagement party,
Chander is called to his company to aid a worker injured in an
industrial accident.  Hurrying to his party afterward, Chander
suffers an automobile accident during a violent rainstorm, and is swept
into the river.  He is found, half dead, by a tribe of Pakistani
peasants.
The tribe is lead by Kahn baba (Saeed Jaffey), a devout Muslim who
guides his life by the words of the Koran, and who believes that
Allah's judgement holds more weight than that of any worldly court.
The peasants nurse Chander back to health only to discover that he has
lost his memory.  Sensing goodness in him, they adopt him into the
tribe.  Kahn baba has a beautiful young daughter, Henna (Zeba Bakhtiar),
who falls in love with the mysterious stranger.  As the months pass,
Chander settles into a simple and idyllic pastoral lifestyle, and he
proves himself to be a decent and loyal member of their community.
Soon, Henna and Chander are to be wed.
On the eve of their nuptials, Chander suddenly recovers his memory.
Henna and her family resolve to return Chander across the border to
India.  The determination and sacrifice that these noble peasants
exhibit in their attempt to send Chander home build to a conclusion
that really packs a whallop.
"Henna" is produced by RK Films, and was the last project of the
great Raj Kapoor, who died in 1988.  The film was completed by his
family and is a fitting tribute to one of the great figures in
Indian filmmaking.  Shot on location, the film is confidently and
competently directed by Randhir Kapoor.  The piedmont of the western
Himalayas (with majestic peaks in the background) provides the setting
for powerful and absolutely convincing performances.  The sequences in
which Henna's love for Chander buds and blossoms are on par with
the best that film can offer, and compare well with, for example,
the ball masque scene in Zefferelli's "Romeo and Juliet" as filmic
realizations of young love.  Add to this fluid and subtle tracking
camerwork and the result is a film  that is much more than the sum
of its parts.
The film conforms to the Indian cinematic tradition of the lengthy
(175 minutes) musical, and contains the obligatory half-dozen or
so musical numbers.  The songs are well woven into the fabric of the
story.  And, the film captures the color and texture of both Indian
upper-class and Pakistani peasant lifestyles.  It accomplishes that
goal that I require in order to consider any film really good:  It is
evocative, it transports the viewer into another realm.
"Henna" is available to Western audiences on DVD from DEI.  The disc
is letterboxed to a 1.85:1 aspect ratio (I am convinced the original
film was shot using a 2.35:1 'Scope process and cropped down to 1.85:1).
The image is exceptionally crisp, clear and vivid, and looks better than
some domestic transfers I have seen.  The only problem with the disc is
a very harsh, clipped and over-driven monaural soundtrack that really
spoiled for me some of the musical numbers, inducing the same visceral
reaction as fingernails on a chalkboard.  That was a great
disappointment to me, since I ENJOY Indian music.  The dialogue is in
Hindi, with optional English subtitles, except during the musical
numbers which are not subtitled (this is a very minor handicap to the
non-Hindi speaking viewer's understanding or enjoyment of the film).
On the whole, I would give "Henna" my strongest recommendation. For
anyone interested in exploring the Hindi movie scene, "Henna" would be
an excellent introduction.
Essay copyright (C) 2000 David M. Arnold.  All rights reserved.

Title
Review for Midnight (1934)
I like to prowl through the used videos bin at our local 
second-hand bookstore to see if I can locate anything 
interesting.  One film that turned up was "Call It Murder", 
starring Humphrey Bogart.  I bought the video in order 
to have an example of an early Bogart role for my 
collection.
"Call It Murder" was originally titled "Midnight" and 
was produced by Universal in 1934.  This was before 
Bogart's breakthrough performances in "The Petrified
Forest" (1936), "High Sierra" and "The Maltese Falcon" 
(both 1941) that made him a star.  During the early 
1930's, Bogart often played crooks who were either hanged, 
shot, or fried by the end of the film.  His role in 
"Call It Murder" was no exception.
The film looks like a programmer, those low-budget 
pictures made to fill the bottom half of a double 
feature.  I found it to be an enjoyable film, and in 
ways a precursor to the Film Noir genre that "Maltese 
Falcon" helped initiate:  It posesses the Film Noir 
elements of cynicism and irony, and its subject is 
the seamier side of life.
The video was transferred from a print distributed by 
Guaranteed Pictures. It would not suprise me to learn 
that Universal sold the film "Midnight" to Guaranteed,
who, after Bogart became a hot item, retitled it, moved 
Bogart's name to top billing, and re-distributed it.  I 
would also not be suprised to learn that the film is now 
in the Public Domain, and thus made its way to video, 
courtesy of those second-tier video plants who duplicate 
tapes in "High Quality EP Mode".
"Call It Murder" tells the story of the somewhat 
dysfunctional Wheldon family.  The  family members are 
Edward Wheldon (O.P. Heggie), his wife (Margaret Wycherly),
and three grown children all still living at home.  One 
daughter, Ada (Katherine Wilson) is married to sleazy, 
ne'er-do-well, unemployed sponger Joe Biggers (Lynne 
Overman), and the couple live at home with her parents.  
The younger daughter, Stella (Sidney Fox) is a free 
spirit who is in love with gangster Garboni (Bogart).  
And, there is playboy son Arthur (Richard Whorf).
Edward Wheldon serves as jury foreman in a murder case 
in which Ethel Saxon (Helen Flint) has been accused 
of killing her cheating husband.  The crime may or 
may not have been an accident, but Wheldon is 
instrumental in the jury's decision to convict and 
condemn Ethel.  District Attorney Plunkett (Moffat 
Johnston), who has political aspirations, regards 
Ethel's conviction as an important scalp to hang at 
his belt, and Ethel goes to the electric chair.
Wheldon would like to get the whole incident out of 
his mind, but as Ethel's execution date approaches the 
family is pestered by the Press, who want to make Ethel 
into some sort of martyr.  Slimey son-in-law Joe sells 
the family out to a newspaper reporter (Henry Hull) 
who is doing a story on how the jury foreman reacts 
to the news of the execution of his sentence.  
Then, as Ethel is being strapped into the Chair, 
daughter Stella bursts in with the news that she has 
just shot and killed her cheating lover, Garboni.  
Ambrose Bierce said there are four categories of 
homicide:  The felonious, the excusable, the 
justifiable, and the praiseworthy.  Where do Ethel's 
and Stella's crimes fit in this spectrum? Wheldon's 
belief in Due Process of Law is tested when the 
accused is close to his heart.  
Despite its limited scope, "Call It Murder" manages 
to be interesting on a couple of levels:  First, most 
of the action takes place in the claustrophobic Wheldon
home, which is a typical, middle-class suburban home 
of the early 1900's.  Director Chester Erskine captures 
the feeling of this time and place.  He also employs 
some clever camera work:  There's a shot through the hall 
mirror, and an interesting match cut: A shot of Ethel 
pacing in her cell, shot through the cell bars; cut 
to a shot of Edward Wheldon pacing in his home, shot 
through the stair rail.
Second, the film makes sophisticated and cynical comments 
about the American Judicial system, about trial by 
jury, about how one's opinions can be swayed depending
on just whose ox is being gored, about the role of the 
media, about the strange relationship between the 
Judiciary and Politics, about relationships between
parents and children, and about the institution of 
Capital Punishment.  These issues are as relevant today 
as they were 64 years ago.
The cast turn in casual performances as if no one 
believed this film was going to make or break a career.  
Bogart's Garboni seems stiff and forced, he would need a 
few more films before finding his voice.  Lynne Overman 
makes the sleazoid Joe thoroughly despicable.  Overall, 
the acting would be described as "workmanlike".
Roger Ebert claims in a recent review that America was 
more sophisticated in the 1930's, and films from that 
era reflect this sophistication.  After viewing this modest
little film from 1934, I believe it.  "Call It Murder" 
is by no means a blockbuster, but it is a tidy little 
drama with more substance than initially meets the eye.
To reply via EMail, replace "Xexecpc" with "execpc" in the
above address.

Title
Review for Solyaris (1972)
As a laserdisc collector I have learnt that often it doesn't pay to be 
impatient. Sometimes an out-of-print disc gets re-released and becomes 
readily available again.  Sometimes this is worth waiting for.  This 
has happened to me with "Dune" this past winter, and it just happened 
again with "Solaris".  When I first tried to obtain a copy of "Solaris", 
it was only available from the "Collectible and Out-of-print" department 
of my laserdisc supplier, for $150.00.  As a re-release, it may now be 
had, new and sealed, for much, much less.
Critic Penelope Houston said of "Solaris" that it was "Russia's answer 
to 2001: A Space Odessy".  Completed in 1972, the film comes from an era in 
which it seemed that nearly everything done in the West resulted in (or, 
was the result of) a Russian response.  Like "2001", "Solaris" explores 
the possibilities of Alien  Contact.  Unlike "2001", it does so with a 
deep emphasis on humanity.
The story follows a scientist, Kris Kelvin (Donatas Banionis), who is a 
pecialist in space psychology.  He has been assigned to get to the bottom 
of the peculiar goings-on at the Solaris space station.  Solaris is in orbit 
around an alien planet that is completely covered by an ocean.  The space 
station, designed for an expedition of 80+ people is now inhabited by only 
three.  Kelvin views the film of a deposition made by Burton (Vladislav 
Dvorjetzki), a pilot who flew a rescue mission near the alien ocean's surface.  
The pilot reported seeing strange things, including a giant, animated statue 
of a boy whom he recognized as the dead son of a colleague.  The prevailing 
view of the scientific panel that heard Burton's deposition is that Burton 
was suffering from overwork; there is a minority view that the alien ocean 
may be organic, sentient, and capable of communicating telepathically.
Kelvin wraps up his terrestial affairs in a bittersweet scene with his 
parents, and travels to the Solaris station.  There, he discovers that one 
of the three remaining crew members, his old buddy Gibarian (Sos Sarkisyan) 
has committed suicide after recording a puzzling message intended for Kelvin.  
The remaining two crew members Snouth (Jueri Jaervet) and Sartorius (Anatoli 
Solonitsyn) are secretive and shut themselves up in their labs.  Kelvin 
becomes aware of other presences aboard the station.  Snouth and Sartorius 
explain that the "guests" have been appearing for some time.  Kelvin soon 
meets another guest, in the form of his dead wife Hari (Natalya Bondarchuk) 
who also committed suicide several years earlier.
Kelvin learns that the guests have odd physical characteristics.  He tricks
Hari into entering a transit capsule and blasts her into space.  She 
reappears. He locks her in his quarters.  She escapes by bashing down the 
door, critically lacerating herself in the process.  The wounds heal before 
his eyes.  Despite these oddities, Kelvin believes (or, wants to believe) 
that the soul of his dead wife inhabits the body of the "guest" that has 
taken on her form. Kelvin has received a rare gift:  The opportunity to 
redress some wrongs that resulted in the loss of a loved one.
Eventually, Kelvin comes to the conclusion that the guests are forms 
emanating from the alien ocean.  Whether the ocean is capable of materializing 
matter, or is merely inducing perceptions in the minds of the crew is not 
made clear (I prefer to believe the latter), but the guests are as real to 
the crew as a brick wall and just as hard to ignore.  The crew rig up an 
experiment in which they transmit Kelvin's brain waves to the planet below.  
The experiment nearly kills him, but when he recovers he discovers that 
the "guests" are gone.  And, in a final scene that is beautiful, moving, 
and joyous, the ocean opens up to Kelvin for First Contact on a very 
intimate level.
"Solaris" is based on Stanislaw Lem's novel of the same name.  Like 
the best of speculative fiction, "Solaris" uses fantastic situations 
for observations on mundane human conditions.  After so many years of 
anthropomorphic humanoid  aliens in "Star Wars" and and on "Star Trek", 
it is startling to contemplate what alien intelligence might REALLY be 
like.  The alien life form in "Solaris" is a single, global life form.  
Or, perhaps a global colony with a single intellect.  Or, maybe something 
totally different.  We see the Solaris crew grappling to understand 
this intelligence, we see them consider blasting the  planet with lethal 
radiation (the standard, human knee-jerk reaction to the unknown).  And 
we seem them finally reconcile themselves to it.
Many science-fiction films abandon the human aspect in favor of 
futuristic gadgetry and fantastic settings.  "Solaris" presents the 
deepest view of Humanity of any science-fiction film I have seen.  
Tarkovsky purposely puts the standard sci-fi accoutrements in the 
background to focus on the characters' humanity. And, the interpersonal 
relationships between the characters are more complex, more complete, 
and have more depth of feeling that is standard for the science fiction 
genre.
And, speaking of humanity, the film is a revelation to me on another 
level.  I had grown up with the usual Cold War propaganda about the 
Evil Empire behind the Iron Curtain.  Now, I view this film, and I see 
ordinary people dealing with ordinary human issues of love, death, fear, 
and understanding: This drives home to me how wrong that propaganda was.  
Our government, our System, was preparing us for conflict with the Soviet 
Union using traditional techniques to dehumanize the enemy in our eyes.  
This film reinforces how universal the human condition is, despite 
political boundaries or nationalities.  It's ironic that this film, 
from the peak of the Cold War, can be such a powerful bridge between 
cultures.
Andrei Tarkovsky was a brilliant, visual filmmaker.  His shots are 
composed with layer upon layer of meaning.  "Solaris" features 
Tarkovsky's trademark of switching between color and black-and-white. 
More than one critic has called him a "visual poet".  The scenes of 
the alien ocean are breathtakingly beautiful.  However, anyone expecting 
a science-fiction adventure will be  disappointed.  This film is 
reflective, it is contemplative.  And, the science-fiction setting
is merely a backdrop for a film for which the primary emphasis is 
speculation on deeper human issues.
Image Entertainment's laserdisc of Solaris is letterboxed, in Russian 
with English subtitles.  (This is one foreign-language film I wish had 
been dubbed.  I know enough French and German to pick up dialogue in 
these languages with the help of subtitles, and I enjoyed listening to 
the musical, tonal Vietnamese language in "Scent of Green Papaya".  But, 
the Russian language is inscrutable to me and not all that pretty to 
listen to.  Subtitles miss nuances of dialogue and distract from 
Tarkovsky's wonderful images.)  Image has re-relased the disc in their 
"Lasers for Less" category:  Collectors should be advised to get it 
while they can.
To reply  via  EMail,  replace  "Xexecpc" with "execpc" in the
address above.

Title
Review for Man Who Fell to Earth, The (1976)
I now have two Nicholas Roeg films in my collection:  
"Walkabout", and "The Man Who Fell to Earth".  Both 
DVD's (new from Criterion and from Fox Lorber) sustain 
the promise of the new digital videodisc medium:  
Videophile quality releases at affordable prices.
"The Man Who Fell to Earth" is a science fiction film 
starring David Bowie as a lone alien from a dying planet 
who arrives on Earth in search of water. The film is 
probably more important to David Bowie fans than it is 
to SF fans since it launched Bowie's career (such as it 
is) as an actor.  
As a science fiction film, TMWFTE is a mixed bag.  Like 
"Walkabout", the theme of the film is the collision between 
modern, Western culture and a simpler, more innocent alien 
culture that ends up losing that innocence.  And, if you 
are a SF fan looking for dazzling effects: You will be 
disappointed -- TMWFTE is more like "Solaris" or "Gattaca" 
in that it explores ideas rather than providing action-packed 
SF adventure.  And, since the action takes place on Earth 
in the late 70's to early 80's, there is no opportunity to 
craft a deeply textured, future or alien world along the 
lines of "Blade Runner" or "Dark City".
Roeg's films are beautifully photographed.  Having seen 
TMWFTE before as a worn-out, panned and scanned rental copy 
on VHS, I very much appreciate the wide screen presentation 
on the Fox Lorber DVD that showcases Roeg's master touch for
composition.  
The film starts with what looks like stock footage from 
NASA of a space vehicle launch, only presented upside-down 
to look like on object's flaming entry into Earth's 
atmosphere.  Then, after a splash-down in a South-Western lake, 
we catch a glimpse of the Visitor (Bowie).  He has taken 
the guise of a British expatriate by the name of Thomas 
Jerome Newton, complete with a (presumably) forged UK 
passport. We see him enter a swap shop and hock a gold 
ring for twenty dollars.  Then, we see him sit by a stream, 
guzzling water.  He takes out a loop of string that holds 
hundreds of similar rings.  Soon he has enough money to 
travel to New York and hire patent attorney Oliver 
Farnsworth (Buck Henry).  Newton has technology for sale.
Together, Newton and Farnsworth build a massive, monopolistic 
technology corporation,sort of what MicroSoft would be 
like if Bill Gates were also into petrochemicals, for the 
purpose of amassing resources enough to build another 
spacecraft for his return flight to his homeworld of Anthea.
Along the way, Newton hires Nathan Bryce (Rip Torn), 
a philandering, burned out college chemistry professor 
with an eye for the coeds in his classes, to be his 
propellants expert.  He also falls in with Mary-Lou 
(Candy Clark), a simple-minded, alcoholic motel maid, 
and they begin a relationship.
Eventually, the Government suits move in to bust up 
Newton's monopoly.  All his closest friends betray him, 
and he is taken to a "place" where Government doctors 
attempt to prove or disprove his origin from another 
planet.  In doing so, they so damage him  that he may 
never return.  (Newton's abode while in the hands of 
the Government doctors evokes a Bizzarro vision of Dave 
Bowman's hotel-room zoo cage in "2001: A Space Odessy".)
On the plus side, the film is very intelligently 
organized, and delivers the various layers of the plot 
obliquely and non-linearly.  I always enjoy an film 
that doesn't insult the viewers' intelligence (I did 
NOT, for example, enjoy "Independence Day".)  Bowie 
is absolutely correct for the character of Newton:  pale, 
gaunt, androgynous, he looks like he might really be an 
alien.  I also like the score, with musical references 
to Gustav Holtz's "The Planets", as well as more pop
selections.
But, the film has some serious flaws.  Roeg's artsy 
camera and editing work sometimes get in the way of 
telling the story (as it also did in parts of "Walkabout").  
My biggest beef is with the amount of sexuality in the film.  
The DVD listed the film as "unrated", but it would get a 
strong "R" rating (perhaps "NC17") today, for long scenes 
of full frontal female nudity, and glimpses of full male 
nudity. Granted, some sex in the film is appropriate, 
especially to lock in the character of Nate Bryce, and 
to explain Newton's relationship with Mary-Lou (and to 
explore a sexual relationship between an earthling and an 
extraterrestrial). Enough is enough -- there's an extended 
scene of rough sex play between Newton and Mary-Lou 
involving a gun that I found painful to watch and felt added 
nothing to the story.
Finally, this may be taken either as a plus or as a minus:  
The story is ambiguous enough to support an entirely 
different interpretation (that Newton is really a delusional 
genius hailing from good old Terra Firma, who only imagines 
himself an alien.)  In a Nicholas Roeg film, you can never be 
sure that what you see is real or imagined, past or present.
Review copyright (C) 1998 David M. Arnold.  All rights reserved.
A film's not about what it's about.  It's about how it's about
what it's about.  -- Ebert's Law

Title
Review for Thief of Bagdad, The (1924)
It's official.  "The Thief of Bagdad" is my favorite silent film, 
edging out "Metropolis".  A lush and visually stunning film, "Thief
of Bagdad" represents the pinnacle of silent Hollywood production
values.  It is "Titanic" of 1924, reportedly the first film ever 
to cost more than $2 million to produce, and it is full of (then) 
state-of-the-art special effects.  "Thief of Bagdad" was recently, 
and deservedly, added to the National Registry of Historic Films.
Black-and-white silent films were more often than not neither 
black-and-white nor silent.  By the '20's, the majority of films 
employed color, primarily through tinting (coloring the film base), 
but also by toning (replacing the black silver oxide with a 
colored material), stenciling and even hand-painting. 
It's hard for me to describe how much of an impact seeing a film 
with authentic tinting and toning makes.  For example, night scenes 
often were photographed in broad daylight with the intent of 
employing a deep blue tint on the final print.  The tinted filmstock 
makes the difference between a night scene looking ridiculous and 
being believable.
In major cities, top theatres employed live orchestras and sound 
effects to accompany films.  Theatres were often equipped with 
theatre pipe organs:  Massive and complex, these organs permitted 
a single organist to be nearly a one-man orchestra.  They featured
many different voices and electrically activated sound effects, 
all summoned up from the keyboard.  By 1924 the silent movie had 
reached its peak of development.  Within 10 years the optical 
soundtrack would be fully developed and very few silent films 
would ever be made again.
Viewing the authoritative print of "Thief of Bagdad" from the 
Killiam Collection on a big screen captures some of the original 
silent film experience.  The Killiam print includes a soundtrack 
of an organ score performed by Lee Erwin, and is reproduced with 
restored tints to deliver that dimension of color the original 
audiences enjoyed.  The Killiam print recently has been released 
on VHS tape by Critic's Choice Video, although the mastering
leaves much to be desired.  However, the same print was used to 
master the much better looking and sounding Republic laserdisc,
which is now out of print but still fairly widely available.
The first title card in "Thief of Bagdad" describes the film as an 
"Arabian Nights Fantasy".  Douglas Fairbanks (Sr) plays the thief 
Ahmed in an ancient Bagdad that is much more fantasy than reality.  
Ahmed is a loveable rogue who lives by one rule:  what he wants 
he takes.  He steals a magic rope that permits him to scale the 
walls in an attempt to burglarize the palace; there, he spots the 
royal princess (Julanne Johnston) and falls in love.
The next day is the princess's birthday, and the day that she is to 
choose her suitor. Ahmed impersonates a prince and joins princes 
from Persia (Mathilde Comont, a woman playing a man's role), from 
India (Noble Johnson), and from Mongolia (So-Jin) as they present 
themselves to the royal family.  Of course the princess chooses 
Ahmed, but a slave girl (Anna May Wong), who is actually a spy in 
the service of the Mongol prince, reveals him to be a common thief. 
Ahmed is scourged and sent into the streets. Rather than choose 
from the other three princes, the princess demands that they spend 
the next seven moons seeking out the rarest treasure, and the prince 
who returns with the greatest and rarest treasure will have her 
as a bride.
Ahmed seeks advice from a Holy Man (Charles Belcher), who teaches 
him that "Happiness must be earned", and that he has it within his 
own power to make himself a prince.  He then tells the reformed 
thief of a hermit in the mountains with knowledge of great treasure.  
But, there is great danger and Ahmed must cross a valley of fire, 
slay a dragon, resist the temptations of sea nymphs, capture a 
flying horse and return to his love before the Mongol prince's 
treachery is complete.
"Thief of Bagdad" treats Islam and the Koran with a charming naivety, 
fondness, and a respectful objectivity that is refreshing in today's 
light of recent events in the Middle East.  But, the portrayal of 
ancient Arabia is most decidedly a fantasy, the setting for a film 
that deliberately makes no attempt at authenticity.
Though the pace of the film is slow and deliberate, and runs for 
nearly 2 1/2 hours, it succeeds in keeping the viewer's attention
for its full span, and the unrushed pace adds to the dreamlike
fantasy of the story.  Unlike "Metropolis", the film is more
or less intact with original title cards, and can be viewed in
the form its creators had intended.
Although directed by Raoul Walsh, there is no question that this is 
Douglas Fairbanks's film:  He was the writer (under pseudonym Elton 
Thomas), producer, and star.  Fairbanks was a fine athlete who 
performed most of his own stunts.  Early on he performs a number 
of clever and humorous stunts as he steals money, jewelry, and food, 
and as he escapes the fakir from whom he has stolen the magic rope.  
Silent film is truly a different art form than modern film.  The 
story must be told entirely visually, and the acting is closer to 
mime than in a sound film.  Douglas Fairbanks performs the role of 
Ahmed with all the subtlety of a baby pig squealing for its dinner; 
other cast memebers deliver more restrained performances.  
"Thief of Bagdad" succeeds because it achieves Film's first and 
foremost requirement:  It is evocative, it transports the viewer to 
another place and time.
I find the enjoyment of "Thief of Bagdad" in the beauty of its 
elaborate Art Deco-meets-Byzantium sets with their soaring spires
and improbable arches, in its special effects (many of which, like 
the magic rope and flying carpet scenes, hold up well even today), 
in its competent exploitation of then-available technology, and 
in the dreamy organ score.  And, in imagining myself seated in an 
opulent, gilded, 1920's movie theatre complete with Wurlitzer pipe 
organ, about to enjoy the biggest blockbuster that had been produced 
to date.
Copyright (C) 1998 David M. Arnold.  All rights reserved.
To reply via EMail, replace "Xexecpc" with "execpc" in the 
above address.

Title
Review for Pardes (1997)
Robert Burns conjectured what a marvelous gift it would be
to see ourselves as others do.  The Indian film "Pardes" gives
Americans a glimpse of how others might view us.  About half
the footage in "Pardes" was shot on the American west coast, in
Hollywood, Las Vegas and Vancouver.
"Pardes" opens with Kishori Lal (Amrish Puri), a NRI (Non
Resident Indian) returning to India to arrange the marriage
of his son Rajiv (Apoorva Agnihotri).  Kishori Lal left India
for America 35 years ago with a few dollars in his pocket.
By now he has built himself a fortune, and lives in a
mansion in Hollywood along with many members of his extended
family.  Rajiv was born in the US and has never set foot in
India.
Rajiv has a poor cousin with the auspicious name of Arjun
(Shah Rukh Kahn) who came to America after his parents died.
Arjun is employed by his uncle, for whom he runs an automotive
repair facility and has a recording studio above the garage.
Kishori Lal wants Rajiv to wed an Indian girl in hopes of
stirring some appreciation of his heritage in his son.
Kusum Ganga (Mahima Chaudhry in her film debut), the
daughter of a childhood friend is his selection.  Arjun
and Rajiv are sent to India to fetch Ganga home to America
for the nuptials.  Arjun dutifully sells Ganga and her family
on Rajiv's virtues.  Once she gets to America, however, Ganga
discovers that Rajiv is not as advertised.
"Pardes" represents America as a land of plenty, and one
commodity that there is plenty of is licentiousness.  Rajiv
is a pathetic character, truly at home neither in the US nor
in India, full of self-loathing, and spoiled by the affluence.
The film walks the center path, cautioning against the
indulgences of Western culture while at the same time
acknowledging the evils of an Eastern patriarchal tradition
in which women are not much more than their fathers' chattel
(Ganga's father loves her, but he values the traditions and
family honor above her life).
The film has excellent production values and features lots
of gorgeous location photography in rural India.  The plot
moves along well, although a subplot about Ganga's rival
suitor could very well have been left on the cutting room floor.
Typically for the Hindi movie genre, the filmmakers invent sly
contrivances for segues into the requisite half-dozen or so
musical numbers.  Performances by two of India's top stars
(Shah Rukh Khan and Amrish Puri) are first rate.
I recommend "Pardes" to thick-skinned Western viewers who
would not be offended by a less than flattering portrayal of
Americans, and who are intrigued by the exotic sights, sounds
and culture of India.
"Pardes" is available on DVD from DEI.  The disc is letterboxed
to approx. 2.0:1 aspect ratio, and includes a good-sounding
stereo soundtrack.  The video transfer is good if less than
excellent, but does exhibit some transfer anomolies (in particular,
shifting aspect ratios).  The film is in Hindi with optional
English subtitles.
Essay copyright (C) 2000 David M. Arnold.  All rights reserved.

Title
Review for Star Is Born, A (1937)
A Star is Born (1937, William Wellman)
A Retrospective Review by David M. Arnold
"A Star is Born" tells the story of small-town girl Esther Blodgett
(Janet Gaynor) who aspires to become a movie actress.  She travels
to Hollywood and is discovered by screen star Norman Maine (Frederic
March) who convinces his producer (Adolphe Menjou) to sign her.  She
adopts the stage name Vicki Lester, falls in love with and marries
Norman.  Soon Vicki's career rockets while the boozing Norman's
crashes.  If this sounds familiar, it is: The film has been remade
twice, in 1954 with Judy Garland, and in 1977 with Barbara Streisand.
I am especially fond of the original version of this film.  The
screenplay was written in part by Dorothy Parker.  The 1994 film
about Parker, "Mrs. Parker and the Vicious Circle", directed by Alan
Rudolph and starring Jennifer Jason Leigh, reconstructs the filming
of "A Star is Born" in its opening scenes.  Parker was a key figure
in the Algonquin Round Table, a group of second-string New York
literati who wrote some of the best light humor of the first half of
the 20th century.  Parker's book reviews, penned under the name of
Constant Reader, are some of the funniest literary put-downs in print.
Example:  "'Daddy, what's an optimist?', said Pat to Mike as they
walked down the street one day.  'An Optimist', replied the absent-
minded professor as he wound up the cat and let out the clock, 'Is
someone who thought Cosmo Hamilton wasn't going to write any more
books.'"
Parker (along with many from the New York literary scene) was
lured to Hollywood in the early '30's as a screenwriter. She
discovered that Hollywood wasn't nearly as literate a place as New
York, but the money was good.  She stayed on, teamed up with her
then husband Alan Campbell, and with Richard Carson to deliver the
final, credited script to "A Star is Born" that had also been worked
on by Ben Hecht, Ring Lardner, and others.  The film sparkles
throughout with gems of Parker's witticisms: "OLIVER NILES:  I'm now
going to turn you over to my demon press agent, Libby.  Don't allow
Libby to frighten you.  He has a heart of gold.  Only harder."
The story is as much about Norman Maine's self-destruction resulting
from alcoholism and egomania as it is about Vicki Lester's rise to
stardom.  Norman provides a dark and tragic bass note to an otherwise
lighthearted story, and Frederic March is absolutely believable in the
role.  Dorothy Parker knew about the effects of alcohol abuse
first-hand.  If you believe Rudolph's 1994 film, then you believe she
was responsible for introducing her tea-totaling friend, writing
partner, and fellow Algonquinite Robert Benchley to drink which
eventually killed him.
The film represents with brutal honesty how Hollywood operates.
Menjou plays producer Oliver Niles as a pragmatic businessman who is
happy to tolerate Norman Maine's drunken escapades while Maine
remains a star, and in order to keep his new star, Vicki, happy.  But,
soon the theatre marquees are replacing "Enchanted Nights starring
Norman Maine" with "Enchanted Nights starring Vicki Lester", and
it's obvious that Niles will cut his losses over Norman.  Lionel
Stander is excellent as Matt Libby, the Press Agent from Hell.
"A Star is Born" was a big production in 1937.  Janet Gaynor was by
then a Hollywood veteran, having won the first ever Oscar for Best
actress in 1929 for her roles in F. W. Murnau's "Sunrise" (probably
the most romantic silent film ever made), and in "Street Angel" and
"Seventh Heaven".  Adolphe Menjou and Frederic March were big-name
stars in their own rights, and the film was produced by David O.
Selznick, the Stephen Spielberg of the day.  It was shot in Techicolor,
which at that time was the expensive and difficult 3-strip system.
"A Star is Born" was nominated for Academy Awards in the Best Picture,
Best Director, Best Assistant Director, Best Actor, Best Actress, and
Best Screenplay categories; it won the Oscar for Best Original Story,
and it won a special award for color cinematography.
For everyone out there who loves classy, smart, bittersweet old movies:
This is a classy, smart, bittersweet old movie:  Well written, well
directed, and well acted.
Essay copyright (C) 1999 David M. Arnold.  All rights reserved.
Sent via Deja.com http://www.deja.com/
Share what you know. Learn what you don't.

Title
Review for Cobra (1925)
A Retrospective Review by David M. Arnold
I puzzled over this film for a long time after viewing it.
I couldn't quite figure out what the point was.  Was it some
sort of morality play?  A lesson on virture?  I finally
concluded that it must have been an attempt to capitalize on
it's star's (Rudolph Valentino) innate magnetism to women --
a romantic fantasy.
Count Rodrigo Torriani (Valentino) is young, handsome and broke.
He has the misfortune of being cursed with irresistiblity
to women, who are drawn to him like moths to a flame.  He has
squandered his inheritance by bestowing cash settlements on
women as compensation for the hearts he has broken.
Rodrigo is befriended by wealthy American antiques dealer
Jack Dorning (Casson Ferguson), who hires Rodrigo to come
to New York and to join his firm as an expert on Italian
antiques.  Jack's lifestyle is as dull as Rodrigo's is
exciting.  Elise (Nita Naldi), niece to a wealthy patron,
and Mary Drake (Gertrude Olmstead), Jack's executive
secretary, make up a complex menage-a-quatre.
I can't discuss my thoughts about this film without giving
away some of the plot, but I'll try to be as oblique as
possible.  Suffice to say that one of the women is virtuous
and the other one is not.  The old Double Standard is in
full vigor, and the non-virtuous one is damned for living
the same lifestyle as Rodrigo, to whom the film give smirking
approval.  Finally, the virtuous one prevails and gets
Her Man, although modern viewers might feel it was the
wrong man.
Rudolph Valentino (stage name for Rodolfo Pietro Filiberto
Raffaello Guglielmi di Valentina) made about a dozen films
after he became a star in "The Four Horsemen of the Apocalypse"
(1921).  "Cobra" was the next to the last film he made before
his untimely and unexpected death in 1926 at age 31.
Valentino was one of film's earliest bona-fide heartthrobs,
and a mob of mourners at his New York funeral nearly turned
into a riot.
"Cobra" is one of Valentino's lesser works, although not
really due to any fault of his own.  His major contribution
is to be broodingly handsome in a number of stagey scenes
in which characters enter, deliver their lines (or, what
pass for lines in a silent film), and then leave.  Valentino
was once again paired with Nita Naldi, one of the silent
era's premier sex symbols.  Valentino and Naldi sizzled in
"Blood and Sand" (1922).  The fire between them in "Cobra"
has been damped down to a feeble smolder, and they get only
one unconvincing smooch.
Director Joseph Henabery has an impressive filmography of
long-forgotten films, many of them 2-reelers.  He is most
recognizable to silent fans as an actor who played Abe
Lincoln in "Birth of a Nation", and Admiral Coligny
in "Intolerance".
The film tackles the topic of adultery with a directness
that the Hayes office would expunge from Hollywood a mere
10 years later.  But, it is so hampered by the silent form
that the it never quite delivers.  I am a fan of silent film.
My list of 5 all-time favorite films includes two silents.
A silent film can be awe-inspiring ("Thief of Bagdad",
"Metropolis"); it can be lyrically beautiful ("Sunrise").
"Cobra" is neither, and its technique with static camera
placment is most un-cinematic.
My biggest complaint with "Cobra" is that the film doesn't
have a coherent moral vision.  The title is derived from
Rodrigo's belief that the victim of a cobra is nonetheless
fascinated by the snake, and succumbs somewhat willingly.
Woman is Rodrigo's cobra, making him the victim who willingly
succumbs out of fascination for his enemy.  However, when
Rodrigo eventually overcomes his self-destructive obsession,
he is smacked down. In the film's final scene, Rodrigo returns,
chastened, to Italy but only after sacrificing own happiness
in gratitude to his friend's generosity.  The fact that
Rodrigo returns unattached keeps the fantasy alive -- Rodrigo
is still available.
I watched the new Image DVD of "Cobra", a disc that suffers
from less than pristine picture quality, and a total lack
of any extra material that might help the viewer put the
film into some sort of historical context.  It appears
to be the only Valentino film as yet (9/1999) to appear on
DVD.  This seems strange to me, since stronger films like
"Blood and Sand" or "The Shiek" are more representative of
his work.
I can recommend "Cobra" as a curio to film fans who want
to round out their silent film experience.  And, as a
reminder that the silent era, too, had its share of clunkers.
Essay Copyright (C) 1999 David M. Arnold.  All rights reserved.
Sent via Deja.com http://www.deja.com/
Share what you know. Learn what you don't.

Title
Review for Metropolis (1927)
One of the real tragedies of film history is that there is no 
longer an original, authoritive print of Fritz Lang's seminal
film "Metropolis".  This review offers some observations on 
this very important silent film, and includes comments on the
various versions currently available on video.  
The closest to a truly authoritive film version today is probably 
the recent Filmmuseum Munich version, restored by Enno Patalas; 
unfortunately, that version is not yet available on video.  
"Metropolis" has been released under a number of video labels.  
Videos released by Third Coast and by Allied Artists are out of
print, and the author would appreciate any information about these
releases.  Currently, the following versions are available:
The Kino Video version, available from Kino[1] and a number of other
suppliers; Giorgio Moroder's version, out of print but still fairly
easy to come by from used video dealers[2]; and a new DVD release 
by Classic Media Holdings, available from the XOOM Website[3].
Fritz Lang produced "Metropolis" in 1927 at the German UFA studios.
This was a hugely ambitious project, involving the proverbial
cast of thousands.  The expense of this project nearly bankrupted
UFA.  
The film suffers from a rather disjointed story, which is 
complicated by the fact that different versions with different 
intertitles exist.  These different versions change details of the
story, although the framework of the narrative is the same.  The
whole point of "Metropolis" isn't about the story, anyway, it's
about visual style.  Like "Star Wars" or "Blade Runner", "Metropolis"
defined a visual style.  Many of the shots in "Metropolis" are 
still jaw-droppingly beautiful.  In 1927 they must have been nothing
short of amazing.
The story, in a nutshell, is about a city in the future with two 
populations:  A ruling class who live above ground in splendor, 
and a working class who live below ground in squalor.  By accident, 
Freder (Gustav Froehlich), the son of John Fredersen (Alfred Abel), 
the Master of the City, pursues Maria (Brigitte Helm), the daughter 
of a worker, into the depths.  Here, Freder becomes allied with the 
working class, and takes the place of an worker who drops from 
exhaustion at his machine.  Freder attends an assembly presided 
by Maria in which she preaches to the workers that they should 
exercise patience and wait for a Mediator, a Messiah who will 
forge a link between the ruling and working classes.
Meanwhile John discovers strange drawings in the possession of 
workers and requests that the mysterious scientist Rotwang (Rudolf 
Klein-Rogge) decipher them.  In his lab, Rotwang reveals to John 
his latest invention: A robot (in the form of a woman).  Rotwang 
determines that the drawings are plans of ancient catacombs beneath 
the city.  John and Rotwang descend into the depths and witness 
Maria's meeting.  John instructs Rotwang to kidnap Maria and give
her likeness to the robot (which Rotwang does in an absolutely 
brilliant sequence of silent-film acting and special effects); 
then, to send the robot to the workers to disrupt their organization.
John's motives for this are not really made clear, and differ from
version to version.
The robot, in Maria's form, incites a riot.  The workers destroy
the city's generator room, causing their underground residences to be
flooded.  Meanwhile, Freder rescues the real Maria and the workers'
children, saving them from being drowned.  Once the workers realize
there homes have been destroyed, the turn on the robot, and burn it
at the stake; this action reveals the robot for what it is.  Freder
pursues Rotwang to the roof of the cathedral, they fight and Rotwang
falls to his death.  Freder becomes the Mediator who bridges the
gulf between the rulers and the ruled as they both realize neither 
can function without the other.
"Metropolis" is a silent film, and Silent Film is a separate art form
from Modern Film.  The acting is closer to mime than in sound films, 
and is, by necessity, more melodramatic than to what modern audiences 
are accustomed.  Nonetheless, Klein-Rogge, playing the part of Rotwang, 
gives a brilliantly subtle performance.  For example, in one scene, 
Rotwang is about to lead John into the Catacombs.  In one gesture, 
Rotwang nods toward the door.  This gesture speaks volumes:  Rotwang
is contemptuous of John but must obey his master.  He doesn't really
want to go into the depths, but he must and he will.  
Brigitte Helm brilliantly plays the dual role of the true and false
Marias.  As Maria, the worker's daughter and the workers' teacher-
preacher, she is the demure girl-next-door.  As the false Maria,
the evil Maria, she looks more lascivious, more voluptuous, less 
virginal.
The real stars of the film are Lang's sets, the special effects,
and Lang's incredible sense of visual composition.  Lang was trained 
as an architect, and he designed a future city that was as organic 
as any real city.    His special effects director (Eugen Schuefftan) 
invented new techniques for integrating models with live action, and 
produced magical results.  Interiors, such as John's office, are 
marvelous interpretations of the future, overlaid with Art Deco 
elements, and they foreshadow developments such as computer displays 
and two-way video conferencing.  The climatic flood scenes as the 
workers' riot destroys their residences remain powerful today.
The film is usually considered an example of the German Expressionist
sub-genre.  Expressionist artists endeavored to invoke a mood or
emotion at the expense of realistic representations, and no one did
it better than the post-W.W.I Germans.  "Metropolis" definitely has 
Expressionist elements, although Lang kept the sets and the characters 
more realistic than in highly stylized Expressionist films like "The 
Cabinet of Dr. Caligari".  The only strongly Expressionist character
in "Metropolis" is Rotwang.  Expressionist films carry their own set 
of codes and symbols.  Some of the stilted acting style in "Metropolis" 
is simply a realization of the Expressionist codes.
"Metropolis", as originally released ran nearly three hours.  The studio
immediately demanded that it be cut, and cut again.  The result
is that many original scenes are lost forever, and that no authoritive
print remains.  A complete discussion of the various versions, and
of the somewhat conflicting plot interpretations between the film's
screenwriter (Thea von Harbou) and Fritz Lang, can be found elsewhere 
on the Web[4].
Today (early 1998), the most widely available version of "Metropolis" 
on video is from Kino Video.  It is probably the closest to an 
authoritive print as is currently available on VHS tape.  The film 
runs for 90 minutes, and looks like it was mastered from a back and 
white print that includes a jazz orchestral score on an optical 
sound track.  The film appears to have been mastered at 24fps.  
Since the original film was intended to be shown at somewhere 
between 18fps and 20fps, the action in the film is 20% to 30% too 
fast.  
The intertitles in the Kino version establish that John assigned 
Rotwang the task of creating the robot in order to create a race of 
mechanical workers that would never tire, would never need pay raises, 
and would never revolt; and, that John also commanded the robot to 
incite the insurrection that destroyed the workers' subterranean city.
The soundtrack is monaural and contains gaps and breaks that 
appear to be the result of splices in the film master.  The sound
quality is roughly equivalent to AM radio.  The video quality is 
good, if not excellent.
I strongly dislike the musical score included in the Kino print:
It is a dark, lugubrious, ugly-sounding jazz score that casts 
an overall gloomy tone to the entire film.  The score is punctuated 
with dark electronic tonalities that, in my opinion, add little 
to the enjoyment or understanding of the film.  
In the early '80's, Oscar-winning composer (for "Flashdance")
Giorgio Moroder came across a negative for "Metropolis" in the 
archives of the Museum of Modern Art in New York City.  He 
funded the preservation of this negative by having it copied
from nitrate to safety stock.  He then proceeded to adapt the 
film, to add a modern, pop score, and to give his version a brief
theatrical run.  The video of this version is now out of print,
but it is still fairly easy to come by from used video dealers, 
and it also can be found (rarely) as a laserdisc under the Vestron
label.
Moroder's version creates strong feelings in the film's fans.
They either love it or hate it, there seems to be no middle 
ground.  The film's advocates believe that Moroder resurrected
a gem and made it accessible by updating the film and adding
a score that the modern audience can relate to.  The film's
detractors believe that Moroder is guilty of crass commercialism,
and that he butchered a piece of Art.
1)  Color.  Moroder claims to have restored Lang's original
tinting schemes.  By the time "Metropolis" was made, common
practice was to add an element of color to otherwise black and
white films through the use of tinted filmstocks[5].  It's clear
that Moroder could not resist the temptation to go beyond
merely restoring the tints:  He added a number of visual
effects (such as moving clouds, and the robot's gleaming eyes) 
that aren't found in other prints; these additions cast doubt 
on the authenticity of his tinting efforts.
2)  Score.  Moroder commissioned a number of tunes by
well-known and less-well-known pop and rock artists of the 
early '80's.  These artists include Pat Benatar, Adam Ant, 
Freddie Mercury (from Queen), and others.  The result is a score
of rock vocals, heavy with synthesizer and drum machine beats.  
To some viewers, this makes "Metropolis" play like a long music
video, and I have been told by a practitioner of the art of 
silent film accompaniment that Moroder's score violates every 
rule of that craft[6].  This may be true, but Moroder's score 
appeals to me in a way I can't quite explain.  And, trust me, 
I'm no fan of any of the featured artists.
3)  Story.  In Moroder's version, John (called "Joh" in this
version) and Rotwang were once rivals for the same woman, Hel.  
Hel wed Joh, and then died giving birth to Freder.  Rotwang, 
in his madness over losing Hel, created the robot in an effort 
to recreate his love.  Joh then takes the robot from Rotwang 
(who has now lost his love twice).  The robot runs amok, eventually 
(if indirectly) destroying its creator:  This is the Frankenstien 
plot. Moroder's story more or less follows an East German 
reconstruction of the film done in 1969[7], and Moroder recreates 
some lost scenes, including a clumsily-done still of a monument 
Rotwang built to Hel.
Moroder's version clocks in at 80 minutes, and is also mastered 
at 24fps.  Moroder added animated intertitles (which WERE common
in silent films).  He also converted many intertitles into 
subtitles, and re-edited many of the scenes.  His version includes
the sports arena scene at the beginning of film, which is missing 
from the Kino version.  Since the film master is so close to the
original negatives, the video quality is excellent.  Enno Patalas, 
responsible for the newly restored Munich version, served as a 
consultant for Moroder's efforts.  It is obvious that much of 
Moroder's print shares a pedigree with the Kino print as the two 
films contain many of the same blemishes.
The audio quality in this version is excellent.  The sound
track is recorded in high-fidelity stereo and includes some
sound effects.  Viewed on high-end home theatre equipment that 
includes a big screen, this video is really quite striking.
Although I agree with Moroder's critics on an intellectual 
level, on a visceral level I enjoy his version very much.  
Moroder's version reaches me in a way the Kino version doesn't.
I discovered visual details that I had missed in viewing the 
Kino version, and I felt more involved and engaged in the film.  
I can only attribute this to Moroder's use of color and to 
his score.  The Kino score kept me distant from the visuals, 
while Moroder's score drew me in.  It's a phenomenon that 
I'm at a loss to explain.  
Had there been an intact, original version of the film, then 
I agree that Moroder would be damnably guilty of Desecration of 
Art.  The bottom line is, that lacking that authoritive version, 
Moroder's reconstruction is as valid (or, as invalid) as 
anyone else's, and that someone outside the Ivory Tower of 
Academia would be audacious enough to attempt this is really 
guilty of nothing worse than causing a bad case of sour grapes.
Classic Media Holdings, Ltd[8] is offering Metropolis on a new
DVD.  This disc is an example of how the new, digital video
technology is a sword that cuts in two directions.
The good news is that DVD technology is indeed ready for
Prime Time.  It is also a technology that lowers the entry
barrier for video producers and distributors to create 
videophile-quality recordings that are very reasonably priced.
A glance at the LaserViews[9] newsletters reveals many more
DVD labels producing product than there are Laserdisc labels.
Eventually, DVD technology will be available to nearly anyone,
even in small production runs, much as Compact Disc technology
is today.
The bad news is that DVD technology is accessible to producers
with little or no real experience addressing the videophile 
market.  Contrast this with Laserdisc manufacturers:  There 
are only a handful of plants in the world capable of producing
laserdiscs.  The expense and difficulty of making a laserdisc 
that must retail for $40.00 or more per copy has meant that
laserdisc producers have sought out the highest quality
original material for mastering purposes.
CMH's DVD of "Metropolis" was mastered from what looks like
a 16mm black and white print that is many generations removed 
from the original negative.  It is a very badly worn print 
at that.  The high quality video reproduction that DVD is 
capable of ends up reproducing all the scratches and gouges 
in the film with extremely high resolution.  Unfortunately,
the resolution of the image itself was lost long ago during 
many generations through the optical printer and many trips 
through the projector.  The result is the video equivalent
of releasing old, worn, scratched 78RPM phonograph discs on
CDs without bothering to clean up the sound.  It may be 
that CHM's DVD is intended not for the videophile but for
computer multi-media applications utilizing DVD-ROM drives 
on PC's.
This version of "Metropolis" includes a mono orchestral score
that sounds like it is from a soundtrack on the film.  I like
this score better than the one on the Kino version.  The 
intertitles are animated and have an old-time look that is 
more authentic than the static titles in the Kino version.  
The film runs for 95 minutes, is probably derived from the 
original US release cut, and does include the sports arena 
scene missing from the Kino version.
Film enthusiasts looking for a high-quality, definitive version 
of "Metropolis" on video are out of luck, at least until someone 
ponies up the big bucks that the holders of the video rights to 
the Munich version want.  The video versions that are available 
all leave something to be desired, but they all do give the viewer 
a glimpse of this great film.
[1]  Kino Video, 333 West 39th Street, New York, NY 10018.
     http://www.kino.com
[2]  I purchased my copy from http://www.bodawg.com
[3]  http://orders.xoom.com/dvd/metro/metro.html
[4]  http://www.paulist.org/doug/metro/about.html
[5]  Monaco, James, "How To Read A Film", Oxford University
     Press (1981), pp 91-92.
[6]  http://search.dejanews.com/getdoc.xp?AN=320462992
[7]  http://www.paulist.org/doug/metro/versions.html
[8]  Classic Media Holdings, Ltd.  930 Tahoe Blvd, 
     Suite 802-336,  Incline Village, Nevada   89451
[9]  http://www.laserviews.com/dvd-news.html
To reply  via  EMail,  replace  "Xexecpc" with "execpc" in the
address above.

Title
Review for How the West Was Won (1962)
How the West Was Won (1962, Henry Hathaway with John Ford and George
Marshall)
A Retrospective Review by David M. Arnold
Before there was IMAX there was Cinerama.  Cinerama was a large-format
presentation technology that featured a screen that was about half as
high as an IMAX screen, but about half again as wide.  Three interlocked
projectors were used to mate images from three strips of film onto
the huge, curved screen.  By using a larger camera negative (.996" x
1.116") x 3, the Cinerama effective aperature was 2.998 x 1.116, more
than 5 times larger than for standard film. A 7-channel sound system
complemented the images, and the result was an experience very much like
today's IMAX.
The business model for Cinerama was also very similar to today's IMAX:
Specially constructed theatres presented specially made films.  IMAX
films in general are 45 minute documentaries with superb production
values but with rather lame content.  With the exception perhaps of
"Everest", I haven't seen an IMAX film that didn't cover fields that
have been much more thoroughly plowed in countless PBS "Nova" and
"Nature" episodes.  As IMAX films primarily feature IMAX, Cinerama
films primarily featured Cinerama.  IMAX and Cinerama both are to
Cinema what a roller coaster is to transportation.
A total of 6 films, primarily travelogues (7 if you include
"Windjammer", another travelogue made for the similar but competing
Cinemiracle system) were made for Cinerama between 1952 and 1962.
The best Cinerama film is probably "How the West Was Won", made as
a joint venture by Cinerama and MGM.  There are a maybe a couple of
prints of "HTWWW" extant in Cinerama 3-strip, and maybe one theatre
still capable of presenting it.  A standard Panavision-compatible
extraction print has been made (which loses about 10% from each of
the two side frames), and this print is available on video.  What
distinguishes "HTWWW" from other Cinerama titles is that it attempts
to use the format for narrative purposes -- the format becomes a means
to an end rather than the end itself.
"How the West Was Won" portrays three generations of pioneers as they
travelled west, starting in Albany, New York in the 1820's.  The film
covers the early Midwest, the California gold rush, wagon trains, the
Civil War, the construction of the transcontinental railroad, and the
eventual triumph of Law and Order.  The film features a veritable who's
who of 50's and 60's talent:  Lee J. Cobb, Henry Fonda, Karl Malden,
Gregory Peck, George Peppard, Debbie Reynolds, James Stewart, John
Wayne, and Spencer Tracy among many others.  Setting aside the usual
1960's movie cliches, the film does an adequate job of presenting what
is basically a historical docu-drama, and it succeeds in keeping one's
interest.  It's far from extraordinary, however, and without the
Cinerama aspect, it would be rather routine.
Viewing "How the West Was Won" on our projection home theatre equipment,
gave me a hint at what the Cinerama experience must have been like.  The
strengths and weaknesses of the Cinerama format are quite obvious.
The major strength is Cinerama's ability to photograph very wide-angle
scenes (the camera was capable of a nearly 150-degree field of view)
with none of the barrel distortion evident in today's widescreen
presentations (this is a problem that IMAX hasn't solved either).
The major weakness is that the image is obviously made of three
pieces, and some rather odd linear distortions are sometimes evident
at the seams.  Much of this is no doubt due to the single-frame
extraction print from which the video was made, and due to the fact
that our screen is flat rather than curved.  All in all, "How the
West Was Won" is a worthy film that any film enthusiast should see
in order to catch a glimpse of an important episode in the history
of film technology. Just make sure you see the letterboxed version.
Anyone interested in a thorough discussion of the history of film
technology in general and Cinerama in particular should visit Martin
Hart's American Widescreen Museum website at:
   http://www.simplecom.net/widefilm.
We watched "HTWWW" on DVD from MGM.  The quality of the disc was OK,
given the age of the material and the number of generations removed
from the original negatives, but this is one film that could have
really benefitted from anamorphic (16x9) enhancement.  There were a
couple of authoring problems with this disc that are noteworthy:
First, the grating, full-screen "Turner" logo appeared sandwiched
BETWEEN the overture and the opening credits.  Second, in the disc's
menus, a chapter covering the Erie Canal is titled, "THE EERIE CANAL".
I grew up along the old Erie canal.  Eerie it was not.
Essay copyright (C) 1999 David M. Arnold.  All rights reserved.
Sent via Deja.com http://www.deja.com/
Share what you know. Learn what you don't.
