Authors
Quentin Kendora
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Rugrats Movie, The (1998)
Hello, for those that are reading from the movie groups, this is my first
real review for the 'net.  Note that I'm a HUGE Rugrats fan, and some of the
stuff that I explain might be confusing to those that haven't seen the show.
While it's not the "Star Wars" saga, "Rugrats" has a lot of characters. I
recommend. "The Unofficial Rugrats Online" at
http://www.saginaw.simplenet.com I consider it "Rugrats for Dummies".
After months of waiting, I finally got the chance to see my favorite
cartoon, the Rugrats on the silver screen. Ever since I was ten (and since
the show began back in 1991), I have always loved the show. And let me tell
you, Klasy-Cuspo did not let me down. A fun, up beat movie that kids and
"growned-ups" will enjoy from start to finish. I attended a 7:05pm showing
of the film, the majority of the sold-out crowd were mainly tykes. Due to
the fact that I'm 17-years old, it really set me down that I didn't see any
other people close to my age other than Adults. At least I'm a kid at heart,
and I can see whatever I please.
The story picks off where "The Family Tree" left us. It begins with a
sharp-looking Indiana Jones spoof, putting our main man Tommy Pickles in his
shoes ready to snatch a prized possesion. Funny how imagination goes with
these kids, as the huge rolling ball that chases them happens to be a very
Pregnant Didi-Tommy's mom.
Shortly after, Didi gives birth to Dil Pickles, which becomes a total bane
to all the main Rugrats-Even Phil and Lil. Dil seems to be somewhat a very
fussy little babe. During most of the film, Dil loves to take batting
practice on Tommy's head (hitting), be it from a rattle or a bottle.
After some disscusion from twins Phil and Lil, they decide to take Dil "back
to the hopsickle". They do attempt to return him via a new Stu
Invention-"The Reptar Wagon". However, they get lost along the way, ending
up in a forest, scary with monkeys and more troubles. This ain't the playpen
folks.
And what does that little imp Angelica (My favorite Rugrat) has to do with
all of this? Since Dil loves to grab items, yelling "mine"!, her doll
Cynthia is grabbed from the hands of the feisty younging. Angelica goes out
under "Shirley-Lock Holmes"-donning rollerblades and all in order to retain
her dolly. However I was dissappointed with what they did to her. Angelica
does not get a lot of screen time compared to her other counterparts. And
Unlike the T.V. show, Angelica is much less of a brat, but she is more like
it in the early moments of the film.
Of course, the adults in the film are just as entertaining as the Rugrats.
The reporter Rex Pester is really a pest. And Grandpa, Stu and Drew bring it
on.
The animation is really on another level. Really cool use during the birth
scene. They really made some scenes 3-D like in appearance. And to be real
with you, it looks like the animators took a shot of speed, as most of the
movie speeds on by. Its not slow like most Disney films. It really has a
small amount of sugar-sweet moments. Also the songs aren't at all chessy for
an animated film.
This being the first G-rated movie I attended in a thearte in almost 8
years, I wonder how did Nick and K-C get away with some of the potty jokes.
They must've been borderline on PG. There are a good amount of them in the
movie, especially during the newborn song number in which involves a shower
of peeing, creating a rainbow. Now that's something that Disney will NEVER
touch. Dil also uses his fire hose as well. And Tommy's buttocks are
exposed.
The botton line: kids, parents, those in between, and diehard Rugrats fans
like me will love this film. Animation knacks may get a kick out of it
also.But those that don't like cute cartoons and those older kids may wanna
stay out of this. Of course its up to you.
 Although the animation is NOT "A Bug's Life" level, it is 1,000 times
better than the T.V. show. And it doesn't play like an episode ethier as
many "mislead souls" have said before the movie even came out. The action is
mostly non-stop. Certainly on a faster pace than any episode. Nickelodeon
and Klasky-Cuspo has made one exciting film. This film will really give
"Babe: A Pig in the City" and "A Bug's Life" a real run for their money.
Bring on the Sequel!!!
For more info about the Rugrats and Angelica, Check out my site dedicated to
her at Angelica Regins Supreme at
http://www.geocities.com/TelevisionCity/Stage/6602
--
Quentin R.
"The Imperial Choice"
The Purple Domain: http://www.geocities.com/SunsetStrip/Alley/7317
One of the few male Angelica fans in America
See http://www.geocities.com/TelevisionCity/Stage/6602 on why I am.
"Talk is Cheap Mothaf****s!"-DMX
