Authors
Kevin Thomas Troy
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Big Hit, The (1998)
absolute zero out of four possible stars
(the money scale: don't go see it even if it's free)
_The Big Hit_ is absolutely awful.  It's supposed to be a spoof
of Hong Kong shoot-em-up movies like _The Killer_, only it's
not funny, and the action scenes are boring.
Here's an example of the movie's humor:  it opens with Melvin
(Marky Mark) helping a friend out by storing a dead man,
contained in two garbage bags, while this friend goes out of
town for the weekend.  They're hitmen, you see.  It's supposed
to remind you of Marvin in _Pulp Fiction_, only it's neither
funny, gross, nor bizarre.  An extended scene follows wherein
Melvin drops the corpse off at his girlfriend's.  There's a lot
of "they're so casual around corpses" jokes, none of which work.
Here's an example of the action:  a hit scene in a hotel,
wherein the hotshot pro killers Melvin works with turn out to
be the three stooges (only not funny).  There's lots of
Executive Producer John Woo ballet gunfight attempts, but it
really doesn't stack up.  The cinematographer uses so many
effects that you just get lost.  It's a nice scene, but it
doesn't measure up to recent displays of this action style,
such as _Replacement Killers_ or _Face/Off_, nor does it come
close to a similarly plotted hit at the beginning of _The
Professional_.
The other action scenes in the movie don't make use of the
special effects in the first one, which is fine, but they're
also very boring.
Characters seem to be motivated by a perverse sense of camp
possessed by director Kirk Wong and screenwriter Ben Ramsey.
For example, an early scene has the kidnapee-- did I mention
this is a kidnapping spoof?  except it's not funny?-- mouthing
off to the bumbling hitmen who have captured her.  She's not
scared, even when one of the professionals waves a gun around
like he's never held one.  Another scene has Lou
Diamond-Philips talking at cross-purposes with his boss-- it
would be funny, except it's so unrealistic that you can see the
screenwriter saying, "It'll be funny because...!"
Racial stereotype jokes, of the "it's so obviously a
self-parody of stereotypes, it has to be funny!" sort are not
funny, especially in this movie.  _Flirting with Disaster_,
maybe, but not here.
A lame running gag regarding a vindictive video store clerk is
a total rip off of the menacing paper boy from Savage Steve
Holland's _Better off Dead_, only in _The Big Hit_, it's not
funny.
The soundtrack beats your ears like a Spew sampler version of
the _Amistad_ score.
Aerial cinematography is bumpy.  They probably thought it would
add a hip, bouncy tone to the various aerial transition scenes,
but it just looks like the poor guy didn't know how to shoot.
The color schemes seem to be lifted from a Joel Schumacher
Batman flick.  They aren't funny, either.
_The Big Hit_ is so bad that its badness extends beyond the
theater and into everyday human relations.  If anyone you know
recommends you see this movie, even on video or something, do
not trust this person with your wallet, children, or personal
information.  If your dentist mentions this movie while
cleaning your teeth, go to the other side of town for that
filling.  Please, believe me.  If you want a hip, witty
contract-killer movie, go see _Gross Point Blank_ or _The
Professional_.
