Authors
Charles Ellis
Number of Reviews
2

Title
Review for Shakespeare in Love (1998)
Shakespeare In Love - review by David Ellis 
        http://www.magicstore.net/my_take.htm
    Tom Stoppard goes to the "Shakespeare What-If" well once again, and why 
not? Didn't Huntz Hall use the same gags every film? Is not Huntz Hall 
remembered fondly by all? 
    There were Victorian writers who made up childhoods for Shakespeare's characters (little Falstaff...egads!), why not make up something about the 
Bard hisownself? His life story has many gaps. 
    It's peopled with theatrical contemporaries like Burbage, Marlowe and a 
boy John Webster (a slightly later tragedian). Jonson and Bacon fans (all 
eight of them) will be disappointed, they don't appear at all. Full of in 
jokes, this romantic comedy delivers on both the romance and the comedy. 
Ignore the history part, this is Hollywood! 
    While Will's sources for his plots are well-known, this film premises 
that his new girlfriend helps him write Romeo And Juliet. She's the model   
for Juliet in Will's "real" life. Shakespeare himself was been first to 
really explore the lines between drama, play acting, and reality. His own 
material is full of winks to the audience. This film follows beautifully and 
entertainingly in that tradition.
    Will is played by intense Joseph Fiennes, who also gets the girl in 
"Elizabeth". I'm jealous...does it show? Intense, intense, intense. If he was 
your shoe salesman, you WOULD buy shoes, OK? But you would fear to buy a car 
or computer from this man. I hope I'm clear about this, he's no half-ass, 
he's intense.
    Gwyneth Paltrow as Viola steals the film in every scene she's in, even 
the scenes with the intense guy.  The rest of the cast does a good job of 
pretending to be theatrical hacks and bad actors..> so 
she can come in and show them what a good actor does. An added treat, she 
plays Romeo for most of the rehearsals. It's two or three roles in one and 
she pulls them all off. If she wins the Oscar she should quit and start a 
legend.
    The film has comedy, romance, a play-within-a-play (a Shakespearian 
invention? If only Romeo And Juliet staged a play for their parents and 
friends, we could have had... oh, never mind!). There are pratfalls galore, 
steamy sex, and culture...what more could you want?
    Despite glaring chrono-illogics the film does a terrific job of 
recreating details of Elizabethan life, from the bad teeth everyone but the 
leads have to the poop in the unpaved streets. Will is as superstitious as 
the rest of the lot. Nobody in the film except Queen Elizabeth really has a 
clue, everyone else in the picture has their own crazed agenda. Nobody has 
any money, not even Viola's noble suitor. All very accurate. The only over-
riding concern of the age left out is the Catholic-Protestant schism, see 
"Elizabeth" for that. 
    We get wonderful supporting characters almost as colorful as Will's own. 
The camera work is as ornate as the rest of the picture, but you hardly 
notice it, it just seems so right. We swoop to balconies and behind-the-
scenes at the theatre with ease and no jarring "oh, it's a movie" to break 
the spell. 
    Much is made in reviews of the fact that the Virginia colony referred to 
in the film did not exist for twenty years after the film events take place. 
I can't believe the filmmakers did not know this, or chose to ignore it. My 
interpretation of the ending is that the sailed for it and shipwrecked thus 
delaying the colony's start. Sole survivor Viola gets to walk off in the 
sunset to an uncertain future on a vast empty continent...bet that wasn't in 
her horoscope!  I like to think she  hiked to the Pacific and somehow ended 
up in Japan, causing trouble the whole way.

Title
Review for Casper (1995)
     The death of creativity is slow and lingering.  Consider Steven
Spielberg's output.  "Let's remake Peter Pan with GREAT SPECIAL
EFFECTS!"  "Let's remake The Flintstones with GREAT SPECIAL EFFECTS!"
"Let's remake the Holocaust with GREAT SPECIAL EFFECTS!"
     Now it's Casper The Friendly Ghost's turn.  Casper would roll over
in his grave.  If it is possible to make an already lame one-note
Harvey/Famous studios creation from the forties an even lamer vehicle,
this is it.
     I saw Casper with a full house of families sympathetic to the
picture.  They wanted to like the film.  They did.  Even my kids liked
it.  You will like it and your family will, too.  Let's be fair and
objective about this.  I repeat, despite my criticisms of this picture,
there's enough good stuff in it that you will enjoy and should take the
kids.  It is not "too scary."
     Now that I've said that I've got to report that the audience
groaned audibly and the words "fakey" and "puppet" were heard when
Casper makes his on-screen appearance.  It's true.  You've never seen
such a high tech technique look so low tech.  You'll swear the
computer-generated Casper is a *real* puppet.  You can almost hear the
plastic slide when Casper blinks his saucer-like "ET" eyes.  The
Ghostly Trio fares better but two recently deceased human ghost
characters look like outtakes from NIGHTMARE BEFORE CHRISTMAS (which
works in NIGHTMARE but not here ... these are supposed to be *real*
ghosts).  You get used to the puppet-looking Casper, but I couldn't
help wondering when Kermit the Frog was going to appear.
     They redo the classic ET "hands touching" shot.  There must be a
cut-and-paste file in the word processors at Amblin with contents like
"Use Hands Touching scene here".  There's a line Casper says "Can I
keep you forever?" which is so awful, it elicited the groans again.
And they repeat the line later at the "climax" of the film.  This is
supposed to be a tagline, the equivalent of "Life is like a box of
chocolates."  Screenwriting is dead.
     At the end, Casper gets to be a "real boy" until the stroke of 10
PM.  Yes, they stole from Pinoccio and Cinderella, too, and badly.
When Casper makes his appearance as a twelve-year-old hunk the
audience, you guessed it, groans.  Casper looks, acts, and sounds like
an eight-year-old tops.  This scene just doesn't play.  What could
these idiots have been thinking? That the pre-pube crowd is going to
flock to the picture because they heard Casper turned out to be their
age?  The scenario calls Casper's innocent "I just want a friend"
motivation into question and posits that Casper wants to get a girl
like any other pre-teen boy.
     Some "in-jokes" are that the hero's last name is Harvey (Harvey
comics) and that Casper's last name was MacFadden (also involved in the
publishing of Casper Comics).  There is a nice cameo appearance by a
Ghostbuster.
     Christina Ricci is very good as the kid with more sense than the
adults, the typical movie kid.  A good choice.  Her dad is portrayed by
a guy who looks like Robin Williams and the villainness is a woman who
looks like Kathleen Turner.  I guess they couldn't get Robin Williams
and Kathleen Turner....  Eric Idle is amusing but where's Don Knotts
when we need him? The two skinny Ghostly Trios have practically the
same voice, as far as I could tell.
     To the film's credit, they explore the origins of Casper.  After
all, the cartoons *were* about a dead kid and just ignored it.  There are
scenes and vignettes that do work as intended.  Particularly touching
is a scene in Casper's old playroom.  I bet the hottest artistic
argument of the film was who got to keep the antique toys used in that
scene.  I know it would be if I was there!
     The subplot with the secret lab and the ghost machine has the look
and feel of a 1970's TV special.  Sort of a Maxwell Smart caper.  It's
certainly *not* moody or scary.  Would you believe Maxwell Smart with
GREAT SPECIAL EFFECTS? Oh No! Another mega-idea from the creative mind
of Steven Spielberg! Watch for it soon...
THE BEST THING ABOUT THE FILM
     Kids love it and parents should take them.  Then go to a comic
store and load up on a bunch of Caspers/Wendys/Spookys etc.  They are
cheap.  Your children will want to read them.  Tell them they can read
them after you read them.  This will make them even more desirable.
The comic book Casper lives in a shack with the ghostly trio in an
enchanted forest.  He has adventures outwitting the trio and other
supernatural creatures there.  Take this opportunity to let your
discover and enjoy enjoy reading and develop an attention span.  You
will get precious few opportunities like this as your children grow.
Copyright 1995 by David Ellis, All Rights Reserved.  Permission is
granted to repost this file on any APPROPRIATE private bulletin board
or circulate this file via manual forwarding by e-mail providing that
the file is transmitted in its entirety, from the title and byline on
top to the end of this paragraph.
