Authors
M. Pierce
Number of Reviews
6

Title
Review for Enemy of the State (1998)
  Has Hollywood run out of interesting characters and plot-driven suspense
thrillers that we must spend two hours watching Will Smith and a gritty Gene
Hackman exchange obtuse dialogue and run around dodging fireballs?  In Enemy of
the State, that is exactly right.
  A few parts The Net, and a few parts Conspiracy Theory, Enemy is about as
exciting as watching Smith talk to CGI aliens in 1997's lame brained Men in
Black.
Will this guy ever get a real role?  He has the Bruce Willis syndrome.
  The plot is bascially Smith, playing a lawyer, getting into hot water with
some high government murderers, who assassinated a powerful political figure
earlier in the movie, when a tape of the killing gets into his hands.  He
inlists the help of an old conspirator (Hackman), and, at the end, er...you
know.
  Enemy was one of the worst films of last year.  Not only was it sloppy in
telling its story and getting its facts straight, the acting was mediocre when
it should have been energy driven, and I didn't like how Smith always magically
out-smarted the badies when all the other extra characters, seeming more
intelligent than Smith, somehow got run over by a truck.
  Enemy came out around the same time as the superior Star Trek: Insurrection. 
I know these two films are different in, well, everything, but the fact that
Enemy outgrossed Insurrection just baffels me.  Somehow, quality can't
overshadow quantity.

Title
Review for Go (1999)
  Yet another brainless teen flick, this one is about, surprise, drugs
and sex.  Stars Katie Holmes and Sarah Polly couldn't look more bored.
Their characters are cardboard cut-outs of every cliched teenager out
there.
  One thing you need to know is I really hated this movie.  Everything
about it annoyed the hell out of me.  The acting, and script, the
plot, and ending.  The director (of the fluke hit Swingers) could have
very well directed a bunch of no-name actors and had a watchabe film.
The "big" stars of Go pretty much drown the project of any
originality.  I felt like I was watching Dawson's Creek Episode 200.
Although the film still would have stayed at red despite its cast.
  The "surprise" ending was sooo predictable.  Since when is a male
character's sudden outing of the closet considered a surprise in
Hollywood anymore??
  Go is Dawson's Creek + Varsity Blues - She's All That = Go home and
watch something else.

Title
Review for Casablanca (1942)
 In one of my many videos I have attained from the local library, Casablanca
was my third classic in some weeks.  The others being Citizen Kane and Vertigo
(yes, I am trying to see as many of AFI's Greatest Movies Ever Made as I can). 
But, Casablanca stood out from the rest for me:  It was actually watchable.
  What most hail as the greatest American film ever, Casablanca isn't so much a
love story as a political frenzy with a love triangle thrown in.  It seems that
star Humphry Bogart spend about 85 percent of the movie with various leaders of
the nation instead of with Ingred Bergman.  That annoyed me, as did the ending.
 Why didn't the plan turn around?!?
  Surprisingly, I enjoyed the film.  I liked Bogart's character and his acting
(not over the top as most actors in his era).  I once read about if you had a
choice to be in a movie, which one would it be, and a women said Casablanca. 
At first I was thinking to myself "why?"  Then, as I watched the film again, I
understood why.  The movie is very well done and the script top-notch, although
I doubt I understood more than half of the political mumbo jumbo.
  Casablanca is, in my mind, no classic (like Solaris), but it is a good film
and stylishly shot.  Hey, Hollywood, how about this:  A remake with Harrison
Ford and Anne Heche?  Now that would be a classic.

Title
Review for 10 Things I Hate About You (1999)
   9: Its pathetic attempt at "improving" on a Shakespeare classic.
10=a classic 9=borderline classic 8=excellent 7=good
6=better than average 5=average 4=disappointing 3=poor
2=awful 1=a crap classic

Title
Review for Matrix, The (1999)
  In a dark hotel room, a women sits in front of a computer.  Cops bust through
the door, telling her to freeze and put her hands up in the air.  Down stairs,
a couple of mysterious FBI-type men, later known as Agents, tell the captain of
the police force that his men are already dead, that the women has most likely
escaped.
  How is this possible?  As we watch the first spellbinding minutes of The
Matrix, we are drawn into a masterfully created work of brilliance, a film so
absorbing and exciting, it is nevertheless an instant classic.  One of the true
great science fiction films ever to unfold on the silver screen.  I would rank
it right up on the list with Star Trek: First Contact, The X-Files motion
picture, and Andrei Tarkovski's Solaris.
  I hate to write long, drawn-out reviews, especially of films I really like,
so, for The Matrix, all I will say is See This Movie Before It Escapes The
Cineplexes!  Not only are the special effects truly amazing, the action
breathtaking, and the acting wonderful, the plot is a brilliant story, so well
thoughtout, so eluded with creativity, it simply is a state of movie magic,
"cinematic gold."

Title
Review for Star Wars: Episode I - The Phantom Menace (1999)
 I have never seen a man so in love with himself than George Lucas.  With the
overt success of the three original Star Wars films, Lucas has become, not
necessarily a filmmaker, but the head cheeze at a huge toy company, with The
Phantom Menace the new product on the shelve.  Only this toy was made for $115
million, but every kid wants it, and, like all other expensive toys, falls
apart within an hour after playing with it.
  The product in question, Star Wars Episode 1: The Phantom Menace (jeez!), is
pure and simple:  Its about the money, baby!  No one in their right mind would
create such a fiasco if they knew it wouldn't make a ton of money before its
fourth week of release.  I come to the SW franchise as a stranger, since I have
absolutely no idea why the SW movies are so popular.  I find them rather boring
and full of nothing but eye candy.
  Phantom Menace is like the first SW, minus 10.  Nothing in the whole concept
is remotely enjoyable.  Even the special effects seem rather bland.  The story
in this new one is a mindless mess...the acting wooden...and the action
sequences like something out of a video game.
  SW: Phantom Menace is one of the worst films of the year so far.  With a
title like SW E1: TPM, Lucas has one big head on those shoulders.  I thought
Chris Carter did for releasing an X-Files movie, although, that movie
adaptation was an excellent way to spend two hours.  PM is one long headache.
