Authors
Nicholas Kleszczewski
Number of Reviews
2

Title
Review for Fear and Loathing in Las Vegas (1998)
It's hard to write about this film without recognizing the harsh divisions in
the critical community about it.  It's proponents say that it is a
tremendously faithful adaptation of Hunter S. Thompson's book.  Its detractors
say that the book does not work as cinema, or that the book is dated.  Let it
be said that on this point I'm on the side of the proponents: a film cannot be
faulted by the material it's based upon.  Let the patron decide if the
material suits him/her.
That said, and admitting that I did not read Thompson's journal about his drug
binges in this one pivotal weekend in 1971, part of me enjoyed _Fear and
Loathing_ in much the same way I enjoyed _2001, A Space Odyssey_.  The key to
enjoying both films is to set your brain aside, forget any notions of plot,
and let the images take over.  In its own quirky-but-deadpan way, _Fear and
Loathing_ accomplishes just that.
In particular, I enjoyed some of the early sequences: the hitchhiker, the
hotel, the cocktail lounge.  I also enjoyed some of the juicy cameos, such as
Christina Ricci and Gary Busey.  Johnny Depp plays Thompson's alter-ego,
"Duke" with the one-note cartoonishness similar to that of Ed Wood.
Plumped-up Benecio Del Toro did an even more exemplary job playing Duke's
comrade "lawyer" Dr. Gonzo, who at times turns intensely violent.
It is in these violent (along with downer) stretches, that the film begins to
drag.  I suppose that it's morally strong to include the results of the drug
binges, such as the extended rage sequences in the hotel room, or the nauseous
merry-go-round sequence in a Circus -based entertainment center.  It
accomplished what it was supposed to: when I was to feel nauseous, I felt
nauseous.  When I was to feel a sense of terror, I felt that too.  These
experiences happen intermittently throughout, and the audience has to wonder
at these junctures if the storytelling arc couldn't have been improved.
As a point of contrast, take the best OD movie scene in recent memory:  Pulp
Fiction. when Mia OD's on heroin, the audience felt that sense of terror and
comedy intermingled together, that built and built until the final stab of a
punchline came through.  One person got a heartattack watching that at the NY
Film festival. After the sequence, drugs are not mentioned again.  It's point
was made.  Move on.
Contrast that with Fear and Loathing:  there's better imagery in the latter,
but the timing is off.  It speeds, it dazzles, it exhilirates, then it gets
dizzying, nauseous, terrifying, and embarrassing, only to begin again. This is
one of those cases where I think it will play better on television, because
the commercials will break up the constant action, and its little vigniettes
can work as chapters that stand on their own.
Back to Depp's Duke.   Material like this is unique in itself, and it is a
plus, to some extent, that his deadpan narration is guiding us through the
film.  Which works and doesn't.  I found a liking to Thompson's writing, and
the matter-of-fact way he speaks of seeing bats and man-eating carpets.
What's missing (and I wouldn't know how to resolve this) is a human element.
Why risk throwing your whole career away on your addiction?  The film touches
upon reasons: Vietnam, dissatisfaction with society, the desire to push
yourself as far to the edge without crossing it.  But it's too cartoonish to
be taken seriously.
Maybe it's the timing.  The just seen _Ice Storm_ is still fresh in my mind,
and tackles this with far greater efficiency than whatever special effects
Gilliam provides.
So it's a mixed bag.  I enjoyed much of the film, but not quite enough to
recommend it.  You know who you are.  If you appreciated the anti-politically
correct, pro-drug book, then you're bound to enjoy the movie.  And shame on
you.
-----== Posted via Deja News, The Leader in Internet Discussion ==-----
http://www.dejanews.com/   Now offering spam-free web-based newsreading

Title
Review for Horse Whisperer, The (1998)
More provocative than the racial lines drawn from the vastly different
responses of the O.J. Simpson verdict, are the gender lines drawn from that of
_The Horse Whisperer_.  This is a chick flick extraordinaire.  It's got women,
horses, extraordinary scenery, a sappy soundtrack, and Robert Redford.  Even
more importantly, (and significantly) it lacks a single identifiable relatable
male character.
Oh sure, there's Redford, but he's an icon, and unless you have a warped ego,
you can't touch him.  As strong an icon that Redford is, he is withered down
to saying "Do this" and by his quiet demeanor and strong presence, and you
_know_ it will get done.   Then there's Sam Neill, who's underused, and who
loses all credibility at the end.  Lastly, there's Chris Cooper, who I really
liked in _Lone Star_, who's reduced to saying "Yep" a lot.
For the women, you have Kristin Scott Thomas, in her first big role since _The
English Patient_.  Here she plays the Holly Hunter role: she's a workaholic
mother who needs to be in control over every situation, who learns to break
her city-bound roots and be taken in by nature (in more ways than one).  For
the girl, I forgot her name,  she's also drawn with the same character traits
of Natalie Portman, so much so that you'd swear that this girl had no
personality traits of her own.  She's smart, pouty, and "Hollywoodish average"
which is equivalent to saying she's an Ivory teenage girl.  And then there's
Chris Cooper's wife, played by a slightly more plump Dianne Weist, who infers
"Yep" a lot.
Why should I state the plot?  You see it in the characters.  Mystical cowboy,
overworked midlife crisis city-mother, pouty depressed but blooming adolescent
girl, the relatively good husband who wimps out, and the "Yep" family.  And
there's a horse, who's the best actor in the film.  Except for a very
well-executioned and haunting beginning, when the girl and her horse get into
an accident that involves snow, a steep hill, and a skidding truck, the film
then goes on auto-pilot for the rest of the time, which I wouldn't care so
much about, except that the film clocks at about three hours.
But what else can I say, that wouldn't get usurped by the throngs of women who
_will_ see this film?  Take my advice.  Since you will be taking your s.o. to
this, you can bargain your way so that she would have to watch two 90-minute
Jackie Chan flicks on video.
-----== Posted via Deja News, The Leader in Internet Discussion ==-----
http://www.dejanews.com/   Now offering spam-free web-based newsreading
