Authors
Rory Aronsky
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for My Fellow Americans (1996)
Starring: Jack Lemmon, James Garner, Dan Aykroyd, John Heard, William
Brimley, Everett McGill, Lauren Bacall
Political scandals and impeachment all go through today's political
market. I simply get tired of this, so I decided to take a break to
watch My Fellow Americans on HBO.
        This movie has to be one of the best political-comedy movies I have
seen in a long time. Jack Lemmon simply shines in his role as Russel
Kramer (Former Republican ex-President). James Garner plays Matt
Douglas, a Democratic successor and a long-time rival of Kramer. Three
years after losing to Kramer's V.P., Bill Haney, Matt Douglas finds
himself with another chance at being Commander-in-Chief when a scandal
prepares to blow involving Olympia (A kickback to the Kramer-Haney
term). The demoractic party's support awaits Douglas to see if he can
get evidence to get his old foe back, but Kramer knows enough to prove
he knew nothing about Olympia. Both ex-Presidents discover the plot
thickens when a witness turns up dead, and a helicopter they were on,
blows to smithereens over the Blue Ridge Mountains in North Carolina.
        After these actions, Kramer & Douglas have to get to Kramer's
presidential library in Ohio for evidence that would bring Haney down. 
        This movie has to be one you have to rent for a weekend. There are some
excellent parts in here. Notice the part in the bathroom stalls with the
redneck guy trying to shake Douglas's hand, but Douglas refuses and
says, "I have to keep my hands on the First Penis". As soon as the guy
leaves, Kramer asks, "The First Penis?". Douglas shoots back, "Yeah,
that is what I am thinking of naming it from now on. Isn't that right,
Blinky?". 
        This movie really gets good when both men find themselves escaping from
the Government agents out to assassinate them. They go into a parade,
only to realize they are marching in a Gay Pride March. They meet
"Dorothy", not a big character in the movie, but a crucial part.
("Dorothy": President Douglas, are you coming out? Douglas: I've always
supported Gay Rights, but I am not coming out. (Points to Kramer): He
is, however). 
        This movie teaches you that there is a funny side to politics. During
their journey to their Presidential library, they meet up with a
homeless couple who lives in their car, they march in the Gay Pride
parade (Already mentioned), plus they stop at Long John Silver's for
coffee. Watch for the part in the bathroom stall with Douglas in there.
There is a hilarious Macarena joke included in that scene.
        Many people refer to this movie as "Grumpy Old Presidents, without
Walter Matthau (Who was shooting I'm Not Rappaport at the time this
movie was being filmed). It is not that way. It is just plain funny. At
the end of the movie though, you will be quite surprised.
        Go rent this movie whenever you can. As for me, I might as well buy it
(That'll make 22 videos in my video drawer at least). Believe me, if any
of our Presidents were this way, this country would be in much better
shape.
