Authors
Simon Doherty
Number of Reviews
4

Title
Review for Princess Bride, The (1987)
Any director who can make films as diverse as Misery, This is Spinal
Tap and The American President deserves kudos for variety.  Rob Reiner
has displayed as much range as anyone around, and what's more his
films are always entertaining.  Here he turned to the fantasy genre,
and again came up with a winner; a film that will genuinely be enjoyed
by both children and adults.
The story: A boy (Fred Savage) is ill in bed so his grandfather (Peter
Falk, of Columbo) comes to read a book to him: The Princess Bride.  It
is this book that makes up the bulk of the film.  Robin Wright plays
Buttercup, a girl who finds True Love with her farmhand Westley (Cary
Elwes).  However, Buttercup hears one day that Westley has been killed
by pirates, and so she submits to Prince Humperdinck's (Chris
Sarandon) desire to marry her.  After she is kidnapped, though,
Westley comes to rescue her.  He later has the help of Mandy Patinkin
and Andre the Giant, playing a master swordsman and ... a giant.  To
be fair to Andre, he displays an acting ability that far surpasses the
standards usually seen in the WWF, and he doesn't let the film down in
the slightest.
I first saw this movie when I was about ten, and I absolutely loved
it.  It had it all; a mysterious hero, fantastic sword fights, an oily
villain and giant monsters.  It was the kind of film that we would
re-enact countless times on the playground, after prolonged arguments
over who got to play whom.  I truly wished that I was Westley, almost
as much as I wished I could be Marty McFly.  Few things could be
cooler than being able to sword fight, although being able to play
Johnny B.  Goode is one of them.  It's a rare movie that captures a
kid's imagination so completely.
Now, at the cynical, world-weary age of 18, it's still great fun to
watch.  The film retains the best aspects of the fantasy genre while
also gently satirising it.  The scenes between grandfather and
grandson are well observed and stay the right side of sentimental.
There's also amusing cameos from Mel Smith and Billy Crystal, and
unfortunately an unamusing cameo from Peter Cook (It's basically him
talking with an exaggerated lisp).
Who would I like to be now?  Hey, I'll be an ill kid if it means Columbo
is my grandfather.

Title
Review for Get Shorty (1995)
Director Barry Sonnenfeld in now best known for the blockbuster Men in
Black, but previously his biggest hit was this slick comedy.  John
Travolta plays Chilli Palmer, a loan shark with an idea for a movie
that he's pitching to washed up producer Harry Zimm (Gene Hackman).
However, Zimm has blown money gambling that he owes to shady character
Bo Catlett (Delroy Lindo).  We also meet actress Karen Flores (Rene
Russo), the ex-wife of Hollywood star Martin Weir (Danny DeVito), who
Chilli wants to be in his film.
Get Shorty is based on an Elmore Leonard book, and was the first film
to successfully evoke the author's cool, witty style.  It has since
been joined by Jackie Brown and Out of Sight as the best Leonard
adaptations, although Get Shorty is closer to the upbeat Out of Sight
than the slower, more thoughtful Jackie Brown.  The story is
convoluted, and it becomes tricky to remember who owes money to whom
as the many characters flit across the screen.  However, the plot is
largely irrelevant, the film being driven by the snappy dialogue and
excellent acting.  Travolta consolidated his comeback after Pulp
Fiction, creating a charismatic character with understated menace.
Hackman is as good as always, and Dennis Farina steals the film as Ray
혩Bones' Barboni, Palmer's underworld boss, who delivers many
of the funniest moments (혩Don't puke on my shoes, Harry').
DeVito also relishes the chance to send up his own image.  The
screenplay draws the characters sharply and makes them all
entertaining, a considerable achievement given that most of them are
pretty unpleasant people.  Sonnenfeld also gets credit for this; he
keeps the tone light even during the violence.  He also gets the
pacing just right, keeping the viewer absorbed whilst developing the
characters fully.  Unusually for a Hollywood film, the ending avoids
tying up too many loose ends, keeping it at a tight 105 minutes.  It
also enables the movie to finish with a memorable final image.
Get Shorty epitomises cool 90's film-making; fast talking, stylish
characters, knowing references to real life movies and actors, and a
funky soundtrack by John Lurie that fits the mood perfectly.
Definitely recommended if you liked Pulp Fiction, Scream or Out of
Sight, and the plot vagaries also make a second viewing worthwhile.

Title
Review for Fargo (1996)
The best work to date of Joel and Ethan Coen, this fantastic film
refuses to be categorised.  At times it is a black comedy, then a
crime drama, then a quiet character study.  It was nominated for nine
Oscars, but picked up only two after coming up against The English
Patient.  Another case of what I wittily call the Chinatown Syndrome
(it missed out because of Godfather II).
The film, amazingly based on a true story, revolves around car
salesman Jerry Lundegaard (William H. Macy).  In financial trouble, he
hires petty criminals Carl Showalter (Steve Buscemi) and Gaear
Grimsrud (Peter Stormare) to kidnap his wife, in an attempt to extract
a ransom from his rich but skinflint father-in-law.  Frances McDormand
is the pregnant cop who investigates when the plan goes wrong and
blood is spilt.
The Coens always create memorable characters, and this is no
exception.  McDormand, in her Oscar winning role, gives her character
genuine warmth when in lesser hands she would have merely been
irritatingly perky and nice.  Macy is also brilliant as a nervous man
who is out of his depth.  The way he tries to keep up a confident
patter when inside he is panicking is reminiscent of Jack Lemmon's
stunning performance in Glengarry Glen Ross.  Buscemi excels as
always, and Stormare is convincing as a man who barely seems conscious
most of the time, only coming to life in moments of sudden violence,
when he becomes decisive and sure.  The transformation in his
treatment of his cigarette, from drooping out of his mouth to a
determined flick out the car window when chasing another car, is a
superb example of an actor using a prop to reinforce their character.
The other Oscar the film won went to the screenplay.  The story is
told efficiently, fitting in a surprising number of subplots in only
98 minutes.  The Coens do not bother with back story; we are dropped
into the lives of these people and pick up what is going on from their
actions and conversations.  There is also some darkly funny dialogue,
such as a lecture Buscemi gives to a car park attendant, and a
conversation between Jerry and his father in law. (혩This deal could
work out real well for me and Jean and Scotty.' 혩Jean and Scotty
never have to worry.') The film reminded me of Pulp Fiction at
times, with people talking about ordinary things in a way that makes
it as engrossing as any special effects sequence.
Fargo makes a refreshing change from huge budget blockbusters, where
characters and conversations are just devices to move the plot
forwards.  What I find depressing is the number of people I know who
liked True Lies but found Fargo boring; the pleasures of this film are
not shoved in your face, but run much deeper for those willing to
discover them.

Title
Review for Bronx Tale, A (1993)
This was the first film to be directed by legendary actor Robert De Niro 
and it is a promising debut.  Based on a stage play by Chazz Palminteri, 
it is very watchable, but a lack of depth prevents it being a great film.
The structure is similar to the first part of Goodfellas, following an 
Italian, Calogero Anello, and his growing association with the gangsters 
in his neighbourhood from age 9 to 17.
De Niro plays his father, a bus driver who shuns involvement with the 
criminals and wishes his son would do the same.  Palminteri is the local 
boss who takes Calogero under his wing.  These performances are the high 
points of the film; both are compelling and completely believable.  As a 
result the film tends to drag when neither are on screen, especially 
during Calogero's romance with a local black girl.  Francis Capra plays 
the teenager capably, but cannot carry the subtler emotional scenes on 
his own.
The influence of Martin Scorsese on De Niro's direction is apparent.  The 
(fairly limited) violence is handled in a similarly startling and 
unflinching way, and talk-overs are used extensively.  However, the 
narration is less effective here than in Goodfellas.  The lines are not 
delivered with the panache of Ray Liotta, and occasionally intrude on the 
story.  In one scene particularly, when bikers enter the local bar, a 
voice-over is used when the images would have been sufficient to tell the 
story.  This breaks the tension that had been developed and weakens the 
impact of what follows.
Overall, though, the film sustained my interest and created some 
memorable scenes and characters.  Hopefully De Niro will tackle some less 
familiar material; he has the potential to develop a style of his own.
