Authors
D Lewis
Number of Reviews
2

Title
Review for Simon Birch (1998)
                                SIMON BIRCH
                         Reviewed by Dennis Lewis
     If you had to dab away a few tears at the conclusion of "Titanic,"
you may want to take along a full box of Puffs if you go see "Simon Birch."
     "Simon Birch," which opens nationwide on Sept. 11, is a movie that can
bring a smile to the face of the most jaded viewer -- or tears to the eyes
of the most cynical.
     Simon, the title character, is an exceptionally compact individual.
At birth he was "no bigger than a baby bird," according to the movie
synopsis, and he remains unusually small as he approaches adolescence.
     Simon's best friend, Joe, is a tall, athletic teenager from one of the
wealthier families in the Maine village in which he and Simon live. Yet Joe
feels like an outsider among the other teenagers in his community because
his mother Rebecca bore him out of wedlock (and has never married).
     The two "outsiders" -- Joe, the "town bastard," and the diminutive
Simon -- form a bond that, as it turns out, has enough strength to
withstand the most serious strain.
     Simon has a belief that God made him small for a reason, to fulfill a
special mission.
     One of the movie's key themes concerns Simon's quest for his "special
purpose" in life. The other deals with Joe's search for clues to the
identity of his father, who he believes still resides in their village.
     Joe is played by Joseph Mazzello, whose previous credits include both
"Jurassic Park" and its sequel, "The Lost World."
     Mazzello manages to infuse his character with the blend of maturity and
youthful innocence necessary to generate audience interest in his quest to
identify his father.
     Ian Michael Smith brings a self-reliance to the character of Simon. As
we watch him on the screen, we're not thinking "poor Simon" because of his
physical limitations; rather, we're cheering his pugnacious approach to
life.
     David Straithairn (most recently of "L.A. Confidential") plays the
Rev. Russell, rector of the local Episcopal church, the congregation
attended by Joe's family and Simon. Straithairn's cleric isn't the
charismatic spiritual leader we're used to seeing on screen. Repeatedly we
sense that Russell is trying, but failing, to connect with his
parishioners.
     (Simon Birch is a reunion of sorts for Straithairn and Mazzello -- the
two played father and son in 1994's "The River Wild.")
     Saturday Night Live veteran Jan Hooks, who did a "church lady"-type
character on Ted Turner's TBS Superstation at the beginning of her career
in the early 1980s, is divine in her role as teacher of Joe and Simon's
Sunday School class. Hooks plays her character as a frustrated woman who
possesses a lot of insecurity and just a dash of menace.
     The main cast is rounded out by Ashley Judd, who plays Joe's mother
Rebecca with an endearing charm that never ventures into the saccharin, and
Oliver Pratt as Ben Goodrich, Rebecca's beau, a drama teacher who has a
remarkable knack for child psychology.
     Simon Birch originally began as a project to adapt John Irving's novel
"A Prayer for Owen Meany" to the screen. The resulting script diverted from
the novel to such a degree that Irving requested the film have a different
name.
     One title considered for the film was "Angels and Armadillos," a quirky
name but one with a significance evident to those who've seen the movie.
     Jim Carrey has a cameo in the bookend scenes that frame the movie.
But this isn't a Jim Carrey movie or a "big name" movie; it's a film that
relies on acting and script quality, rather than star power, to attract an
audience.
     If any film this year merits at least one Oscar nomination, it's
"Simon Birch."
                                   Cast
Joseph Mazzello.................................Joe
Ian Michael Smith...............................Simon
Ashley Judd.....................................Rebecca
Oliver Platt....................................Ben Goodrich
David Straithairn...............................Rev. Russell
Jan Hooks.......................................Sunday School Teacher
Jim Carrey......................................Joe as an adult
Source: Internet Movie Database (http://us.imdb.com or
http://italy.imdb.com) and studio Web site for Simon Birch
(http://www.simonbirch.com).

Title
Review for As Good As It Gets (1997)
(For your consideration -- the following review of "As Good As It Gets" that
I wrote for the Dec. 97-Jan. 98 issue of _Out & About North Florida_, a
publication of the Lesbian and Gay Community Association of Jacksonville. The
issue was printed on Dec. 19.)
OK, guys, if you've had a crush on Greg Kinnear ever since his days as
host of "Talk Soup," you're in for a real treat this Christmas.
Kinnear plays gay artist Simon Bishop in the movie "As Good As It Gets,"
which opens Dec. 25 at theaters in Jacksonville and elsewhere.
Simon is a painter whose Manhattan apartment/studio is across the hall
from the apartment of Melvin Udall (Jack Nicholson). Melvin is a self-
centered, opinionated, obsessive-compulsive author.
To describe Melvin's comments as "politically incorrect" is an
understatement. His thoughtless remarks have managed to alienate almost every
customer and employee of the neighborhood cafe he visits for breakfast each
morning.
Carol Connelly (Helen Hunt) is the only waitress who's willing to
overlook Melvin's idiosyncrasies. Therefore, she becomes the stabilizing
figure in the neurotic Melvin's morning breakfast ritual.
Melvin's neighbors aren't sure of how to perceive him and, at first, the
audience may not be, either.
Often Nicholson uses facial expressions that seem like a throwback to
his portrayal of another author, Jack Torrance, in 1980's "The Shining." If
this movie hadn't been advertised as a comedy, audiences probably would expect
Melvin to start breaking down d oors with an ax.
Melvin uses non-PC dialogue when referring to Simon, but we soon learn
that he's not a homophobe. Melvin makes comments that are just as impolite to
a couple he perceives as Jewish who are sitting at his usual table in the
restaurant. But by then the audience knows that Melvin isn't a bigot, he's
just upset at encountering a change in his breakfast ritual.
The director, James L. Brooks, uses Melvin's obsessive-compulsive
disorder to bring in dialogue that studios would have been too nervous to
permit just a few years ago.
We may wince at many of the comments Melvin makes to Simon. And
socially conscious straights (and gays) may feel a twinge of guilt as they
chuckle at those lines. Yet it's clear that there's no hatred behind any of
Melvin's remarks.
Kinnear plays Simon with admirable restraint. Kinnear's mannerisms
border on excess flamboyance in the opening scene in which Simon welcomes home
his lost dog (the pooch Melvin sent down a garbage chute). But once Kinnear
settles into the role, Simon comes across as the average gay man (i.e., as
unobtrusive as any other man on the street).
Yes, Simon is one of filmdom's "gay guys even a Southern Baptist
could love." Like George Downes (Rupert Everett) in "My Best Friend's
Wedding," Simon helps a straight couple sort out their feelings for each
other. But unlike Kevin Kline in "In & Out," he doesn't get to kiss Tom
Selleck.
Now that Ellen Degeneres has shaken the taboo of being "out" on screen,
writers of romantic comedies have embraced the gay male character who can
serve as the lead female's confidant while not posing a threat to the male
lead.
Should we be upset that there isn't a romance for Simon in "As Good As It
Gets?" Well, the actor who would have been chosen for an on-screen kiss with
Kinnear has reason to be riled. But Kinnear's character is a groundbreaking
role in another area -- a gay man who could be spokesman for the "True Love
Waits" movement.
Vincent (Skeet Ulrich), the street hustler Simon invites in to model for
his next project, is certainly surprised that modeling is all Simon has in
mind.  And gays may think it is just *too convenient* that the script has made
Simon a single guy still waiting for the right man to come along.
But later in the movie, when Simon reminds Melvin of how fortunate any man
would be to meet the one other individual he wants to be with the majority of
time, we realize that Simon hasn't abandoned a goal many of us have discarded.
The publicity campaign for "As Good As It Gets" began three months ago,
possibly because Tri-Star Pictures realized a character with the disposition
of Melvin Udall might not make an ideal first impression with an audience.
When I first saw the preview and the scene that shows Melvin sending
Simon's dog down the garbage chute, I thought, "No way am I going to pay $6 to
see this." But my opinion of the movie began to change the more I saw the
preview.
There was a charm in the scene showing Jack Nicholson and Helen Hunt in a
restaurant on Chesapeake Bay while "I Love You For Sentimental Reasons" plays
in the background. (Ironically, despite the allure of that scene in the
preview, the song isn't featured at that point in the actual movie. And the
preview itself contains a longer snippet of the song than is actually used in
the film.)
The only connection between the Christmas season and "As Good As It Gets"
is the movie's Dec. 25 release date. But this movie, with its themes of true
love and true friendship, is perfect for the holiday.
                     "As Good As It Gets"
Cast:
Jack Nicholson..........................Melvin Udall
Helen Hunt..............................Carol Connelly
Greg Kinnear............................Simon Bishop
Cuba Gooding Jr.........................Frank Sachs
Skeet Ulrich............................Vincent
Shirley Knight..........................Beverly
Yeardley Smith..........................Jackie
Lup Ontiveros...........................Nora
Jesse James.............................Spencer Stone
Directed by James L. Brooks      Written by Marcus Andrus, James L. Brooks
Rated PG-13                             Length: 138 minutes
        (http://us.imdb.com  or  http://italy.imdb.com)
Review (c) 1997 Dennis Lewis
Articles in Out & About North Florida (c) Lesbian and Gay Community
Association of Jacksonville
 
