Authors
Alex Siegel
Number of Reviews
3

Title
Review for Godzilla (1998)
Wrap a hundred million dollars worth of special effects around nickel
script, and what you get is movie like Godzilla. It's hard to know
what to say about a movie like this one since ordinary criticisms
about plot and acting would be redundant. So instead I'll start with
special effects, which are the primary reason anybody would want to
see this picture.
The special effects were... pretty good, perhaps even great at
times. If you saw ID4 and Jurassic Park, you won't see anything new in
Godzilla. However, there is still a lot to look at. Big Green gets
plenty of screen time, and he has never looked so spiffy. The
systematic destruction of Manhattan was also well done. The visuals
become a bit spotty towards the end, but none are in-your-face bad. If
the director had cut out all the dialog and chosen a better score, we
might have a pretty decent movie.
Unhappily, he did not make that choice. Where is it written that
"summer popcorn" movies have to be so dumb that the audience laughs at
all the wrong times? Aliens was not dumb. Terminator II was not
dumb. The list goes on: Dirty Harry, Jaws, Commando... These are not
shining examples of the literary arts, but they don't insult the
audience either. Godzilla, on the other hand, is a perfect example of
how Hollywood cuts all the wrong corners. I can imagine the scene now:
a handful of Sony execs sitting around a table, sipping coffee. One
suggests doing a big Godzilla movie. Everybody nods. "Great idea," one
exec mutters, "but who will write the script?" Somebody else responds,
"Don't worry about that. How hard can it be to churn out a Godzilla
script?" Such statements should appear on tombstones as a warning to
future generations.
I suppose I should talk about the acting, such as it is. Matthew
Broderick struggles as the "smart guy that nobody will listen to." He
spends most of the movie looking like a lost puppy rather than the
brilliant (at times impossibly so) scientist that he's supposed to
be. Maria Pitillo plays the romantic interest, but does so in such a
dimwitted fashion that it's hard to see why anybody would want to
spend much time with her. Jean Reno does a fair turn as a mysterious
French guy, although he's limited by his material.
The production team did get one big thing right in Godzilla: the
advertising campaign. It's easy to see where they spent $150 million on
this budget item. We've been inundated with pretty good Godzilla ads
for months now. More than anything else, these ads will probably save
the movie from being a bomb at the box office. I particularly liked
the preview where Godzilla steps on a Tyrannosaurus skeleton in a
museum. I might add that a better movie would not have needed so much
clever advertising. Witness The Full Monty, which had almost no
promotion yet made truckloads of money.
In summary, go see Godzilla if you're in the mood for extremely
brainless eye candy. Otherwise, don't bother.

Title
Review for Specialist, The (1994)
     In THE SPECIALIST, Sylvester Stallone plays a ex-CIA demolitions
expert, who is now a kinder, gentler hitman.  Sharon Stone plays the
femme fatal, and James Woods plays the buddy gone bad.
     Let me start by saying that this was a really bad movie.  I'm not
kidding around here, I've seen my share of lemons in my day, and this
one was a true dog.  What, you may ask, made it so bad?  A whole lot of
things.
     First off, the script was laughable.  Rambling, incoherent,
uneven, it badly needed a few more passes through the typewriter.  In
particular, the dialog was criminal.  It's been a long time since I've
heard so many wooden lines strung together within the space of two
hours.  Ironically, the only character who came off as vaguely real was
the drug lord.  At least he had more than one emotion at his disposal.
     The acting was was also poor, which is surprising considering that
this is a veteran cast.  Stallone, who has never had great range, was
particularly uninteresting here.  Even in the action scenes, he seemed
tired and bored.  Woods demonstrates a range of emotion: from vague
hostility to full temper tantrum.  Stone looks somewhat distressed from
beginning to end, and never breaks into a smile.  Maybe she was
thinking about what this movie will do to her fragile career.
     But there's more.  The production values were very uneven.  In
almost every scene, the lighting was bad, or the sound was off.  Even
the explosions (and there were plenty) seemed half-hearted.  At times,
it looked downright amateurish.  Maybe they were under a tight
deadline, or maybe they just didn't care.  In any event, the director
should start looking for another line of work.  It's interesting that
Ed Wood opened on the same night.  Just a coincidence, I suppose.
     A few bits in particular deserve honorable mention.  There is a
long love scene in the middle that almost had me laughing out loud.
The only word that fits is "comical."  If real people had sex like these
two, there would be a lot fewer babies in the world.  The low point of
the movie had to be the fight on the bus.  Embarrassing.  Throughout
the scene, I couldn't shake the sensation that I'd seen it before, in
about a thousand other cheap action flicks.  Whoever decided to include
the pregnant woman should be shot.
     It's hard to think of another movie to compare this one too.
CABIN BOY, HIGHLANDER II, BARBARIAN QUEEN, THE PERILS OF GWENDOLYN.
These too were a frontal assault on our intelligence.  Maybe some of
the "Sea Quest" episodes.  The mind boggles, and the stomach churns.
     That's enough ranting.  To conclude, THE SPECIALIST is bad,
boring, and bad.  Don't see it, ever.

Title
Review for Last Action Hero (1993)
     Shakespeare said, "A tale told by an idiot, full of sound and
fury, signifying nothing."  This description fits LAST ACTION HERO
perfectly.  But first, here is a short synopsis:
     Arnold Schwarzenegger plays Jack Slater, a character in a series
of action movies.  Austin O'Brien plays Danny Madigan, a boy who is
addicted to Jack Slater movies.  Danny leads a miserable, squalid life
in downtown Manhattan.  One night, he is transported into a Jack Slater
movie by a magic movie ticket.  For part of LAST ACTION HERO, he lives
in the movie within the movie.  He spends his time trying to convince
Jack that he is only a movie character, while Jack goes about the
business of cleaning up the bad guys.  After a while, one of the bad
guys, an evil thug named Vivaldi (played by Anthony Quinn) escapes into
the "real world."  Jack chases Vivaldi into the real world, and the
action continues there.
     This movie suffers from some classic problems that seem to plague
big Hollywood productions.  The biggest problem is a lack of focus.  At
the beginning, it seems to be a movie about Danny's horrible life.  The
movie portrays Manhattan as a filthy, crime ridden sewer.  Now, I'm not
a fan of Manhattan, but it's not this bad.  When I saw this part on the
screen, I thought, "Oh, this movie has a social message."  But, I was
wrong.  The bits about Manhattan are meaningless and perfunctory.  They
are there only to give the movie some sort of atmosphere reminiscent of
BLADE RUNNER.
     When Danny enters the movie with the movie, LAST ACTION HERO
enters into comedy/satire mode.  Schwarzenegger tries to satire every
action movie that he has ever made.  I actually thought that this was
the strongest part of LAST ACTION HERO, but it still became quite
tedious.  I think they wanted to create the pace of AIRPLANE, while
keeping the cleverness of THE PLAYER, but it had neither.  All though,
I will admit that I laughed in several spots.  The most annoying part
of this phase of the movie is the kid.  Danny is so damn clever and
intrusive in every scene that the audience quickly grows to hate him.
When will Hollywood learn that cute kids and action movies do not mix.
     When Danny and Jack enter the "real world," LAST ACTION HERO
enters action-movie mode.  This is the strangest part of the movie,
since they do exactly the sorts of things that they spent the previous
hour satirizing.  There are several bits where Jack is "discovering"
the joy and pain of living in the real world, but I found them false.
There is nothing real about the real world in LAST ACTION HERO.  Mr.
Schwarzenegger has been living in the fantasy world of Southern
California for too long to have any clue about living in New York
City.  The sad part is that this is where the plot of LAST ACTION HERO
begins to actually get going.  But, just as quickly, LAST ACTION HERO
returns to pointless violence and an endless stream of Hollywood
in-jokes.
     This movie was frustrating to watch because there was so much
unrealized potential.  The movie-in-a-movie gimmick is fun.  The satire
is quite funny at times.  Vivaldi shows surprising intelligence and
could have made things happen.  I have heard that four different teams
of writers worked on this script, and it shows.  It is full of
unexpected changes of mood and character.  We go from a rape scene to
something out of BUFFY THE VAMPIRE KILLER without even blinking.  A lot
of the action is completely out of place.  The slim premise is simply
not enough to support a full length, big budget picture.  I can't help
but think that they should have scrapped the whole project early on,
and tried again with a brand new script.  Unfortunately, the producers
decided to save it by throwing more money at it.  There is no doubt
that Arnold's king-sized ego had no small part to play in this
debacle.
     I can only hope that Arnold and the Hollywood community as a whole
learn something from this mess, but deep in my heart, I know better.
