Authors
Victory Marasigan
Number of Reviews
12

Title
Review for Soldier (1998)
_Soldier_ is hands down one of the worst movies a person could
ever have to sit through that doesn't have Jean Claude Van Damme in it. I
could liken it to the sci-fi cheese that was the Hollywood
product-of-choice back in the early 80s, but that would be too much of a
compliment. If there is a movie theater in hell, this film is playing
there 24 hours a day.
The story, such that there is, revolves around Todd (Kurt Russell), an
automaton of a man who has been raised from birth to be a merciless
soldier in a not-too-distant ultra-conservative future (is there any other
kind?) After years of desensitization at a military academy full of other
boys just like him, Todd becomes a ground fighter in a series of wars all
over the galaxy. Who the enemies in these wars are is never revealed, but
the few glimpses of Todd in battle show that it doesn't matter, because
innocent hostages are wiped out as indifferently as the bad guys.
After ten minutes of this nihilistic trash -- yes folks, there's more --
we see Todd as a buff, scarred adult, now so accustomed to the carnage
that no confrontation at all causes him to break a sweat.  There's a new
wrinkle, though. Todd and his brethren are declared obsolete, and a new
batch of soldiers takes their place.  After losing a sanctioned battle
with _Dragon_'s Jason Scott Lee, the seemingly dead Todd is dumped by a
flying ice-cube tray (well, that's what is looked like) on a remote
garbage planet. 
If you predict that Todd meets a bunch of outcast settlers on this planet,
and that they band together to fight a bunch of bad guys coming to destroy
them, you're way ahead of the game. The renegade society on this trash
heap is so clich you half-expect Tina Turner and Master Blaster to come
strolling into frame any minute. 
It's surprising that _Soldier_ is the brain-child of _Blade Runner_
co-writer
David Webb Peoples. Unlike that mind-twisting classic, this film contains
just barely enough dialogue to fill about three double-spaced pages. Add
into the mix the _Mortal Kombat_'s Paul Anderson inept direction, and it's
easy to see how _Soldier_ turned out so bad. And the special effects! 
Remember the flying steam irons in Hardware Wars?
Gary Busey is in this movie. 'Nuff said. 
_Soldier_ is proof that Hollywood still has plenty of bad ideas sitting in
its script vaults. That this sad film made it to the silver screen should
encourage plenty of aspiring screenwriters out there that there is hope
after all. Now if you'll excuse me, I have to go weep for the future.

Title
Review for Impostors, The (1998)
Review by Victory A. Marasigan
http:www.gl.umbc.edu/~vmaras1/reviewsidx.html
I have to admit that I admire what writer-director Stanley Tucci was
trying to do with his latest film _The Impostors_. Obviously an
homage to the screwball "program picture" comedies of the 30s and 40s, the
movie exudes a _joie de vivre_ which is hard to dislike.  It's too bad
that Tucci's screenplay degenerates into the formulaic drivel and
standardness which derailed many films of that very same era. 
Oliver Platt and Stanley Tucci play Maurice and Arthur, a pair of starving
actors in 1930s New York.  They are desperate for work, but they aren't
idle.  Among their pastimes is putting on loud, brash arguments in public,
with the inevitable conclusion of one of them falling to the ground with
exaggerated death throes.  Though they'd rather have jobs, Maurice and
Arthur find that such real world practice works more directly to their
benefit, particularly in scamming vendors out of their food.  When they're
not begging, they're auditioning (the line between the two has become
blurred for the desperate pair).  What is such a shame is that the film
fails to milk their comedy-rich plight in the city and opts instead to
plop Maurice and Arthur haphazardly into a completely different locale. 
Through an ill-fated encounter with a Shakespearean actor named Jeremy
Burtom (Alfred Molina, who makes one of the worst Hamlets ever captured on
film), the pair end up as stowaways on a cruise ship.   In classic
ensemble fashion, the film introduces the various players whom Maurice and
Arthur will encounter on their maritime adventure.  There's the rich sheik
(Teagle F. Bougere). There's the stuffy aristocrat (Dana Ivey).
There's the depressed lounge singer (Steve Buscemi, who actually sings!).
There's the deposed Queen (Isabella Rossellini)... it's that kind of yarn.
The only caricatures missing are Frankenstein and Dracula (catch that,
Abbott and Costello fans?).  From here it's strictly hide-and-seek mayhem,
as our bumbling pair of heroes hop from cabin to cabin trying to avoid the
peeved Mr. Burtom who, it turns out, is also on board.       
The cruise ship plot is a yawner, but some appropriately hammy
performances do get to light up the screen.  Campbell Scott gets some of
the film's best lines from his role as the head steward, a scar-faced
German with an unrequited lust.  Lili Taylor and Matt McGrath are
irresistably sweet as lovers who must overcome the crazy circumstances
which keep them apart.  And Tony Shalhoub must be awarded the brass ring
for having the, um, _cojones_ to do a wild phone sex scene.
The film's catchy jazz score and art deco production design make _The
Imposters_ easy on the ears and eyes.  I confess that had the film been
shot in black-and-white, I may have given it a half-star higher.  It's
details like that which can make all the difference in a film like this.
Although _The Impostors_ is in toto only good for a few chuckles, there
is a certain joy to be had in watching an ensemble cast having a fun time
just being silly.  Here's hoping that next time, director Tucci makes a
film that's as fun for the audience as well. 

Title
Review for Star Trek: Insurrection (1998)
Review by Victory A. Marasigan
http://www.gl.umbc.edu/~vmaras1/reviewsidx.html
It's hard to believe it's been nearly five years since "The Next
Generation" crew gave up their top-rated syndicated TV series "to explore
new worlds and new civilizations" on the big screen. What's not as
difficult to believe is the ebb of rich characterizations and fresh
storylines their infrequent adventures have necessitated. _Star Trek:
Insurrection_, the crew's third feature, sadly rings more like a _Return
to Mayberry_-type reunion than a thrilling further adventure.
This time around, the Enterprise and her crew must travel to a remote
planet, where one of their own has apparently gone renegade and taken
people hostage. Captain Picard (Patrick Stewart) and crew manage to subdue
their comrade and beam down to investigate, only to find a small colony of
youthful Ba'ku living in an eerily tranquil, unchanging paradise. The
actual threat to these humanoid people is a group of stretchy-faced aliens
called the Son'a (led by _Amadeus_' F. Murray Abraham) who, under the
sanction of the Federation, have devised a sneaky plan to steal the planet
-- and its rejuvenating resources -- right out from under the Ba'ku's
wrinkle-free noses. 
The planet's virtual Fountain of Youth is a thinly-veiled excuse to show
Our Gang acting uncharacteristically giddy and energetic, a la the
break-dancing old geezers in Cocoon. Counselor Troi and Commander Riker
(Marina Sirtis and director Jonathan Frakes)  rekindle their early TV
series romance. Worf (Michael Dorn) goes through Klingon puberty all over
again. Geordi LaForge (Levar Burton) gets to see for the first time. And
Picard finds love with a sweet (and improbably unattached) Ba'ku (Donna
Murphy). It's too bad the planet's powers can't work true miracles, like
subtracting the pounds some of the crew have gained during their two-year
hiatus (Is it just me, or is Commander Riker prematurely showing the
famous Captain Kirk lovehandles?). 
The temporary augmentations brought about by the planetary anomaly only
highlight a failure of the new movie voyages so far. After three films, no
major changes in the characters' lives have occurred, barring Picard's
Ahab-Moby Dick awakening in _First Contact_. Beloved personalities like
Troi and Worf have become mere caricatures of themselves. And the
pasty-white android Commander Data (Brent Spiner) has had nothing to do
but plod along and "discover" yet another strange facet of humanity -- in
this case the concept of adolescent fun (Really, after almost a decade on
the Enterprise, you'd think he'd have learned the meaning of "fun" long
ago).
Much of Insurrection's self-aware script plays off the fact that these
characters know each other so well, they can predict exactly what the
other is going to do in any given situation. Their familiarity with each
other is sort of a private joke, albeit one which seasoned viewers of the
series will eat up. It's all too apparent that writers Rick Berman and
Michael Piller were trying to duplicate the virtues of their last film,
the enjoyable _First Contact_. But all the eye-winking humor and
space-chase action they packed into this outing can't mask the fact that
the story is silly, dull, and ultimately inconsequential to the _Star
Trek_ mythos.  Unless the Enterprise breaks free of the orbit into which
it's currently locked, the hit-or-miss legacy of the franchise will likely
continue. 
Reviewed December 9, 1998 at RC Eastpoint, Baltimore, MD. 

Title
Review for Siege, The (1998)
It's a classic film scenario: What if terrorists struck on U.S. soil?  The
movies have long exploited the timely idea, using it like political
propaganda to show off America's strength and selfless heroism.  Films
like the Die Hard series and True Lies have turned one of this country's
biggest fears into popcorn entertainment, where the bad guy is easy to
pinpoint by his foreign accent, and the good guys are defined by their
snappy one-liners.  The outline of Edward Zwick's much-ballyhooed The
Siege appears to promise yet another flag-waving, foreigner-bashing
bulletfest, but thankfully, the film is nowhere nearly that shallow. 
Denzel Washington's FBI agent Anthony Hubbard is thrust into the thick of
an international conflict when a bomb threat is made on a New York City
bus.  He gets the wheels turning on an investigation, only to discover
that the CIA (personified by mysterious agent Annette Bening) has already
taken the case into its own hands.  After civilians are lost in a series
of horrific explosions, the entire nation's eyes look toward New York, and
Hubbard and his crew find themselves trying to fend off an imminent
declaration of martial law. Working both with and without the CIA's
go-ahead, Hubbard attempts to find out who is behind the attack before the
situation really gets out of hand, and before innocent American citizens
end up being sequestered like animals. 
Packed with white-knuckle tension and genuine pathos, The Siege is truly
an enthralling ride.  Washington's acting is on target, as always; his
Jack Ryan-esquie screen persona fits like a glove.  Tony Shalhoub is just
as good as Hubbard's partner, a family-man who finds that even he is
unable to escape the racial discord brought about by the terrorist
incidents. 
The most jarring aspect of the film are its bombing scenes, which are
executed with an authenticity that is quite uncomfortable to watch.  Some
are shown in explicit detail, others only in aftermath.  Images like these
are fodder for the world news on a nightly basis, but to see them taking
place in New York City is irrepressibly unnerving.  To add to the tension,
the filmmakers make it abundantly clear that a terrorist bomb can go off
anywhere, anytime -- even in a movie theater.  Lowbrow as the film's scare
tactics may be, they certainly draw us in by forcing us to realize that
although the situation on the screen isn't real, it easily could be. 
Of late, a great concern about the film has been its apparent racist
depiction of Arabs as terrorists.  But The Siege smartly pushes beyond the
superficial constraints of its main plot to delve deeper into the issues
of racial, religious, and cultural prejudice than most mainstream
"thrillers" have before it.  These issues are in fact integral to the
story, and although it is blatantly preachy at times, The Siege somehow
avoids making its moral ring out like self-congratulatory claptrap. 
For all its merits, The Siege is not perfect.  The film would have done
well to explore the Arab and Muslim culture even more fully.  As it
stands, the film comes dangerously close to making its Arab characters
more symbolic than real.
The film also suffers from some questionable characterizations.  Bening is
unconvincing as CIA agent Elise Kraft, inhabiting the role like a
schoolteacher with a sexy-cool night personality.  Bruce Willis'
one-dimensionally acted turn as an army general is too obvious a foil to
Washington's self-righteous Hubbard.
Does the film trivialize such real tragedies as the Oklahoma City bombing? 
Yes and no.  On the one hand, it is quite arrogant to think that the real
horror of terrorism could be evoked succinctly in a movie.  Conversely, to
not address tragedy in some capacity would be to dishonor those who have
died. 
It should be understood that The Siege is but a work of entertainment, not
an attempt at a modern morality tale.  That being said, it is still very
likely that moviegoers will come away from the film more open-minded than
when they went in. 

Title
Review for Elizabeth (1998)
Elizabeth is a potent historical drama set in England in the mid-1500s.
It is a time when stately royal ceremonies are as commonplace as public
burnings.  Internally, the Catholics wage war against the Protestants.
Meanwhile, Spain, Scotland and France strategize their next moves in the
struggle for power.  Little does England know that a young woman named
Elizabeth (Cate Blanchett)  will be their greatest hope for survival.
The film charts Elizabeth's tumultuous struggle to gain true power over
her kingdom.  As a Protestant, she is the last person any of the Catholic
royalty would want to be Queen.  But her half-sister Queen Mary (Kathy
Burke), deathly ill and unable to conceive a child, pleas with Elizabeth
to take over the throne.  Mary gives her her blessing on only one
condition: that Elizabeth renounce her faith and uphold the teachings of
Catholicism across the land.  Once declared Queen, Elizabeth immediately
finds herself under assault, both by her own subjects (including the Duke
of Norfolk, played with steely-eyed grace by Christopher Eccleston) and by
forces abroad.  Slowly but surely, the neophyte ruler takes England by its
reigns and forges a new path for her kingdom.
Elizabeth is surrounded by a keenly drawn cadre of subjects and advisers.
Her closest ally is the mysterious Sir Francis Walsingham (Geoffrey Rush,
in a perfectly subtle performance).  Also on her side is Sir William Cecil
(Sir Richard Attenborough), her well-meaning but misguided chief adviser.
With few people she can trust, Elizabeth must prove her self-worth any way
she can, even if it means being the iron-fisted ruler she secretly
despises.   
Blanchett deserves an Oscar for her performance as Elizabeth.  She
portrays the young Queen with just the right balance of gawky
self-consciousness and shrewd charisma.  Though not a classical beauty,
Blanchett is able to entrance the viewer with just a coy smile or an
impish smirk.  She is at home with her character's playful tendencies,
particularly in one scene where Elizabeth dances unabashedly with
childhood friend and lover Lord Robert Dudley (Joseph Fiennes).  Whether
fending off unctuous suitors or "playing" the Houses in court, Blanchett's
Elizabeth radiates a confidence which impossible to dislike.
Almost as interesting as the character of Elizabeth are Shekhar Kapur's
visual delights.  He and cinematographer Remi Adefarasin have crafted a
film with a rich color palette that is a feast for the eyes.  Rolling
green hills, extravagant ceremonial galas, dark and foreboding corridors
-- all are depicted with a real sense of artistic appreciation.  The
castles and cathedrals of Europe have rarely been doted on so lovingly as
they are here. 
Though writer Michael Hirst's script gets a little murky at times, and his
injections of humor get a little overplayed, Elizabeth pulses with the
right amount of dramatic and cinematic verve to make it just deserving of
a theatrical viewing.  As a whole, the story survives because Elizabeth's
struggle is one which deserves attention.  By the time she makes her
shocking (but very sensible) final declaration, we're ready to bow to
Elizabeth as our own Queen.  

Title
Review for Very Bad Things (1998)
I have to hand it to director Peter Berg. With his first feature Very Bad
Things, he's delivered a story so alternatingly hilarious and repulsive
that by the time it's over, you don't know whether you actually liked the
movie or not. Indeed, I don't think any film in recent memory has caused
such large groups of moviegoers to get up and walk out of the theater at
regular intervals. It's not that the film is poorly made; it's that Very
Bad Things grabs a hold of you and squeezes until you literally can't take
it any more.
At its outset, Berg fools us into thinking we'll be watching a City
Slickers-type weekend adventure, as five young-and-up-and-coming
30-somethings (wild guys Jeremy Piven, Daniel Stern, Christian Slater,
Leland Orser, and John Favreau) pack into a minivan and head off to Vegas.
Their mission: to celebrate that time-honored night of controlled chaos -
the bachelor party. Groom Favreau is excited but understandably tense, as
his bride-to-be (Cameron Diaz) has voiced quite clearly her disapproval of
the ritual.
Once in their Vegas hotel suite, the boys really let loose, absorbing
drugs and booze like sponges. Their raw ebullience turns to abject horror
when, in a coital frenzy, one of the guys accidentally kills the
prostitute they hired to entertain them. In the first of a series of
panic-induced bad decisions, the guys decide to take the body out to the
desert and bury it. Not just bury it, but chop it up with a store-bought
electric turkey carver and bury it. Thank God for the 24-hour Target, huh?
Their hideous deed done, the sullied boys head home so the groom can
prepare for his wedding. Of course, things are not as easy to sweep under
the rug as they'd like. As in Poe's "The Tell-Tale Heart,"  echoes of
their crime haunt the boys as soon as they set foot back on home turf. In
one particularly well-played scene, family-man Stern lets his paranoia
engulf him to the point of hysteria while trying to buy snacks at a gas
station/convenience store. His behavior doesn't go unnoticed, and it isn't
long before the boys' need for damage control leads to an even larger body
count.
Though it seems inconceivable that humor could be mined out of the deadly
serious premise I've just described, this film is a comedy. It is in some
ways a variation on There's Something About Mary, with the macabre
substituted for just plain gross. The proceedings are made all the more
shocking by the fact that these are normal guys-next-door doing...well,
very bad things.
Though the five leads seem more suited to the demands of wacky comedy,
some (especially Ellen regular Jeremy Piven) are able pull off unhinged
grief and mania quite effectively. The reserved Favreau, the film's moral
anchor, makes good as the tense groom who just wishes the madness would
all just go away. Slater's aphasic Robert is a look at what his Heathers
character might have become if he'd survived that film and gone into real
estate. Diaz, as Favreau's future bride, turns out to be the film's most
eccentric personality, a woman so hell-bent on having her wedding she will
stoop to new lows to make sure it isn't ruined. And Jeanne Tripplehorn, as
Stern's seemingly homey wife, elicits some cheers when she explodes and
goes ballistic on an intruding baddie.
Uneven but engrossing, Very Bad Things is able to generate some palpable
crackling tension, a merit on which I can easily recommend it. Whether the
carnage is too much is totally a matter of personal taste (which is so
significant you can either add or subtract a whole letter grade from my
own rating.)
Like the rest of the movie, Very Bad Things' final act cadenza is either
laugh-out-loud hilarious or downright offensive. You can almost hear the
Farelly brothers offering their approval. Whatever it's effect on you, you
have to walk out of the theater after that.
Reviewed October 15, 1998 at General Cinema Towson Commons, Towson, MD. 

Title
Review for Beloved (1998)
Review by Victory A. Marasigan
http://www.gl.umbc.edu/~vmaras1/reviewsidx.html
Jonathan Demme's _Beloved_, based on the book Toni Morrison, is a
study in skillful literary adaptation. On the one hand, the film manages
to recreate key moments from the novel, evoking Morrison's pragmatic
narrative style without using her authorial voice. On the other hand,
Beloved omits the some of the finer details of the book, favoring an
ambiguously defined back story upon which to build the story's main
events. This choice is a smartly made one, for it creates an open space in
which the story's wide range of emotions can gestate and grow. Indeed, the
impact of the film is so protracted that much of it cannot be felt until
long after the end credits have rolled.
_Beloved_ takes place in the second half of the 19th century, during the
so-called Reconstruction Era after the Civil War. For newly-freed slaves,
it is a time of confusion and turmoil. Oprah Winfrey is Sethe, a slave who
escaped a Kentucky plantation and took her children to an Ohio farmhouse,
where she hoped the terror would end. What she did not know was that it
would follow her there, and remain with her long after the physical threat
had vanished. _Beloved_ ultimately tells the story of Sethe's search for
forgiveness, one long-hampered by an unforgettable sin. 
The film starts off on a dreary day ten years after Sethe's escape, as a
violent, unseen energy rocks her dilapidated farmhouse. Invisible hands
terrorize her family, flinging objects across rooms, shaking tables,
rattling floorboards. Sethe's sons run away, perhaps for good, leaving
Sethe and her daughter Denver to fend for themselves. 
Demme's matter-of-fact handling of this supernatural element is just one
of _Beloved_'s intriguing aspects. All of the characters take for granted
that ghosts are real. When Paul D (Danny Glover) -- a former slave who
escaped Kentucky along with Sethe -- arrives at the house eight years
later and is confronted with the ghost's hellish visions, he doesn't run
in terror. Instead, he asks who the ghost is. As in Morrison's novel,
Demme quickly establishes that the horror of the story will not come from
the fact of the ghost itself, but from the terrifying past in which the
ghost was created. Sethe is the one being haunted, but the ghost in the
house is the least of her fears. In fact, the ghost is one of the reasons
she chooses to stay. 
The story takes an bizarre turn with the appearance of Beloved (Thandie
Newton), a young black-clad woman who appears on Sethe's front lawn,
leaned Christ-like against a tree stump. Sethe and Denver immediately
take to the rasping woman and try to nurse her to health. They know not
who she is, but that doesn't matter. Only Paul D is suspicious of the
stranger. Little does the family know that Beloved will bring about many
changes, and force Sethe to release a guilt she has held onto so urgently
for eighteen years. 
Winfrey is arguably Beloved's greatest asset. She inhabits the role of
Sethe so convincingly it is hard to believe this is the same woman who
shines brightly on a TV talk show. Lisa Gay Hamilton does an impressive
job in the emotionally demanding role as the younger Sethe, whose
appalling actions make her the disturbed woman we see eighteen years
later. Danny Glover is affable as the sympathetic Paul D, as is Kimberly
Elise as Denver, Sethe's wanderlusting daughter. As Sethe's sage-like
mother-in-law Old Baby Suggs, Beah Richards authoritatively commands every
scene in which she appears.
The film's least palatable choice of casting is unfortunately that of the
role of Beloved herself. Thandie Newton plays the glassy-eyed girl with a
demented fervor which is endearing at first, but which becomes off-putting
and unintentionally laughable by the end. 
Departing from the honed aesthetic he used in such films as _The Silence
of the Lambs_ and _Melvin & Howard_, director Demme has used a bit of
dramatic overstatement to get across the vivid descriptions in Morrison's
novel. Totemic camera shots and color-saturated scenery are decidedly
uncommon in Demme's films, but the few he uses here work to the film's
benefit.  _Beloved_'s most memorable scenes are those of Baby Suggs'
gatherings in a forest clearing, where the bright yellow-greens of nature
entrance the viewer as much as Suggs' words do.
For the most part, though, Demme maintains his trademark directorial
neutrality.  This, combined with Morrison's equally frugal method of
storytelling, may make _Beloved_ somewhat of a challenge to watch, even to
those familiar with the book.  Though the film compliments the book
extraordinarily well, it falls short in allowing the sort of accessibility
one usually expects from a film.  Nothing is spoon-fed to the viewer. 
Morrison's novel is just as enigmatic, but unlike a movie, a book can be
put down to allow the various undercurrents and themes to churn and
absorb.
The movie begins like _Poltergeist_, and ends like _The Color Purple_,
with shades of _The Scarlet Letter_ and _Little Women_ somewhere in the
middle. Taken as a whole, Beloved is a disquieting, one-of-a-kind
experience, one to be viewed with guards down and spirits in abeyance.

Title
Review for Vampires (1998)
Review by Victory A. Marasigan
http://www.gl.umbc.edu/~vmaras1/reviewsidx.html
"It was not scary."  These are the first words that came to mind after it
was over.  When a movie is called _Vampires_, "not scary" aren't words
that should be associated with it.  But that wasn't my only gripe.  John
Carpenter is a name associated with cutting-edge cinema, as in the intense
scares of _Halloween_, _The Thing_ and _The Prince of Darkness_, or the
offbeat action of _They Live_ and _Escape From New York_.  Unfortunately,
the only thing that is cutting edge about _Vampires_ is the level of
boredom the movie is able to reach.  With an anemic plot and
not-quite-kosher special effects, _John Carpenter's Vampires_ has barely
enough substance to slake the thirst of even the least discerning genre
fan. 
The film is at first concerned with a group of roaming vampire slayers,
led by James Woods, of all people.  Like some sort of holy A-Team (they
even have their own souped-up van), the bunch invade and wipe out a nest
of vampires in a New Mexico shack.  Their method is amusingly innovative:
the blood-suckers are reeled out with harpoons so they can flare up in the
sun like matchsticks.  
To commemorate their victory, the loutish band decorates a motel room with
hookers and parties the night away.  Their celebration is short-lived,
however, as a master vampire named Valek ambushes and single-handedly
destroys most of the team.  Woods' Jack Crow and buddy Montoya (Daniel
Baldwin) escape with their lives, along with a woman named Katrina (Sheryl
Lee).  Although the woman has been bitten,  Montoya and Crow decide to
keep Katrina for her psychic link to the master vampire.      
The rest of the movie is concerned with the boys' hunt for Valek (Thomas
Ian Griffith), a freaky Marilyn Manson-type who's on a mission that dates
back 600 years.  Along the way they pick up a priest named Guiteau (Tim
Guinee), a character who serves pretty much the same purpose as the
jittery Cpl. Upham in _Saving Private Ryan_.  Some stuff happens in the
middle of the movie, but I can't remember most of it, because I often
found a twitching hair in the corner of the frame more interesting than
what was happening on screen. 
_Vampires_ finally starts to pick up about 90 minutes into the mix, as
Crow, Guiteau, and Montoya assault an abandoned prison-turned vampire
nest.  Only then does the film begin to even resemble a Carpenter flick. 
But it's too little too late.  We get the inevitable final confrontation,
but it seems tacked on and rather anti-climactic (Come on, we're dealing
with _the_ master vampire here!) 
Interestingly, last summer's vampire actioner _Blade_ was derived from a
comic book, and _Vampires_ from a novel, yet the latter seems more steeped
in campy cheesiness than the former, a more deliberate superhero flick.
Woods' Jack Crow spouts glib off-the-cuff one-liners and strolls away from
exploding buildings with that oh-so-cool stride.  And his motive for
killing vampires?  Take a wild guess.  (Hint: A ______ killed his _____
when he was just a _____.)
At least _Blade_ had decent action and slick stylishness.  _Vampires_
lacks even cheap thrills to mask its gossamer-thin plot.  To make up for
this, the movie resorts to other "shocks," such as its generally
condescending attitude towards women (Crow slaps them around for the fun
of it) and an overplayed contempt for religion (Crow teases Guiteau
incessantly about whether his vow of celibacy has made him prone to
"getting woodies.") 
It can be argued that maybe I wanted too much from this movie.  If not
scary and gory, I wanted tense, relentless, and exhausting.  _John
Carpenter's Vampires_ is none of these.  I can only recommended it for the
hardcore Carpenter fan.  For the rest of you looking for a good scare,
beware: _Vampires_ is a film with no teeth.

Title
Review for Prince of Egypt, The (1998)
NOTE: This review and an interview with Dreamworks SKG's Jeffrey
Katzenberg and the makers THE PRINCE OF EGYPT can be found at: 
http://www.gl.umbc.edu/~vmaras1/reviewsidx.html
The concept for DreamWorks SKG's _The Prince of Egypt_ doesn't
sound like subject matter ripe for the animated-movie treatment. The film
retells the Biblical story of Exodus, the same one told in DeMille's
expansive epic _The Ten Commandments_. A "cartoon" about plague and
pestilence, infant murders, and the drowning of hundreds of soldiers? Is
DreamWorks crazy?
Such reservations can thankfully be put to rest, because the resulting
film is one of the most touching and emotionally uplifting versions of the
story yet depicted. DreamWork's version of this oft-told tale offers a
vulnerable Moses, as compared to Charlton Heston's famous
chiseled-out-of-stone take on the character.  Gaunt and rather
unintimidating, this Moses (voiced by Val Kilmer) has the rebellious
demeanor and zeal that any young soul might have. 
The film's bold, sweeping opening sequence (underscored by the wondrous
choral cry "Deliver Us") shows us Moses' legendary beginnings, as his
desperate mother sends him adrift on the Nile to escape the Pharaoh's
(Patrick Stewart)  murderous soldiers. Ironically, this action brings the
Hebrew infant into the care of the Pharaoh's family. Raised like the
Pharaoh's own, Moses grows up unaware of his true heritage. He develops a
strong bond with the Pharaoh's son Rameses (Ralph Fiennes, in the most
convincing and heartbreaking of the film's characterizations). Moses' life
is turned on its end when, soon after being declared prince, he meets his
true siblings (voiced by Sandra Bullock and Jeff Goldblum), who reveal to
him his slave heritage. This truth is too much for the young man; without
explanation, he leaves his father's kingdom behind, unsure of his destiny. 
For the animators, envisioning a story set in ancient Egypt seems to have
been like discovering a treasure-filled mummy's tomb. The majestic
Egyptian city, with its oversize temples and skyscraping statues, looks
like an elaborate chessboard, with pieces which may have been laid there
by the hands of the Gods themselves. The rich color in the temples'
hypostyle halls, the painted limestone reliefs, the glare of the
unforgiving sunlight -- all details which pull us into the reality of that
beautiful place. 
Moses' journey eventually brings him into contact with God Himself, who
empowers him to return to his kingdom and let his people go. The miracles
Moses helps bring about, from the invasion of swarms of insects to the
fiery finger of God, dazzle with a beauty which is believable without
being photorealistic. And let's not forget _the_ miracle -- the parting of
the Red Sea -- which features astounding, breathtaking visual effects. 
Though Moses finds love and marriage in the desert, the film is really
more interested in the relationship between him and Rameses. The latter
experiences a tragic fall due to his own blindness, but his caring for his
brother remains solid throughout the film. And so, Rameses becomes one of
the most sympathizable "bad guys"  ever to be depicted in an animated
movie. 
So who is the audience for this film? The way the story is told, a person
need not be familiar with nor even believe in the Biblical stories to be
moved by it. Younger children can sit through the film and not be fully
aware of the scope of the horrors being inferred. Inspiring and
transporting, _The Prince of Egypt_ is an experience believers and
non-believers alike should not miss.

Title
Review for Meet Joe Black (1998)
Here's how the story goes: Death decides to take a rare vacation on Earth,
using a sunny-blonde out-of-towner (Brad Pitt) as his corporeal vehicle. 
In exchange for a temporary extension on his life, wealthy tycoon William
Parrish (Anthony Hopkins) agrees to give Death, a.k.a. Joe Black, a tour
of humanity. The child-like -- and ironically angelic -- Joe eventually
finds himself head-over-heels in love with Susan Parrish (Claire Forlani),
putting the elder Parrish at odds with the daughter for whom he wants
nothing but the best (Imagine Dr. Kevorkian dating _your_ daughter). 
A pretty silly idea for a movie, isn't it?  To the contrary, the adult's
fairy tale _Meet Joe Black_ rises above the obvious pitfalls of its
premise to tell a thought-provoking and heart-warming story of deep
universal relevance.  
For once, Pitt is able to use his suave doofus persona to create a likable
character.  He and Forlani make a charged, intense on-screen couple.  More
central to the story is Hopkins' relationship with his daughters, which he
works to resolve before his impending demise.  As cliche as his
character's situation is, Hopkins great performance (one of his best since
_The Silence of the Lambs_) and writers Ron Osborne and Jeff Reno's
eloquent dialogue make all the difference in letting us forget that we've
seen this story many times before. 
At three hours, the film does carry a bit of a squirm factor, but
objectively, little could have been excised without changing the film's
impact.  If _Meet Joe Black_ moves at a glacially slow pace, it is because
there is so much to take in in every single shot (a Stanley Kubrick
influence, perhaps?). 
With its complicated lessons on family relations and the inevitability of
death, _Meet Joe Black_ resonates on a very personal level.  It is
definitely not a movie to go out and see with "the gang." Ideally, the
film should be viewed in a mostly empty theater, where the movie's
blissful quiet can invigorate you. 

Title
Review for Ronin (1998)
Review by Victory A. Marasigan
http://www.gl.umbc.edu/~vmaras1/reviewsidx.html
The Ronin were a group of shamed samurai in feudal Japan who sold their
services after the death of their slain master.  With _Ronin_ (**1/2),
director John Frankenheimer and writers J.D. Zeik and Richard Weisz
attempt a modern-day take on the concept, but whatever historical
comparison they intended to make seems to have been lost in all the noise
and spectacle of what is an otherwise enjoyable distraction of a movie. 
The Ronin in this tale are a group of mercenaries who have been assembled
to retrieve a silver suitcase somewhere in France.  The operatives are
strangers to each other and to their employer, and don't even know the
contents of the case they are chasing after.  This premise is intriguing,
but the movie quickly reveals itself for the high-class escapist junk
we've already seen in umpteen James Bond movies.
To make up for the deficits in character and plotting, Frankenheimer
throws in some excellent high-speed car chases, arguably the best thing
about the movie. The labyrinthine streets of France become the world's
biggest Hot Wheels Playset, complete with statuesque roundabouts, loopy
turns, and of course, bins full of seafood for the smashing. These
sequences, showcasing grand cityscapes and killer mountain roads, are
deftly executed adrenaline rushes, at least worthy of your local
second-run theater's admission price. 
It is to Robert DeNiro's credit that he is able to block our view of the
derivative story line on his own for about half an hour before we begin to
suspect something is afoot. As the shadowy soldier-of-fortune Sam, DeNiro
is charismatic and cool, able to assault someone with something as simple
as a strategically-placed cup of coffee.  By necessity and by design, Sam
assumes the role as the group's strategist, uniting the ragtag bunch into
a competent team.
The other Ronin are not quite as well-drawn.  Natascha McElhone (_The
Truman Show_), as a former terrorist, is the next most interesting member
of the group, displaying a dichotomy of toughness and sensitivity.  Actors
Sean Bean(_Goldeneye_) and Jean Reno (_The Professional_) fill out the
rest of the team with vivid, if routine, performances.  As their icy
nemeses, fine thespians Jonathan Pryce and Stellan Skarsgard seem to serve
no purpose except to stuff the roster with more actors with foreign
accents.  The film stifles the acting skills of most of its talent, then
commits the unforgivable offense of asking the audience to sit back and
accept the characters' lack of knowable motivation or sympathizability.
The writers have gone through the conceit of making their story as layered
as possible, but alas, the facade is all too transparent.  "Intelligent" 
appears to have been confused with "incomprehensible," as _Ronin_ jumps
from one scene to the next without quite making clear what was so
important about the scene before. The questions pile up, only to be wiped
away cleanly by another exhilarating car chase which literally kills off
those loose ends.  A warning to the unsuspecting movie-goer: any attempt
to sort out who is loyal to whom in this story may cause severe cerebral
hemorrhage.  Don't think.  Just wait for the car chases. 
Rather than give us too little opportunity for introspection (as is the
case in many modern films), _Ronin_ gives us too much, so that the overall
scheme of the film resembles nothing so much as a box bull of blank jigsaw
puzzle pieces. 

Title
Review for Prince of Egypt, The (1998)
NOTE: This review and an interview with Dreamworks SKG's Jeffrey
Katzenberg and the makers THE PRINCE OF EGYPT can be found at: 
http://www.gl.umbc.edu/~vmaras1/reviewsidx.html
The concept for DreamWorks SKG's _The Prince of Egypt_ doesn't
sound like subject matter ripe for the animated-movie treatment. The film
retells the Biblical story of Exodus, the same one told in DeMille's
expansive epic _The Ten Commandments_. A "cartoon" about plague and
pestilence, infant murders, and the drowning of hundreds of soldiers? Is
DreamWorks crazy?
Such reservations can thankfully be put to rest, because the resulting
film is one of the most touching and emotionally uplifting versions of the
story yet depicted. DreamWork's version of this oft-told tale offers a
vulnerable Moses, as compared to Charlton Heston's famous
chiseled-out-of-stone take on the character.  Gaunt and rather
unintimidating, this Moses (voiced by Val Kilmer) has the rebellious
demeanor and zeal that any young soul might have. 
The film's bold, sweeping opening sequence (underscored by the wondrous
choral cry "Deliver Us") shows us Moses' legendary beginnings, as his
desperate mother sends him adrift on the Nile to escape the Pharaoh's
(Patrick Stewart)  murderous soldiers. Ironically, this action brings the
Hebrew infant into the care of the Pharaoh's family. Raised like the
Pharaoh's own, Moses grows up unaware of his true heritage. He develops a
strong bond with the Pharaoh's son Rameses (Ralph Fiennes, in the most
convincing and heartbreaking of the film's characterizations). Moses' life
is turned on its end when, soon after being declared prince, he meets his
true siblings (voiced by Sandra Bullock and Jeff Goldblum), who reveal to
him his slave heritage. This truth is too much for the young man; without
explanation, he leaves his father's kingdom behind, unsure of his destiny. 
For the animators, envisioning a story set in ancient Egypt seems to have
been like discovering a treasure-filled mummy's tomb. The majestic
Egyptian city, with its oversize temples and skyscraping statues, looks
like an elaborate chessboard, with pieces which may have been laid there
by the hands of the Gods themselves. The rich color in the temples'
hypostyle halls, the painted limestone reliefs, the glare of the
unforgiving sunlight -- all details which pull us into the reality of that
beautiful place. 
Moses' journey eventually brings him into contact with God Himself, who
empowers him to return to his kingdom and let his people go. The miracles
Moses helps bring about, from the invasion of swarms of insects to the
fiery finger of God, dazzle with a beauty which is believable without
being photorealistic. And let's not forget _the_ miracle -- the parting of
the Red Sea -- which features astounding, breathtaking visual effects. 
Though Moses finds love and marriage in the desert, the film is really
more interested in the relationship between him and Rameses. The latter
experiences a tragic fall due to his own blindness, but his caring for his
brother remains solid throughout the film. And so, Rameses becomes one of
the most sympathizable "bad guys"  ever to be depicted in an animated
movie. 
So who is the audience for this film? The way the story is told, a person
need not be familiar with nor even believe in the Biblical stories to be
moved by it. Younger children can sit through the film and not be fully
aware of the scope of the horrors being inferred. Inspiring and
transporting, _The Prince of Egypt_ is an experience believers and
non-believers alike should not miss.
