Authors
Robert Dorsett
Number of Reviews
12

Title
Review for Family Business (1989)
     FAMILY BUSINESS stars Sean Connery as an elderly burglar in New York.
Dustin Hoffman appears as his estranged son, Dustin Hoffman, and Matthew 
Broderick as *his* son.
     The dynamics of the film are complicated.  Suffice it to say that
Connery's character is a professional burglar.  Hoffman's used to be one as
well, but  gave it up, in favor of "legitimate" business.  There is a conflict
between  father and son.  Broderick is portrayed as a smart kid who
mysteriously  drops out of a master's degree program--to "join the family
business."  His father isn't very happy about that, but his grandfather is
supportive.  The rest of the movie deals with a caper and the various conflicts
among the three men.
     This is a relatively serious movie, with good characterizations all
around.  It's the first "serious" film Connery's been in in a LONG time (he
tends to favor action/adventure films, which he invariably shines in).
Broderick is surprisingly good as the grandson.  Hoffman's well, Hoffman.
Everyone has a nasty side to himself: this isn't a gooey-feel-good Christmas
movie.
     Don't get the impression that this is another THE GREAT TRAIN ROBBERY.
(which was also a good movie)  It isn't.  

Title
Review for Fire Birds (1990)
     The previews of FIRE BIRDS make it out to be another TOP GUN: when
I first saw them, my reaction was "is that legal?"  The plots seemed to
be almost identical.  Well, I was wrong: the plots are slightly
different, and TOP GUN is the better movie.  I kid you not.
     FIRE BIRDS is a confused (or, in the words of one patron in the
audience, "stupid") movie that pitches AH-64 Apaches against the
Villain of the Week, the "drug cartel."  Its central characters are two
rather egocentric, immature men, one a pilot (played by Nicholas Cage),
the other his instructor (played by Tommy Lee Jones).  No, kids, Sean
Young doesn't play a terribly noteworthy role, except, perhaps, to give
women someone to identify with (I am starting to understand the bean
counters in Hollywood, and strongly suspect this to be the case).  All
three pilots are Good.  Damned Good.  The Best.  You know the type.
:-)
     The story (let's see if I got this right) has a group of Apache
pilots being trained to provide air support for a Gesta--uh, DEA, raid
against some kind of summit conference of Drug Lords.  Cage plays the
young bronco, Young the love interest.  Besides personality problems,
Cage has a problem flying with a night vision gizmo (which turns out to
be utterly irrelevant), and develops a competition of wits with his
instructor, who has just turned 40.
     The two bright spots in the movie are the character of Jones, as
well as his performance; and the nice photography.  Unlike TOP GUN, the
dogfights in this movie can actually be followed.  If one ignores the
absurdity of pushing the old Apache (or any helicopter) as a fighter
(the movie got extensive support from the Army and McDonnell Douglas, so
its PR aspect is undoubtedly well considered), most of the combat
sequences are pretty fun.
     Problem is, though, one has to wade through some of the stupidest,
corniest dialog of all time, in order to get to the good parts.  For
this reason, I give this movie a 6/10 rating.  
     In terms of letter grades, here's how it stocks against the other
"Summer Blockbusters" so far:
        CADILLAC MAN        C+
        FIRE BIRDS        C
        BIRD ON A WIRE        D
Some may question my assigning letter grades to these flicks, but this
*is* a competition to see who makes the most money, and grades *are* a
commonly-used means assigning relative standards of mediocrity.  :-) Not
even the shallowest movie-goer can call these Works of Art.  Although
some have tried their best-- a few on this very newsgroup!  :-) :-)
---
Robert Dorsett, disappointed in the summer's crop of movies so far.
Internet: rdd@rascal.ics.utexas.edu               
UUCP: ...cs.utexas.edu!rascal.ics.utexas.edu!rdd  

Title
Review for Bird on a Wire (1990)
     BIRD ON A WIRE is the latest star vehicle for Mel Gibson and Goldie
Hawn.  It features Gibson as Rick Jarmin; Hawn as his ex-wife*, Marianne
Graves.  To cut a very long, convoluted story short, Gibson's in the
Federal Witness  Protection Program.  He has been forced to transfer
from invisible job to invisible job over a fifteen-year period; part of
his cover has been to pretend that he's dead.  He runs into his wife
(who is now a high-powered attorney) one day, much to her surprise.
Coincidentally, someone who doesn't like him wants him dead, and spends
a great deal of time trying to do just that*.  Gibson is forced to use
her, and, in the ensuing chase, they get to rekindle their earlier
romance.
     The story is very, very weak, and has little more than Hawn looking
cute and Gibson posturing.  There are numerous allusions to Gibson's
gluteus maximus; it quickly gets boring after a while.  The rest of the
film amounts to gasoline explosions, car chases, lots of noise, the
inexplicable bad guys, and jokes about the conflict between Gibson's
working-class character and Hawn's refined character (And Guess What:
Love Triumphs!  SURPRISE!!!).  YAWN.
     There are numerous product placements: BMW, Four Seasons, Apple
(including an obscene user interface on a Mac; I don't know why Apple
let them do that--looks like a PC), etc.  I guess they didn't manage to
get an American Express or Visa endorsement, but every time Hawn says
"my gold card," her face is away from the camera--don't be surprised if
it's dubbed in when it comes out on video tape.  :-)
     If you want to see yet another film with Gibson as a Sex Symbol,
Hawn as a Giddy Flake, and Carradine as a Bad Guy with an Attitude, SEE
THIS MOVIE.  I, however, was bored out of my mind (and judging by all
the heads propped on hands near the end, everyone else was, too).  Skip
it: 5/10 (two stars).  It's worth about a buck: if you must see it,
catch it on cable or video.
     I may have been dozing, but didn't they technically say that Gibson
ran off at the altar?  If so, how could Hawn be the self-described
grieving widow (hotel scene)?  Am I missing something in their use of
idiom?
     And the entire premise of the the movie: why the hell were these
people after Gibson in the first place?  Why waste the time or effort?
And why would the people the ex-DEA people were doing a deal with want
Gibson dead?  The story has holes one can drive a truck through.  I can
buy Carradine's character wanting Gibson dead, but wasn't he just a
minion, and unlikely to sway the Organization to his point of view?
Revenge apart, why waste time on someone who ceased being a threat
fifteen years previously, and who obviously wants to be left alone (as
evidenced by the lack of contacts with the feds)?
     The flying scenes were stupid.  Enough said: the
real-plane/helicopter scenes were quite different from the flying
models.  When are filmmakers going to realize that models just don't
look like the the real thing?  I was interested to note, though, that
the helicopter had a G (Great Britain) prefix, while the airplane had
an N (American) prefix.  Where was this thing filmed?  
     The whole zoo scene was idiotic.  I kept on thinking: "Don't they
feed those animals?"  And why should the animals pass up fresh, bloody
bait (at the end) to continue to snap at Gibson dangling from the
foot-bridge?  And why would the animal go after Hawn's jacket, when she
throws it away, when it has a nice, plump side of meat in front of it?
:-)
     Lastly, the movie seems to be intended for television: virtually no
profanity, and surprisingly little physical violence.  Only one Good Guy
got waxed; the rest of the film showed Rick and Marianne being *very*
careful not to actually *hurt* the people who were trying to bury them.
Gibson as pacifist?  Yeeeesh...

Title
Review for Licence to Kill (1989)
     Timothy Dalton's back as James Bond, in what appears to be a mixture of
many plot elements from the *book* LIVE AND LET DIE, the movie THUNDERBALL, and
various "Miami Vice" episodes.
     The plot: Tragedy strikes Felix Leiter, the CIA agent who's helped out
Bond many a time (and who's undergone yet another facelift :-)).  The culprit
is a drug czar.  Bond goes on a revenge trip, accumulating an impressive body 
count along the way (remember, Bond has the license to *kill*, and he uses it 
liberally in this one).  In the process of his vendetta, the Secret Service 
disowns him, which makes for a renegade secret agent, and, for the first time
in the series' history, a plausible cover story.
     Story: mostly sound, almost even believable.
     Dialogue: I saw this at a college preview.  The audience appreciated some
intentionally corny lines.  I'm not sure how well the same lines would come
across in "real life."  "I love James so much"--this from a girl who barely
knows him...  :-)  (That particular scene was a throw-away.)  There are a lot
of very good wisecracks, as well as self-deprecating humor.
     Special effects: some pretty good ones, some very complex.  Unfortunately,
there are continuity problems on some of the more complex effects.
     Stunts: likewise, some very complex ones....
     Gore count: still cartoonland violence, but this flick has the highest 
casualty count in years.
     Characterization: Bond's drifting closer to the "book Bond" than even
Connery did.  He gets really bashed up in this one (although, unlike many a
Bond book, he doesn't end up in the hospital).  The villain's a suitable match
for him,  this time around.
     Product placement: didn't seem very conspicuous.  Of course, a Coast Guard
Dauphin II had a big "Aerospatiale" logo on the side of it, which I didn't
notice when I examined one fairly closely six weeks ago.... :-)  
     Gadgets: a few.  I get the impression that the gadgets were only
introduced to bring Q on the screen, who's an audience favorite.  It isn't
really a gadget movie, but they do use everyday household appliances (spear 
guns, lighters, airplanes, Stingers) in interesting ways...
     Overall review: one of the best adventure films this summer, and the best
Bond since THE SPY WHO LOVED ME.  Easily on a par with INDY III, and much
better than the summer disappointments (GHOSTBUSTERS II, STAR TREK V, BATMAN).
3 stars (out of four), or a 7.5/10 on the genre-sensitive scale.

Title
Review for Total Recall (1990)
     Arnold Swarzenegger stars as a rather mixed-up guy in the
somewhat-distant future.  The movie begins with him having a deep
hankering to go to Mars.  His wife isn't keen on the idea, so he settles
for something second-best--to have the *memories* of a trip to Mars
implanted in his brain.  He chooses the company's "Secret Agent" option;
the next thing we see is that the procedure goes wrong--he starts
playing the secret agent after getting doped up, but before the new
memories have been implanted.
     The rest of the film is more or less an action-adventure, with a
few plot twists (is it all a hallucination, or isn't it?) to spice
things up.
     As a science-fiction movie, all I can say is that I'm reminded of
the old actor's adage about Star Trek: it doesn't matter how
preposterous the story is, you've just got to *believe* in it.  The cast
here, by and large, does their best to make the movie fly.  The story,
though--let's face it--is preposterous (I was willing to buy the memory
bit, but the physics in the rest of the film ... yuck), and leans less
on science fiction than on pure fantasy.  The whole thing comes across
like a 50's/60's-era sci-fi flick, with many things not quite clicking
into place.  Even Swarzenegger's trademark humor is (intentionally?)
somewhat sterile, although there are some bright moments.  
     The flick sort of reminded me of Sean Connery's OUTLAND, which was
a far better movie, and made far better use of the cramped mining
town/oppressive environment gimmick.  Swarzenegger's last SF film,
PREDATOR, was a lot slicker.  This one, however, tries to be a
combination of both, with a bit of ROBOCOP (which I didn't care for) and
COMMANDO thrown in for good measure.
     There are product placements everywhere: Evian, Hilton, Heinz, Jack
in the Box, USA Today, and hundreds of others which I didn't catch.
They are all listed at the end of the film.  These are used, generally,
to provide "texture," but abnormally tilted labels always pisses me
off.  I've yet to see a kitchen in which all the shelves are piled up on
the counter, with every single label pointed straight at you.  :-)  If
one were cynical, one would find some pleasure in seeing these companies
portrayed in the way they were (Jack in the Box, for instance, is
located next door to a whorehouse; "Mars Today" is the organ of a
demagogue; the Hilton's the site of several shoot-outs and terrorist
incidents).  And I did.  :-)
Rating: 6/10, or a B- on the Summer Grading Scheme.

Title
Review for D.O.A. (1988)
     For those of you who sort of liked FRANTIC's idea (style, "normal guy in
jeopardy" plot), but didn't feel compelled to write in a story during the
boring execution of the film, the new movie, D.O.A., should be most welcome.  
     The story revolves around Dexter Cornell, portrayed by Dennis Quaid.  He
plays a burned-out English professor at a "large southern university" (the
movie was filmed in Austin, Texas).  Early in the film, he manages to swallow 
a rare, fatal, slow-acting (24-48 hours to live) poison ("phosphorous 
chloride") during a drinking binge.  To make it worse, his wife is murdered, 
and he's the prime suspect.  The rest of the movie is dedicated to him trying 
to figure out who's trying to ruin his day.
     D.O.A. succeeds everywhere that FRANTIC failed.  It has a good story.
Good pacing.  It has more sophisticated commentary and humor.  It has a much
more imaginative visual style.  Quaid, to me, is a much more believable
"everyman" than Ford (in this role, at least; I generally like Ford's
performances), and displays a greater acting range (ever notice how Ford seemed
to only have one expression--pained--during FRANTIC?).  In short, it's a true
mystery, rather than a travelogue.  We're given a cast of suspects, and are led
along a fairly logical process of deduction.  None of the fantastic gaps of
credibility that plagued FRANTIC (including the worst, that Ford's character
would "go out" on his own after such a short time).  My only gripe is that the
ending should have had more punch.  

Title
Review for Passenger 57 (1992)
     PASSENGER 57 stars Wesley Snipes as John Cutter, a
counter-terrorism expert.  After his wife is tragically killed in a
domestic crime incident he was involved in, and after blaming himself,
he resigns from the FBI (or Secret Service; not quite clear which), and
hires himself out as a security consultant "training night watchmen and
airline personnel," which everyone he knows considers a "loser" job;
everyone tries to convince him to go back to his old job.  Whatever.
     What's pertinent to the story is that the hero ends up on an
L-1011, which just so happens to be transporting a very dangerous
terrorist captive, by the name of Charles Rame.  Unfortunately, Rame's
gang is also on board the airplane, and *aren't* prisoners: the FBI
agents accompanying him are killed, and he hijacks the airplane.
Cutter jumps right into the situation, and starts fighting the
terrorists almost instantly.  They underestimate him ("just airline
security"), not knowing his past, and allow him to secure the lower
galley.
     So, how good's the movie?  Really neat premise, but it just doesn't
work.  Just no sense of tension or action; the plot's too methodical.
Only about a third of the movie occurs in the air.
     One has the drift of things to come when, after a fairly exciting
opening scene, they end it with a water truck going out of control, the
bottles falling down and bursting, disorienting the villain, and
allowing him to be captured.  Ooooooookay.
     The movie also suffers from continuity problems.  The captain's
killed early on (no spoiler, it's in the trailer), yet, later on, in a
landing scene, we see hands on the throttle from the *left*.  Hmm.  Next
time we see the F/O, he's still in the right seat; the captain's seat
(and his window) are covered in blood.  Hmm.
     The terrorists kill the security guards.  First one, then the
other.  Well, when the first one's getting offed, why does the other
have blood running down his head?  Then they switch camera angles and
show him getting killed, no blood.  Next cut: blood down the head.
- Why is it so important, at one point, to jump out the moving airplane?
  Why not wait until it stops and step out?  The characters involved had
  no reason to suppose they were in immediate danger.
- The blown-out window near the end.  Okay, the air goes out.  But why
  does the door on the other side buckle and get blown out?  What
  pressure differential can exist that would be any worse than a
  routine flight?  Metal fatigue?  Is the owner of the airline supposed
  to be Frank Lorenzo?  Why does it take so *incredibly* long for the
  airplane to depressurize, and why don't the combatants all pass out,
  or at least slow down because of hypoxia?
- This sounds bloodthirsty, but I'm amazed Snipes didn't kill more
  people.  Starts out against an unknown number of terrorists, and he's
  prancing around in these prolonged fight scenes, taking *prisoners*...
  Hmm...
- The ground scenes are remarkably absurd.  One gets no sense of the FBI
  people being in any way professionals: it's a filmmaker's concept:
  "What would *I* do if..."   And one gets the resulting impression of
  amateurism and incompetence.  Except for SNIPES, of course.  And the
  way he re-boards the airplane is absurd: "Commando" in reverse, if you
  follow my drift.
- Lastly, Cutter's background just isn't believable.  Are we to believe
  that this highly trained operative, *with* the drop on a criminal,
  *isn't* going to put a bullet in the skull of some thug holding his
  wife hostage, regardless of whether he's hold a gun to her head?
  Hmmmm...  Perhaps he's supposed to be an anti-hero...
     I stuck around for the credits, wondering who their consultants
were.  Nope.  No FBI consultants, nobody from Lockheed, no FAA, no
nuttin'.  Yet another frequent flyer's vision of aviation and terrorism.
     Acting?  Snipes isn't convincing in this role.  People call Seagal
a wooden actor; this guy's wooden.  Seagal's an Olivier next to Snipes.
The BAD guy, played by Bruce Payne, is nicely done (except for an
embarrassing scene with his lawyer).  Snipes just isn't up to his level
of menace.
     Just about the only original thing in this movie is that Cutter
*doesn't* have cute one-liners, ala Swarzenegger, after violent scenes.
The only relief is when the CEO of the airline comments on the
intelligence of the FBI: "Brilliant.  They take a dangerous, experienced
hijacker to trial in an airplane.  Why not a bus or train?"  :-)   Lots
of racial "sarcasm," such as the old woman who can't tell Blacks apart,
and confuses Cutter with Arsenio Hall; or the hick police from
Louisiana, who treat Cutter worse than the terrorists.
     Overall, this movie's very dull, which is a Bad Thing to say about 
adventure flicks.  It's also short (under 1:25).  It is *no* DIE HARD
aboard an airplane, nowhere near the rush of UNDER SIEGE.  If you
expect this movie to be similar to those, it isn't.  It's not even R
material: TV-movie stuff.  With such a subdued plot and violence factor,
one might suspect they're aiming for a *realism* effect, but it's
cartoonish, at best, a teenager's fantasy.
     Rating: 0 on the [-4,+4] scale, two stars, 5/10, etc.  Not a bad
movie, but definitely not a good one, standard formulaic fare.  Wait for
it to appear on TV (uncut!  :-)).  

Title
Review for Millennium (1989)
     MILLENNIUM starts with an incredibly fake model of a Boeing 747 skipping
the tops of clouds, bumping all over the place.  We go to the cockpit, where
the crew is drawling ATC clearances, and the captain, for some reason, so
senile that he's taking orders from his first officer.  Inexplicably, the
airplane has a mid-air with a DC-10.  On the way down, the flight engineer's
sent to the back.  He returns as promptly, shouting "The passengers are all
dead!"  And thus is the crux of the story.
     Kris Kristofferson plays the chief investigator for the National
Transportation Safety Board (NTSB).  You know he knows his stuff: he looks
unkempt, walks like he has more aches and pains than James Gardner, and growls
out the smallest line.  When he smiles, it looks like his face is going to
collapse from the effort.  Clearly an expert.
     As he investigates the crash, he discovers various oddities: watches that
run backwards, for example.  And a "thing" that manages to stun him.  
     Spoilers are at the end of this article.  The above makes the plot sound
pretty interesting, right?  *Wrong*.  This is a *horrible* movie.  The pits.
Pure, un- pretentious, regurgitated crap.  The acting sucks.  The direction
sucks.  The production values are non-existent.  The special effects are
laughable.  The dialog is lousy, fake, and contrived.  Technically, the
producers clearly haven't the foggiest idea of how the NTSB works
(Kristofferson to press conference: "We'll have our findings for you in a
couple of days, just hold your questions").  The thing which eventually gets
Kristofferson in hot water with his bosses in Washington is SOP for the "real"
NTSB.  Cheryl Ladd looks like a high-school girl who's just discovered makeup.
     Suffice it to say that this movie isn't worth seeing.  Five minutes into
it, I seriously debated running out and negotiating a ticket-swap with "The 
Package."  This movie is pure trash.  A zero rating (out of four).  An utterly
forgettable movie, one which I am embarrassed to even admit having spent the
time watching.  But even worse, since about a quarter of the movie is run
*twice*, in the form of an alternative-future flashback.  So we get to see the
same, horrible acting and implausible situations for *1/2 the running time of
the movie*.
     In other words, yes, folks, we finally have an SF flick this summer that's
worse (*much* *much* worse) than STAR TREK V (makes STV look like Academy Award
material, folks).
     The whole point about the movie is that there's this sort of commando team
from the future that runs about picking passengers off doomed airliners,
replacing them with dead bodies.  The idea's to "seed" them in the distance
past or far-off future.  A humanitarian effort, right?  Well, why do they even
bother?  If the passengers are seeded in the far-off future, they're just
fucking up someone *else*'s future.  And seriously, are airline crashes the
most significant tragedy that people 1000 years in the future will be concerned
about?   This is one hole the movie never overcomes.  Nor do they ever explain
why life is such hell in the year 3000.  Nor how the robot at the end is able
to get all misty-eyed and cry.  Now how these jokers are capable of producing
dead bodies that are *identical* with other people (without ever seeing the
subject), yet lack the technology to produce medicine.
     I could go on and on about the incredible conceptual problems in this
flick, but it's simply not worth it.  
Robert Dorsett 
Internet: mentat@walt.cc.utexas.edu
UUCP: ...cs.utexas.edu!walt.cc.utexas.edu!mentat

Title
Review for Hellraiser (1987)
     This review contains spoilers, but believe me, I don't say anything you
can't guess 10 minutes into the movie.
     I *did* go into this one with high expectations.  I had been exposed to
media reports that this film would signify a departure from the slasher flicks.
I sort of expected another EXORCIST or THE SHINING.  I even put aside my
general rule of not seeing this type of film.  Boy, was I wrong!  Another
garbage slasher flick, the only difference being that *this* one has a story!
     The story, you ask?  Well, a scumball buys a Chinese puzzle from a guy in
an Arab souk.  He takes it home, somehow getting it past Customs :-) and starts
fiddling with it in his attic.  Lo and behold, after he takes it apart, three
demons appear and start taking him apart, but with meat hooks.  When they're
finished, his gizzards are hanging from the ceiling.  They botch up their
cleanup job, however, and manage to leave his heart (or some gland; I didn't
really recognize the organ) under a floorboard.  The guy's brother and his
brother's wife appear at the door soon after, and decide to move in.  They
throw away Scumball's belongings, and set up house.  Turns out that Wife is a
bit of a nympho, and screwed around with Scumball right before her marriage.
She starts having some wild hallucinations.  Later, Hubby spills some blood on
the attic floorboards (slow-mo special effects of the buckets of blood hitting
the ground--all from the tiny cut on his hand).  Said blood is eagerly sucked
up by Scumball's Organ.  The Organ grows into a Thing that requires Yet More
Blood in order to complete the Regeneration into a Really Ugly Thing.  It
establishes mind contact with Wife, who agrees to help him get more blood,
because she really wants to be screwed again.  So, she helps him kill three
businessmen.  Scumball, at this time, gradually gets his strength back and
grows all his organs back.  Problem is, he doesn't have any skin, and even
after three or four corpses, still doesn't get any skin.  He finally gets
some, though, but strangely enough, he ends up looking like his brother.
Guess they couldn't get the original actor back.  Who knows.
     Scumball (whose name is Frank) is not a nice guy.  He describes his
torture by the demons fondly, as the "ultimate pleasure and pain, since at that
level there is no difference between the two."  Somehow, I don't see getting
torn apart by 90 fish- and meat-hooks a lot of fun.  This guy is *so* bad ("How
bad *is* he?"), *so* bad that the *rats* cower in a corner in fear.  For good
reason, too; he crucifies two of them for fun, and carves a third while the
Nympho's horsing around with Hubby.
     Anyway.  Hubby's Daughter (who, if course, is not *WIFE'S* daughter)
starts to suspect something is wrong after she sees Wife going into the attic
with one of her johns and the ensuing screams.  The dumb bimbo meets Scumball,
and is not impressed.  She manages to escape with the Chinese Puzzle, and 
brings out the demons.
     At any rate, the demons are pissed off that they screwed up their cleanup;
they're normally quite meticulous about that type of thing.  The story boils
down to the demons trying to correct their mistake.  The demons are not,
however, the good guys.  The dumb bimbo's the good guy.  She somehow not only
gets them to take care of Frank, but also banishes them to Hell or oblivion,
we're not too sure which.  Not too shabby for someone with single-digit IQ.
     This is basically a "bad jinn" story.  It is an *awful* movie.  Awful
acting, bad focus in the photography, many scenes of skin being penetrated by
meathooks, which is really unrealistic, and looks like the latex that it is.
Continuity?  Who cares.  Acting?  *Terrible*.  Script?  Horrible.  Sounds
canned.  Unrealistic.  Story is so-so, but the impact is lost long, long before
the film ends.
     I do think the *rat* acting was quite good.  I have never seen rats look
afraid.  They should get nominated for an award.  Really good acting there, the
best in the movie.  "The envelope for Best Furry Rodent, please..."
     A "one star out of four" rating would be far too generous.  A "1/10"
rating (or -4 in the -4 to +4 rating system) is far more accurate.  This movie
is so bad that people in the audience were laughing, chortling at the bad
acting and crummy dialog.  I can see this film turning into the next ROCKY
HORROR PICTURE SHOW.  People were getting so fed up they were yelling warnings
up to the characters on the screen.  Had to have something to do.  Dumb, dumb,
dumb movie.   I was embarrassed that I spent money to see it.
     It goes without saying that I disagree with the other reviews on the board
that attempt to review the film for itself.  Lots of slime and red-dyed corn
syrup does not constitute "horror," in my opinion.  

Title
Review for Rapid Fire (1992)
     Spoilers follow, mainly for those who have *never* seen a movie of
this type, before.  But if you're that young, you shouldn't see this
thing, anyway, so..:-)
     The hype surrounding RAPID FIRE has been unbelievable.  "Brandon
Lee better than his father!"  "Brandon Lee charismatic!"  "Watch out Van
Damme!"  Blah blah blah.
     It's all BS.  Why?  Because, unlike his father, and unlike other
"minor-league" action leads, such as Norris, Van Damme, Lundgren,
etc--Brandon has no screen presence.  He has no charisma.  He is not a
leading man.  And, worse still, rather than being violent, macho, a
personality someone might even respect, he comes across as *creepy* and
violent.  If he has any future in the movies, he might well work as a
villain, but a leading man, he isn't.
     What makes this even worse is that the bad guys, played by Nick
"Stingray" Mancuso, and Tao Lzu, chewed up every single scene they were
in.  By the end, we're really rooting for the bad guys, more than the
good guys.  Let the man with any semblance of character, win.  
     In fact, come to think of it, we rarely see Lee in the same frame
with *any* other actor.  There's a reason: he turns into wallpaper.
     (Note, however, that I'd never say any of this to his face, since
he does seem to have some very nicely choreographed moves :-))
     And then there's the story.  I don't know about the rest of you,
but I'm getting distinctly bored with movies of this type--buddie
flicks, set in Chicago, with a Horner/clone sound-track, and wet city
streets.  They're all the same, they're all fake, they're all
implausible, and they're all *boring*.  And we seem to get about half a
dozen a year.  I don't think that Hollywood's ever dipped into a single
formula as extensively as this type of movie, which emerged over the
last ten years.  Even more than Siskel & Ebert's peeve against "buddy
movies," "wet city streets" is becoming a sure tip-off of abject
mediocrity.
     RAPID FIRE starts out in (apparently) Thailand, in an interesting
setting-- a river transfer point, which we're expected to believe is in
the Golden Triangle, and the base of Tao's headquarters.  Based on that
scene, this movie *could* have worked as an equivalent crime drama in,
say, Bangkok, letting the "environment" outweigh the preposterousness,
but a movie like this has no budget to do a movie like that.
     Basic story.  Mancuso plays an over-the-hill US crime boss.  He
visits Tao in his layer, to borrow money, get a piece of his action.
Most of his men are in jail, and he can't hold his own, any more.  Tao
was a messenger, who has now made it REAL big.  In the process of
asking, he humiliates Tao, in front of his men, but for some
inexplicable reason, is allowed out with his life.  Well, okay.  
     Cut back to the US.  Lee plays the son of a US Army intelligence
agent who got run over by a tank at Tiananmen.  He's now a cynical art
student, avoiding political causes.  He's tricked to go to a political
fund-raiser, which happens to be sponsored by a prominent regional
distributor.  While there, that smuggler is axed by Mancuso, who Lee
sees.  Mancuso then decides that he *must* kill Lee, the mistake of his
life.  And it goes on and on.
     - Why does Lee like to play with his victims, before killing them?
       'Tisn't very plausible most of the time: the forces of darkness
       descending upon him, bullets all over the place, and he's
       playing kung fu with some poor soul.  If they're gonna make it
       plausible, at least make the other guy a reasonable opponent: if
       a "fist-of-death" hit *hits*, the other guy's going down.  Spare
       us the gymnastics: that's once nice aspect of Chuck Norris's
       movies--they've never really had the dancing (except for reverse
       roundhouse kicks, of course :-)), but they're slightly more
       plausible because of that.
     Overall, by about hour into the movie, I was starting to feel
distinctly uncomfortable about having wasted my matinee dough to see
this thing.  At the end, I was embarrassed.  And I *like* dumb action
flicks!
     This movie is so bad, and so cliche-ridden, that it deserves no
consideration; the only reason I'm reviewing it is to save other people
the pain of seeing it.  One star: don't even waste money for it on
video.  See it on an airplane.  Don't rent the headsets.  See
UNFORGIVEN, the best movie of the year, instead.
     Incidentally, there were *five* people in the audience, including
myself.  In past weeks, I've seen UNFORGIVEN, and was dragged to THE
THREE NINJAS.  UNFORGIVEN was *packed*, on the same day and time; THREE
NINJAS was half full.  This movie smells like a *bomb*.  Perhaps Bruce
Lee's been dead too long for Junior to ride on his father's coat-tails;
as a nephew said, "Bruce who?  Was he like Van Damme?"

Title
Review for Dracula (1992)
     Gary Oldman stars as the vampire, who's been simmering away in his
castle for several hundred years.  He invites Jonathan Harker (Keanu
Reeves) to his castle in Transylvania, to sign and deliver a real estate
deal: the count wants to move to London (happy hunting grounds?).  While
Harker is there, the Count learns of the existence of Mina (Winona
Ryder), who is Harker's fiance, but who also bears an uncanny
resemblance to the count's betrothed, who died in tragic circumstances,
several hundred years earlier.  The count feels his  destiny drawing him
to London; the rest of the movie revolves around (a) his attempts to
seduce Mina, (b) the vampire-killer Van Helsing's (Anthony Hopkins)
attempts to find and kill him, (c) Harker's attempts to escape from the
er, vamps holding him in the castle, and (d) a major plot-crisis
involving Mina's somewhat ah, flirtatious friend, Lucy.
     Before proceeding, let me confess that I've never read Stoker's
novel, which the hype says this movie is faithful to.  Maybe it is,
maybe it isn't.  I don't know.  I have seen just about all the *movies*,
though, my favorite of which, by far, is the Frank Langella version.
Just so you know where I'm coming from.
     So, does this one work?  Not really.  It's an attractive movie, but
very choppy; several audience members confessed to some confusion, after
it, as to what they had just seen.  Some scenes are just plain BAD
(especially the opening scenes introducing Mina and Lucy), so contrived
that it's embarrassing to see them included.
     I didn't see much in this movie that lived up to its hype (net or
otherwise).  When I think "Dracula," I think three things: "tragedy,"
"love story," and "horror," in about that order.  This movie reversed
the priority, and didn't really make much of the first element, until
the *very* end.
     I would suggest that for a Dracula movie to work, you have to have
a sympathetic vampire.  And this vampire wasn't sympathetic.  By playing
up the horror, they had to de-humanize the vampire: the movie deals more
with Mina than Dracula.  And Mina's a fairly one-dimensional character.
     The problem is, the horror didn't really work: it was more
repulsive than frightening; Lucy wasn't a particularly endearing
character to get worked up about, and Mina was a tad bit whiny; Harker's
exploits were of interest, but his eventual escape just wasn't terribly
believable.  Even Hopkins's Van Helsing fell flat, his flippant remarks
in "polite" company about chopping off heads and removing hearts quickly
becoming old (very nice sense of menace, though, as to what he MIGHT do
if the various characters didn't answer his casual questions in just the
right way).  Perhaps I'm getting old, but I'm just not impressed by
crosses spurting blood, or latex masks, anymore: effective horror
movies, to me, emphasize the monsters *within* men (or women).
     The music is monotonous, and doesn't help the story along any: this
is an opera, but only has episodic theme music.
     How about the cinematography?  It is unique; I'll give it that, and
often visually attractive.  Did it help the story along, any?  Not
reaaaaally.  
     Acting?  I don't see why people are commenting about Reeves: he was
perfectly adequate for the part.  Hopkins was interesting, but a bit
flat.  Oldman had a great deal of fun as Dracula, but, again, failed to
convey that essential "something" to divide our loyalties between him
and the "good guys."
     So what did this movie add to the canon?  Namely: the nature of
Dracula's fall from grace, and his intense interest in Mina.  Dracula is
also explicitly identified as Vlad the Impaler (the "Draculs" were a
line of "defenders of Christianity," who were "betrayed" by the church).
The aggressiveness of Mina's behavior late in the movie was of interest,
but the metaphysical relationship between her and her predecessor (and
why she apparently *rationally* found the vampire so interesting) was
not well established.  Of particular interest is how Vlad's trial as a
vampire ultimately ends in absolution, thus giving a meaning, of sorts,
to all the madness...
     It is worth seeing.   The second half is much better than the first
half; if the quality of the last 30 minutes had been sustained for the
rest of the movie, this would be very good, indeed.  2.5 stars (out of
four), +1 on the [-4,+4] scale, a 5 on the 0-10 scale.  Catch it
matinee.

Title
Review for Cadillac Man (1990)
     CADILLAC MAN stars Robin Williams as Joey O'Brien, a car salesman
in New  York.  The first third of the film documents his various
personal problems: he's juggling relationships with four women, owes a
mobster $20,000, and will lose his job the next day, unless he sells
twelve new cars.  He is eventually put in a situation in which he'll
have to reverse his losing streak, or he'll lose his life.
     The movie sounds trite, and it is, to a degree.  It's essentially
yet another platform for Williams to strut his stuff (and is vaguely
reminiscent of GOOD MORNING, VIETNAM).  The principal gag is that Joey
can argue himself out of anything, but life is conspiring to make it all
an up-hill battle.  The production quality, however, raises it out of
the gutter: it has a good supporting cast, and isn't *quite* as
clear-cut as the advertisements make out.
     There are a number of good gags, both subtle and overt.  It won't
have people rolling in the aisles, but it has its moments.  I'd give it
a 6/10, or three stars.  It's a "feel-good," Christmassy sort of flick.
It won't be the blockbuster of the summer, but then again, films
released in mid-May rarely are.
