Authors
Stuart Cracraft
Number of Reviews
3

Title
Review for Contact (1997)
'Contact' shows why Jodie Foster is one of our best actresses.
See Contact with your family. It is a movie for all ages.
After a predictable MIT Phillip Morrison powers-of-10 zoom-out start
(which can be surprising to those not familiar with Prof. Morrison's
work), Contact picks up steam, gradually, building, by-the-end, an
irresistable juggernaut and a very good movie that does not as is so
often the case fall out-of-balance in terms of too much pandering to
the technological "geek" side.  By the end, the audience is left with
what good science fiction is supposed to do: evoke a sense of wonder
about the universe and evoke questions in your mind about what's out
there.
This movie does not let technology overshadow characterization and in
this sense it is unusual amongst high-tech movies. However, except for
Jodie Foster (Elie Arroway) and John Hurt (S.R. Hadden), who are both
actors of exceptional caliber, the supporting cast are not especially
impressive.  Hurt certainly has had better roles (Stephen Ward in
Scandal). This one, as the multi-billionare Hadden, does not do his
acting skills justice.
This is clearly a Foster movie by one of the great Hollywood lights of
our generation.  Foster's radiance has never been more strong than in
the scene where she finally meets the Vegans on their terms. Early
scenes take a long, long time to build up to this. The movie's pacing
is very good and subtle. The panoramas of the radio dishes at Arecibo
and CETI in New Mexico and Puerto Rico are beautiful.  The politics of
Foster's character attempting to obtain funding for research at these
places are trite and predictable however.
One of the most entertaining, but very short scenes, is when Foster is
confronted by Rob Lowe, during a cabinet-level presidential meeting to
discuss the alien invitation. There were real sparks in this scene
between Foster and Lowe and it would behoove them to consider other
vehicles in which this dynamism could be explored. It is the only
scene in the movie in which there were tremendous dynamics between two
characters. Everything else was very one-sided (e.g.  Foster).  Lowe
can stand up to Foster and it showed in that scene at the cabinet
table.
The core scene of the movie is set on a surrealistic beach on a
far-away world in the starsystem of Vega. It feels a lot like science
fiction writer John Varley's scenes in his book STEEL BEACH, where the
female protagonists encounters an immensely superior intelligence, in
one case a computer manufactured by mankind itself, and in Foster's
case, an illusion drawn from her memory.  In another sense, this
immensely moving scene evokes Gene Roddenberry's STAR TREK pilot The
Cage, later The Menagerie, when Jeffrey Hunter and Susan Oliver have
their memories manipulated to create new worlds in which they live and
encounter aliens.
The concept is not new, by any sense, in the world of science
fiction. But the beach scene, which is the centerpiece of the film, as
is the whole film, is driven by Foster. Freed from her needs to direct
by director Zemecki, Foster is able to let it all hang out in the
characterization and the lead she provides to her supporting cast. As
the movie gains speed, Foster's acting intensifies and the audience
really does experience it with her. It is certainly Oscar-caliber
acting, unquestionably.
The supporting cast does well and Zemeckis throws in some humor with
some President Clinton cameos, cleverly manipulated, George
Stephanopolus-style, to seem very Forrest Gump. In fact, Zemeckis
et. al. got in trouble for the usage of some of the footage seen in
the movie, vis a vis Clinton. But the audience I attended this movie
with just had some good chuckles at Clinton's walk-ons.
The much-discussed tension between science and religion in this movie
is not particularly insightful to those who have already gone through
this course though it is helpful to those in the audience who have
not. Also, the near-final scene, in a Senate Judiciary Hearing room is
disappointing.
Contact is a fitting memorial to the memory of Carl Sagan, science
popularizer, and sometime pedantic gadfly of the halls of
academe. Perhaps now, Sagan can be said to be with his Dragons of
Eden.

Title
Review for Full Metal Jacket (1987)
     FULL METAL JACKET is a disappointment.  After a rabble-rousing first 5-10
minutes, the absurdly funny drill sergeant becomes repetitive and boring.  The
portrayal of a young, overweight recruit's difficulty in fitting in is
interesting at first, but by the time all his comrades beat him senseless with
towels-wrapped-with-soap, it becomes quite clear what Kubrick is trying to tell
us about life and people.  This viewpoint is strongly echoed in the last few
minutes of the film (see below).
     The fat recruit goes nuts (who blames him?), and drills his drill sergeant
with a .22 caliber, and then drills himself.  What do we learn?  A mercilessly-
persecuted human finally takes the ultimate trip, a murder-suicide.  Is this
surprising or revealing of human nature?
     The critical scene in this movie occurs in a large, abandoned structure
which hides a sniper.  The sniper gradually picks off the platoon's members
one-by-one as they enter.  Finally ensnared, the sniper reveals herself as a
pretty, young Vietnamese girl, who begs the platoon members to kill her.  The
young Vietnamese girl I saw this movie with commented: "They show all the bad
things about Vietnam, and little of the good."
     Kubrick's vision of war and humanity is certainly strongly anti-war, but
as usual with Kubrick, it may be anti-human too.  Kubrick has never directed
people well, save for LOLITA and the movies before it.  Ever since LOLITA, his
movies have painted humanity as a depraved, scared bunch of individuals
unwilling to stand firm and take responsibility.  If Kubrick could once portray
an individual showing the self-same responsibility that Kubrick himself shows
in molding his own movies to perfection, then we would know what the heights of
human endeavor could achieve.  We await such a character in Kubrick's movies.

Title
Review for Koyaanisqatsi (1983)
     (This is a Francis Ford Coppola presentation, produced and directed by
Godfrey Reggio, music by Philip Glass, cinematography by Ron Fricke.)
     This film is a visually dazzling, audio-inspiring, vaguely anti-war
statement.  It is pretty transparent, and I knew we were in trouble about 10
minutes into this film when it switched from beautiful nature landscapes to
big, ugly man-made machines.
     So, the director chose to portray man in an essentially negative light.
No one is happy in this film.  Lots of H-bombs blow up in between the pretty
pictures of time-lapse photography.
     At the very end, when the credits are finished, we find out it is "An Ire
Production".  Tsk, tsk.  There's little quite so irritating as video morality
and video political left-wing leanings.
     Also, it falls into the Lucas-trap of edits that are so fast, one hardly
has a chance to choose to accept or reject the images being flooded into the
audience's mind.  In this respect, it is a film meant for non-thinkers.
