Authors
Joe Blenkle
Number of Reviews
5

Title
Review for Independence Day (1996)
     If you can suspend all common sense for the two hours and 17
minutes that INDEPENDENCE DAY runs, you'll be in great shape, but if
you're one of those moviegoers who looks for things wrong with films,
plots and everything else, you'll probably have a field day with this
movie.
     I am one of those who goes to a film to be entertained (i.e. -
film reviewer), not a person who looks for things wrong or wonders
what signifigance a lamp has sitting on a table (i.e. - film critic),
and INDEPENDENCE DAY is a terrific film if you can suspend all belief
in reality.
     As the film is brand new to theaters across the country, I don't
want to give too much away, but some of the things that happen in this
film are too unbelievable if you think about them for too long. But
the wonderful thing about INDEPENDENCE DAY is that the movie doesn't
give you a chance to think about anything for too long as it is an
edge-of-your-seat thriller all the way through.
      You may find yourself pondering later on, however, how an Air
Force pilot learns to pilot an alien ship in a matter of hours or how
a woman survives a firestorm rushing through a tunnel by hiding in a
small room as the fire rushes by outside. At the very least she should
have suffocated as the fire consumed all the oxygen, or been
incinerated by the intense heat only a few feet away. There are many
of these insults to common sense throughout the film, but they are
easily overlooked due to the intense action throughout the film.
     By now everyone has heard what INDEPENDENCE DAY is all about.
There has been a lot of pre-release hype and for once the film
actually lives up to its fantastic billing.
     The cast list is impressive with a lineup including Will Smith,
Bill Pullman, Jeff Goldblum, Mary McDonnell, Judd Hirsch, Randy Quaid,
Robert Loggia and Brent Spiner.
    I have never really been a fan of Goldblum's, but this film did a
lot to change that. The whole cast does an excellent job holding your
attention throughout the movie, especially Smith and later in the
film, Goldblum.
   Spiner's character was somewhat wasted, however, playing a crazed
scientist-type in charge of the government's alien research project.
Fortunately the audience didn't have to endure his part for very long.
   The special effects in INDEPENDENCE DAY are fantastic, especially
the fireball sequences where buildings are blown apart and early in
the film when the alien ships come rolling in engulfed in clouds of
fire.
   There are enough narrow escapes in this film to last you well into
next year and an equal number of little twists and turns in the plot
that will keep you guessing until the very end. INDEPENDENCE DAY even
has its little bits of comedy which will keep you off balance and
never knowing what to expect next.
     I've heard this film described as a cross between STAR WARS, TOP
GUN and WAR OF THE WORLDS - and it's every bit that and more.
     The lines are probably going to be long throughout the summer for
this film, but INDEPENDENCE DAY is one movie that is well worth the
wait.
     INDEPENDENCE DAY is a 20th Century Fox presentation starring
Will Smith, Bill Pullman, Jeff Goldblum, Mary McDonnell, Judd Hirsch,
Randy Quaid, Robert Loggia and Brent Spiner. Directed by Roland
Emmerich. Produced by Dean Devlin. Executive Producer is Roland
Emmerich, Ute Emmerich and William Fay. Screenplay by Dean Devlin and
Roland Emmerich. Release date: July 2, 1996. Running time: 137
minutes.
This review, photos, upcoming attractions, links and more can be found
on my movie review web page at:
http://www.calweb.com/~jblenkle/movies - stop by and visit!
Guest reviews welcomed - email me at jblenkle@calweb.com

Title
Review for First Wives Club, The (1996)
Funny, funny, funny! Paramount's new comedy "The First Wives  Club" is
a well-rounded outing that has a little bit of everything.
Not only is it a very funny movie, it has its touching moments, a
little bit of drama, and lots of hijinx that will keep you in stitches
for the entire length of the film.
"The First Wives Club" stars Bette Midler as Brenda, Goldie Hawn as
Elsie, and Diane Keaton as Annie, three life-long friends that have
drifted apart in their years since college.
The trio is brought back together by the tragic suicide of another
friend, who despite her great wealth suffered from a failed marriage
and an unhappy, lonely life.
The "girls" find they have more in common with their departed friend
than they'd like to admit. Despite Brenda's loving son, Elsie's career
as an actress, and Annie's seemingly happy marriage and life as a
housewife, all three discover after a night of drinking that they are
all miserable.
Brenda and Elsie's husbands have dumped them for younger women and
Annie is soon to discover that husband Aaron's (Stephen Collins) night
on the town is only a gentle way of breaking the news to her that he
wants a divorce.
The girls ban together to form  "The First Wives Club" to hand a
little bit of misery back to their ex-husbands.
Brenda schemes to get the "goods" on ex-husband Morty's (Dan Hedaya)
selling stolen goods in his electronics store; Elsie is ordered to
liquidate all her and Bill's (Victor Garber) possessions and split the
money. She sells them to Annie for a dollar. Annie auctions them off
to raise enough money to buy her husband's advertising firm out from
underneath him.
The girls definitely get the goods on the guys with hilarious results.
The film also stars Sarah Jessica Parker as Shelly, a dim-wit blonde
who has taken up with Morty; Bronson Pinchot plays Duarto, an interior
decorator friend of Brenda; and Elizabeth Berkley (Phoebe) stars as
Bill's new (and not known to him - underage) love interest.
"The First Wives Club" is a Paramount Pictures presentation produced
by Scott Rudin and Directed by Hugh Wilson. Screenplay by Robert
Harling.
--
This review, photos, upcoming attractions, links and more can be found
on my movie review web page at: http://www.calweb.com/~jblenkle/movies
- stop by and visit! Guest reviews welcomed - email me at
jblenkle@calweb.com

Title
Review for Bordello of Blood (1996)
 I wasn't too excited about the first "Tales From the Crypt" movie -
Demon Knight. That's why the latest installment - Tales From the
Crypt: Bordello of Blood was a surprise to me. I've never been a real
"Crypt" fan with the goofy ghoul "The Cryptkeeper" who introduces each
tale, a little too much for my tastes.
Fortunately in this movie his parts were held to a minimum and were
much better done than in the first movie. But the real surprise in
this movie was a halfway interesting story that was entertaining in
spots, as well as funny.
Of course a big part of this was due to the fact that it starred
Dennis Miller, who spent six years honing his comedy skills on
"Saturday Night Live." Miller's part of Rafe Guttman, a down and out
private investigator, made the film. I don't think this role would
have worked without him.
Tales From the Crypt: Bordello of Blood is simply dumb fun, but it is
well done dumb fun. Of course with "Bordello" in the title, one can
expect nudity - and you won't be disappointed - but surprisingly none
of it is by lead actress Erika Eleniak, who has bared it all in
Playboy and appeared in a number of movies including Under Siege, A
Pyromaniac's Love Story, and The Beverly Hillbillies. Eleniak plays
Katherine Verdoux, an assistant to TV bible thumper Reverand Current
(Chris Sarandon) and Guttman's prospective love interest in the movie.
To briefly outline the plot, after Verdoux's punker borther Caleb
(Corey Feldman) disappears, she hires Guttman to find him and the pair
track him to a funeral home that is really a bordello - filled with
vampires - including evil personified in Lilith (Angie Everhart), an
ancient blood-sucker who will stop at nothing to get what she
wants.
The movie becomes too predicatble of course, for anyone who watched
the "Crypt" shows on TV. The good guys win, the good guys lose, the
good guys win...or did they? It's still fun though and Miller has got
some great lines in the movie that has the audience just short of
rolling in the aisles. 
Be warned, however, there is lots of blood and gore, including ripping
hearts and other assorted body parts out of bodies. But for you
conniseurs of beautifil and scantily clad women, there is also a
liberal dose of them in the movie.
Again, if you're looking for just dumb fun, this movie is for you, but
otherwise wait for it to come out on video. It's fun enough to watch a
few times and may make a worthwhile addition to your collection.
Tales From the Crypt: Bordello of Blood is a Universal Pictures
presentation Dennis Miller, Erika Eleniak, Angie Everhart, Chris
Sarandon, Corey Feldman, William Sadler and John Kassier (voice of the
Crypt Keeper). Produced and Directed by: Gilbert Adler. Screenplay by
A.L. Katz and Hilbert Adler. Running time: 87 minutes.
--
This review, photos, upcoming attractions, links and more can be found
on my movie review web page at: http://www.calweb.com/~jblenkle/movies
- stop by and visit! Guest reviews welcomed - email me at
jblenkle@calweb.com

Title
Review for Mars Attacks! (1996)
Almost predictably so, MARS ATTACKS!, a new film by Tim Burton and
Warner Brothers Pictures is dumb and mindless, but to such an extent
that the film is really funny.
Basically the premise behind the movie is that a bunch of little green
men with very large heads decide that they like Earth a whole lot
better than Mars and set out to conquer the planet. 
MARS ATTACKS! is actually based on a set of trading cards that were
released for a short run in 1962. Due to the horrifying images on some
of these cards, they were pulled from the stores and vending machines
after only a few months. I personally remember these cards as a kid
and they scared me to death!
Fortunately, "MARS ATTACKS!" takes a lighter approach to the alien
invasion theme and although some of the scenes might scare the younger
children, they by in large are more humorous than anything else.
The film is headlined by an all-star cast including the likes of Jack
Nicholson (as the President), Martin Short, Pierce Brosnan, Sarah
Jessica Parker, Michael J. Fox, Danny DeVito, Glenn Close and Tom
Jones.
"MARS ATTACKS!" clearly spoofs some of the great old science fiction
"B" films, as well as some of the newer releases. 
SF aficionados will clearly see a lot of elements from that classic
EARTH VS. THE FLYING SAUCERS as well as the more recent INDEPENDENCE
DAY. But the silliness of the film is still its main attraction.
After a fleet of flying saucers is seen heading toward Earth, it's
marked as either the greatest event civilization has ever known or a
precursor to impending doom.
A meeting is set up between the aliens and representatives of the
United States, at which time the alien ambassador and his guards open
fire on the thousands of people gathered at a remote desert site.
The President (Nicholson) thinks this may have just been a "cultural
misunderstanding," so he beam a message into space inviting the aliens
back. They come back to address Congress and offer an apology, at
which time they again open fire, wiping out most of the legislative
branch of the U.S. government.
It finally sinks in that these aliens aren't nice guys and it's Earth
vs. Mars in an all-out war of the worlds.
I don't want to give too much of this film away because half the fun
is seeing it on the screen and not quite knowing what to expect next.
The special effects in the movie are very well done and the actors put
in a superb performance fighting little green men and spaceships that
weren't actually there. The Martians were created as three-dimensional
computer generated characters by Industrial Light and Magic, which has
previously done the effects on movies like TERMINATOR 2: JUDGEMENT
DAY, FORREST GUMP, and JURASSIC PARK.
"I was very lucky to have such great actors working against imaginary
green men," says Burton, whose credits also include PEE-WEE'S BIG
ADEVENTURE, BEETLEJUICE, BATMAN, and ED WOOD. "That was the most
surreal thing. All of these great actors came in, and they basically
reverted to play-acting. They all got into the spirit of it and it was
a joy to watch them."
If you are a sci-fi fan in general, the movie may leave you with a bad
taste in your mouth. But if you're a fan of all those old "B"
science-fiction movies from the 40s and 50s, you'll love the look of
MARS ATTACKS!. It's just dumb enough to work and just good enough to
hold your interest, although some of the scenes are a little slow
developing and leave you wishing they'd get on with it.
MARS ATTACKS! runs 105 minutes and is rated PG-13. The film stars:
Jack Nicholson, Glenn Close, Annette Benning, Pierce Brosnan, Danny
DeVito, Martin Short, Sarah Jressica Parker, Michael J. Fox, Rod
Steiger, Tom Jones, Lukas Haas, Natalie Portman, Jim Brown, Lisa Marie
and Sylvia Sidney (most of whom are disinigrated at various points in
the movie). Directed by Tim Burton. Produced by Tim Burton and Larry
Franco. Screen Story and Screenplay by Jonathan Gems.
This review, photos, upcoming attractions, links and more can be found
on my movie review web page at: http://www.calweb.com/~jblenkle/movies
- stop by and visit! Guest reviews welcomed - email me at
jblenkle@calweb.com

Title
Review for Hercules (1997)
    Okay, I'll admit right up front that it's hard not to be biased in
my review of Walt Disney's 35th full-length animated feature -
HERCULES.
    Over the past few months I have become acquainted with one of the
stars of the film - Meg (better known as Susan Egan). 
    Susan is also better known in another Disney role , as she played
(and originated) the role of Belle in the Broadway stage production of
BEAUTY AND THE BEAST.
    I am also proud to run the Official Susan Egan Fan Page (see link
below), where fans can see the many things Susan has done in an
unbelievably short amount of time.
    But back to the present. HERCULES opens today (June 27) in
theaters nationwide and Disney fans are going to be pleasantly
surprised at this film.
    For me personally, I felt HERCULES fell a little short of other
recent Disney outings like ALADDIN and BEAUTY AND THE BEAST, but it
still holds the magic that all Disney classics do.
    The only real shortcoming of the film is that it didn't have
nearly enough singing by our beloved Meg. Susan had only one featured
song in the movie, "I Won't Say," which is a true pleasure to listen
to as she sings about her feelings toward Hercules and her disbelief
that she is falling for him.
    The movie itself is great. Hercules (Tate Donovan) is portrayed in
this film a little differently than told in ancient mythology, but the
general idea is the same. Part god and part mortal, Hercules sets
out to be a "true hero," the only way he can earn his way back to
Mount Olympus.
    But Hades (James Woods) has other plans. He is planning a hostile
takeover over Mount Olympus and he has been advised by the Three Fates
that only Hercules will stand in his way. 
    He dispatches his bumbling henchmen Panic (Matt Frewer) and Pain
(Bobcat Goldthwait) to kidnap the baby Hercules from Mount Olympus,
take him to Earth, give him a potion to make him mortal and then do
away with him.
    They only partially succeed, giving him all but a drop of the
potion which turns him mortal, but lets him retain his god-like
strength.
    Herc grows to manhood and sets out to find his roots, discovering
he is the son of Zeus (Rip Torn). Zeus tells him that his only way to
come back to Olympus is to become a true hero and to that end,
Hercules seeks out the trainer of heroes, a satyr named Phil (Danny
DeVito).
    Herc and Phil take on a relationship like Rocky and his trainer
and indeed, some of the sequences are reminiscent of the ROCKY movies.
    Phil soon gets Herc up to speed and it's off to challenge to
world, defeat all the monsters and become a hero. Along the way, Herc
becomes so famous that he has his own line of merchandise -
everything from sandles to action figures (available at a store near
you, I'm sure).
    But of course, everything isn't that simple. Hades is still out to
get Hercules and this time has a secret weapon - Meg - a young woman
who is working off her "life" sentence to Hades after dying
to save the life of her ungrateful boyfriend. 
    Meg doesn't want to get involved romantically ever again, but you
can guess what happens and the rest is "history."
    Herc's sidekick flying horse Pegasus and Phil take a dim view of
this distraction in Herc's life, but the hero won't listen to reason.
    Susan Egan and Tate Donovan do excellent jobs in the title roles.
There is a lot of humor, heartbreak and romance...but I won't give
away what happens, when or why.  The story becomes as touching as
BEAUTY AND THE BEAST in the end and HERCULES will have you leaving the
theater with a good feeling inside.
    HERCULES also stars the voice talents of Samantha Eggar as Hera;
Hal Holbrook as Amphitryon; Paul Shaffer as Hermes; and Charlton
Heston as the Narrator. 
    HERCULES is a Walt Disney Pictures production and is rated G for
General Audiences. The running time is 86 minutes and this flick rates
a perfect four stars.
See this review and more at THE MOVIE CORNER
http://www.calweb.com/~jblenkle/movies
and visit Susan Egan's Official Fan Page at:
http://www.calweb.com/~jblenkle/egan 
