Authors
Joshua Birk
Number of Reviews
2

Title
Review for Godzilla (1998)
I love movies big, movies small, movies bad and movies excellent. 
It's the ones in between I can't stand.
Godzilla is a little bit of all of this.
Let's put it like this. When this movie came out, critics panned it for
being plotless. Pointless. Lack of decent dialog. Yada. Yada. Did these
guys watch any of the original movies? I adored them. In case you missed
the basis, here's the plot of every Godzilla movie ever made: 
  1.Monster or Monsters awake or arrive from ridiculous concept.
Concepts can include frozen slumber, lab mutation or time travel. 
  2.Monsters spend considerable time and plot to reach a metropolis.
This is because monsters love an audience. This metropolis is almost
invariably Tokyo, but exceptions do occur. 
  3.Extras, a few unknown actors and the occasional Raymond Burr throws
considerable military power and scientific knowledge at the monsters to
generally no avail. 
  4.Switch between blue screened special effects, miniatures, screaming
extras and large amounts of latex. 
  5.Monsters generally get tired of the action. They are, after all,
quite large. They generally sludge back into the ocean and roll some
credits.
Point is that if there was ever a movie whose premise allowed it to be
an idiotic slugfest of special effect wizardry and large buildings being
cut down to size, Godzilla was it. In fact, if there was a problem I had
with the movie, is that they didn't have enough of it. They introduce
baby godzillas (ick...didn't even work in the old ones) which makes it a
little too slick and suspenseful. Anyone can take a bunch of film from a
poorly lit corporate building and paste some 3D alien/lizard/squid
thingy after some aptly screaming actors. The beauty of Godzilla is
scale. Watching buildings fall. Tanks get squashed. And mankind learn it
suddenly became the runt of the block.
Overall:
A fun romp in central park with huge, fantastic special effects.
Wonderful lack of plot and great silly dialog. Unfortunate injection of
standard fair Alien-esque subplot and not nearly enough squashing,
screaming and general mayhem. 
-- 
Joshua Birk 
______________________________
home email:inkless@inkless.com
The Cutting Room Floor - Reader Based Reviews
http://www.inkless.com/crfloor/

Title
Review for Truman Show, The (1998)
Movies are controlled by their premise, which is what makes The Truman
Show such an amazing piece of celluloid.
Brief explanation.  I recently wrote a bit on Godzilla which loved it
for being bad, because it's a movie reprising really bad (although
ultra-fun) movies.  The old Godzilla movies were essentially just large
pieces of latex shambling through bad plot intersected with dialog. 
Independence Day, by the same people and almost the same concept, wasn't
a good movie because it didn't have that license to ill.  If Godzilla
had a wonderful plot and great acting, I probably would have hated it.
The Truman Show's premise gives it a huge task: create a show within a
movie in which the producer/director
is essentially God.  That places it essentially on the other end of the
spectrum from Godzilla.
This Harrison Begeron meets The Real World is a difficult setup because
the audience is supposed to be analyzing everything, watching Truman's
microcosm from the same lens as the Truman's television audience. 
What's good for the microcosm, is good for the film.  Because of this,
the reverse is true as well, the viewer is analyzing the entire film in
the same light.
Even with that scrutiny, The Truman Show is still excellent.  My first
concern was Jim Carrey.  As someone who has made a career as an
over actor, it's hard to see him carrying a dramatic role.  Particularly
one in movie where the entire plot and action is almost literally
revolving around him with every hidden camera. For the most part, Carrey
does a fine job.  He occasionally drifts off into manic fits, about half
of which seem to fit into the role and the rest just seem weird.
The chief problem isn't Carrey, but the slow rising of the curtain of
his stageworld.  The Truman Show has been airing nonstop for Truman's
entire life, without his knowledge that it is indeed a show.  Yet, in a
matter of two days, enough clues get dropped and enough actors slip in
their roles that he questions his existence.  What the movie lack is
history.  Truman's denial of his stageworld should logically have
spanned months, if not years, instead of weeks.  Only a couple of
episodes from his life really have an impact on the plot, which seems
implausible for movie begging to have an epic history.
With that exception, though, the movie carries through with the premise
with intelligence. Everything from the extras in television show to the
audience watching it around the globe make an environment which draws
the viewer in to ask the question "How will it end?"
Overall:
Carrey's acting is good, but not brilliant.  Fortunately, it doesn't
have to be, because the movie is brilliant.  Hug your favorite Truman
pillow and go see this one.
