Authors
David Arnold
Number of Reviews
3

Title
Review for Chushingura (1962)
"Chushingura" is an epic tale, based on a historic event, set in the
late feudal period of Japan:  A young lord, Asano (Yuzo Kayama), follows
his consience and a new law and refuses to pay tribute to an elder
lord, Kira (Chűsha Ichikawa).  Kira has achieved his position through
graft -- he is, in reality, a cowardly, greedy womanizer.  When Kira
realizes that Asano won't enrich his coffers, he hatches a plan to
humiliate him.  Kira arranges for Asano to be host to some imperial
envoys in the Shogun's palace in Edo.  Asano is as inexperienced as
he is incorruptable, and Kira witholds essential details of protocol,
taunting Asano and implying that whatever tribute Asano had withheld
would be a pittance compared to what it would now cost him to employ
Kira's assistance.  Finally, Asano is goaded beyond his limit, draws
his sword and attempts to slay Kira in the palace.
Drawing one's weapon inside the Shogun's palace is a capital offense,
and Asano is compelled to commit hara kiri.  His family and their
retainers (ronin) are forced to relinquish the Clan Asano castle
and become outcasts.  Led by Lord Oishi (Koshiro Matsumoto), the
clan chamberlain,  60 of the clan secretly plot revenge against Kira.
Along the way, a number of interesting side stories and digressions
are set up, all of which come together at the film's climax.
The film is beautifully photographed in Tohoscope (a wide screen
CinemaScope/Panavision clone), and unfolds meditatively, evoking
early 18th century Japanese scenery and customs in lush detail.  The
ethic of the film is very, very Japanese with its emphasis on honor
and Bushido, the code of the Samurai.  Kira is more of a villian for
being cowardly than for being greedy.  Anyone with an interest in
Japanese history and culture will eat this film up.
The score, written by Akira Ifukube, is on the whole a delightful
and effective bit of east-meets-west cinema music, although the use
of what sounds like a Hammond organ in full Leslie mode as
punctuation brought flashbacks of 1950's televison soap operas.
The only shortcoming is at the very end, in the climatic battle
between Oishi's followers and Kira's bodyguards.  The fight scene
suffers from the same lack of realism as so many Hollywood shootouts
from the 40's and 50's -- the Good Guys cut up a larger force of
Bad Guys without losing a single man, and the Bad Guys drop without
shedding a drop of blood.  I'm sure that, in reality, such a battle
would have been nothing short of a bloodbath.  Not that I'm complaining,
really, since I don't get off on explicit scenes of bloodhshed. It's
just that the violence in the early parts of the film were handled so
carefully and so obliquely (the shot of Asano's suicide dissolves
out before the fatal plunge of the daggar), I found the final fight
scene jarringly unrealistic in the context of the rest of the film.
The version of "Chushingura" that I saw was from Image's DVD.  It
is just short of 4 hours long, and in two parts.  I believe this
is the way the film was originally shown in Japan.  The DVD itself
is somewhat lackluster and suffers from some authoring problems:
The image is less crisp than of what DVD is capable, and a number of
encoding artifacts appear in the image.  Perhaps since this film
comes so close to maxing out a single side of a DVD, some bandwith
compromises were made to avoid having to cut a 2-sided disc.  The
English subtitles are burned into the video and could not be switched
off; thankfully, they're outside of the image itself.  Properly done,
this DVD should have had selectable subtitles.  I would have preferred
it to have been dubbed as well.  As deep as is my love for things
Japanese, I'm afraid that my love for the Japanese language shall
forever go unrequited.
Essay copyright (C) 1999 David M. Arnold.  All rights reserved.
-----------== Posted via Deja News, The Discussion Network ==----------
http://www.dejanews.com/       Search, Read, Discuss, or Start Your Own    

Title
Review for Andrei Rublyov (1969)
Andrei Rublev (1969, Andrei Tarkovsky)
A retrospective review by David M. Arnold
Andrei Tarkovsky might very well have been the most gifted filmmaker in the
short 100-year history of the medium.  Tarkovsky is the other of the two
Soviet filmmakers apt to be familiar to American film dilletantes (the first
being Sergei Eisenstein).  With "Andrei Rublev", Tarkovsky elevates
filmmaking to an Art that requires as much intellectual investment on the
part of the observer as does the poetry of T.S. Eliot or the novels of James
Joyce.        And, he produced the this, as well as the bulk of his film output, in
the Soviet Union during the late '60's and '70's under a political regime
that, although not the most repressive, was still notorious for suppression
of creative art. The greatest irony is that "Andrei Rublev", a decidedly
uncommercial film made on an epic scale, could ONLY have been produced by a
subsidized film industry within a centrally controlled economy not driven by
the profit motive. It could not have been made in Hollywood.
Andrei Rublev was a Russian historic figure who flourished during the end of
the 14th century.  Rublev was the most important medieval Russian painter of
religious icons and frescos.  He is considered the father of the first native
Russian style of iconography.  Tarkovsky uses Rublev as the central figure in
his long, meditative reflection on the the meanings of Life, Faith and Art.
The film has no real plot and no protagonist:  Rublev (played by Anatoli
Solonitsyn, who portrayed Dr. Sartorius in Tarkovsky's brilliant sci-fi film,
"Solaris") is more an observer than a participant.  The first scene in the
film is a prologue featuring an improbable event.  A group of peasants
construct a crude hot air balloon and one of them takes flight in it.  We see
the earth from the balloonist's perspective, until the balloon ruptures and
crashes, killing its passenger.  Then, the film unfolds as a series of
vignettes representing historic events in Rublev's lifetime.  He is a monk. 
He meets Theophanes the Greek (Nikolai Sergeyev), the renown Byzantine
iconographer and becomes his pupil.  He is commissioned to paint the
Cathedral in Vladimir. He encounters a summer solstice worshipping group of
pagans and witnesses their persecution.  He has just completed the cathedral
in Vladimir when the town is viciously sacked by the Tatars.  His entourage
of assistants and helpers is scattered.  He endures famine.  He grapples with
his conscience, and for a time renounces painting and speaking.  He is
finally reconciled to his responsibility to his art as the custodian of a
God-given talent. At this point, the film shifts from black and white into
full color and we are presented with an epilogue of photographs of Rublev's
actual art.
"Andrei Rublev" is very realistic and frank about the value placed on life in
Russia during the middle ages.        We see inhumanity in the form of arrogant
noblemen and the Tatar invaders.  We see men being tortured and we see
brutality to animals.  There were several scenes that made me wince; I
especially dislike seeing animals being mistreated, whether or not through
the use of special effects (I suspect in some cases these were not effects). 
Tarkovsky was explicit in portraying this evil to underscore Rublev's
internal struggle.
The lack of a definite story arc and the brutal scenes of peasant life mean
that this film is not for everyone.  It is certainly not idle entertainment,
Tarkovsky expects the observer to be an active participant.  He provides a
series of images and leaves it to the viewer to tie it all together, and a
complete understanding of the film requires multiple viewings.        The film is
recommended for Tarkovsky's brilliant cinematic technique, for his long,
complex and lyrical tracking shots.  Like Steven Spielberg, Tarkovsky is not
encumbered by a sense of the Proscenium Arch.  His shots put you right in the
middle of the action.
Production on "Andrei Rublev" started in 1966, and the film was re-cut in
1969.  The Soviet authorities didn't quite know what to make of such a
personal and spiritual work, so it sat on the shelf until its premier in
1971.  "Andrei Rublev" is available in its original, uncut form on DVD from
the Criterion Collection.
Essay copyright (C) 1999 David M. Arnold.  All rights reserved.
-----------== Posted via Deja News, The Discussion Network ==----------
http://www.dejanews.com/       Search, Read, Discuss, or Start Your Own    

Title
Review for Aleksandr Nevsky (1938)
Alexander Nevsky (1938, Sergei Eisenstein)
A retrospective review by David M. Arnold
The year was 1938.  Russia had signed a non-aggression treaty
with Germany.  Stalin, perhaps  since he was cut from the same
cloth as was Hitler, understood better than the other Allies that
the Germans couldn't be trusted.  Like many totalatarian
regimes, Stalin's believed the purpose of Art was as a tool
of the State to communicate to the masses.
Sergei Eisenstien, the great Russian filmmaker and theorist
was approached by Stalin to make a film that would help prepare
the Soviet population for war with Germany.  Eisenstien chose
as the subject of his film a historic event:  The defeat of the
Teutonic Knights by the Russians under the leadership of Alexander
Nevsky in 1242.  Sergei Prokofiev provided the score, and Stalin
gave Eisenstein access to the Soviet army as extras.  The result,
"Alexander Nevsky" is a classic, both as cinema and as propaganda.
Prince Alexander (Nikolai Cherkasov) has returned from defeating
the Swedes at the Battle of the Neva River, from which he earned
his surname  "Nevsky".  His band of followers is approached by a
Mongol prince, who upon learning Alexander's identiy immediately
offers him a high position in the Horde.  Alexander demurrs and
the Mongols go on their way.  One of Alexander's lieutenants
suggests they should drive the Mongols away, but Alexander
ominiously states that there are more dangerous threats.
Meanwhile, the city of Nogovorod is shown as a prosperous medieval
town.  Vasili (Nikolai Okhlopkov) and Gavrilo (Andrei Abrikosov),
two noblemen vie for the affections of a Olga (Vera Ivasheva). Ignat
(Dmitri Orlov), a master armourer, hawks his wares.  Then comes
word of the fall of the neighboring city of Pskov to the Teutonic
Knights, a German religious order that strives to unite the entire
Christian world under the Holy Roman Emporer. The people of Nogovorod
debate whether to bribe the Teutons for peace or to assemble and
fight.  The decide to fight under the leadership of Domash (Nikolai
Arsky), but Domash insists that they need a stronger leader, one
with a clearer head.  They need Alexander.
A delegation is sent to Alexander's headquarters to ask him to
help defend Nogovorod.  Alexander says he knows nothing of defense,
he will attack.  And, he will need not only his own troops and
those of Nogovorod, but they must mobilize and arm the peasants
as well.  The Teutons, with the help of the traitorous Tverdilo
(Sergei Blinnikov), the ex-mayor of Pskov, march towards Nogovorod.
They meet Alexander's forces on a frozen lake, and what is perhaps
the largest staged medieval battle ensues.
Totalatarian Art is full of symbolism, and Eisenstein lays it on
with a trowel.  The spiritual leader of the Teutonic Knights is
an archbishop whose crest looks very much like a stylized swastika.
The Teutons themselves wear helms that look like inverted milk pails
with cross-shaped eye and nose openings: Faceless opressors; while
the Russians wear open, onion-shaped helmets.  (The Teutons employ
impressed mercenaries who wear helmets that look remarkably like
German WW-II army gear, except with eye holes that again render them
faceless.)
The Teutons are bent on converting or eliminating any who refuse to
bow to the Holy Roman Emperor:  This means the Russians because they
are Russian Orthodox.  To demonstrate the cruelty of the Teutons we
are shown old men being hanged, women burnt at the stake and infants
and small children thrown into fires.  (Actually, if one substitues
Judaism for Russion Orthodoxy, Eisenstein was remarkably prescient).
The film itself is remarkable for the massive battle scene, although
the rest of the film seems weaker in comparison.  Eisenstein's
theories on montage that are epitomized in his 1925 film "Battleship
Potemkin" seem more subdued here.  Since each character is a symbol
for Something Else, the performances are decidedly one-dimensional.
Overall, "Alexander Nevsky" does succeed in evoking 13th century
Russian life, the sets and costumes look authentic.
"Alexander Nevsky" plays like a silent film, and it might as well
have been one:  I don't speak a word of Russian, and the soundtrack
is so muddy I doubt I could have  understood a word of it even if I
did speak Russian.  Prokofiev's score comes through, dimly, and it
is a wonderful marriage of folk tunes and original melodies that
pump up the nationalistic fervor of the film.  Stalin must have been
mightily pleased with what Eisenstein had delivered.
Nothing "Alexander Nevsky" achieves negates the fact that this is
State-sponsored propaganda.  Today, in the wake of the Littleton
tragedy, I hear blame being placed on films.  I hear calls for
controls on film content.  Although I believe that many modern
films do cross the line of common sense and decency, I also firmly
believe that we cannot allow Film to slip into proscribed content
controls.  The ultimate end to that slippery slope is State Art,
and we could end up only with films like "Alexander Nevsky".
Essay copyright (C) 1999 David M. Arnold.  All rights reserved.
--== Sent via Deja.com http://www.deja.com/ ==--
---Share what you know. Learn what you don't.---
