Authors
Kurt Thearling
Number of Reviews
2

Title
Review for Wish You Were Here (1987)
     I just saw LIVING ON TOKYO TIME last weekend and I saw WISH YOU WERE HERE
a few weeks ago.  Both were great.  [WISH YOU WERE WERE HERE is reviewed in
another article. -ecl]
     WISH YOU WERE HERE is based on the first part of the biography of Cynthia
Payne (the character that PERSONAL SERVICES is based on.  It is directed and
written by David Leland, the writer of MONA LISA (with Neil Jordan) and
PERSONAL SERVICES.  The star, Emily Lloyd, is the brightest thing to hit movie
screens this year.  The story is about a young girl who tries to rebel against
her father and society by swearing like a truck driver and using sexual
promiscuity to shock people.  Her favorite saying (she says it often) is "up
your bum."  But as she realizes what her actions have done, she begins to
realize the consequences that she must begin to face.   The movie ends with her
making some very crucial decisions about how she will live her life.

Title
Review for Living on Tokyo Time (1987)
     I just saw LIVING ON TOKYO TIME last weekend and I saw WISH YOU WERE HERE
a few weeks ago.  Both were great.  [WISH YOU WERE WERE HERE is reviewed in
another article. -ecl]
     LIVING ON TOKYO TIME is a comedy about a Japanese girl who comes to  the
United States after her fiance dumps her for another woman.  After  she is here
for a while, she realizes that she must find a way to  stay or she will be
deported.  One of her co-workers suggests that she marry someone so that she
can get a permanent residency visa.  This is where Ken steps in.  A
Japanese-American musician with a heavy metal  band, he has just broken up with
his girlfriend.  He has nothing better to do so he gets married.  She speaks
only a little English, he speaks no Japanese.  The two come from two different
worlds (they could be different planets) and have little in common.  The story
then revolves around  the trials and tribulations of a marriage between two
people who nothing about each other.  
     One note, LIVING ON TOKYO TIME is a very dry comedy.  There is not much
excitement but there are some good laughs.  I would give it a 8 out of 10.
