Authors
Walter Chaw
Number of Reviews
2

Title
Review for Jurassic Park III (2001)
JURASSIC PARK III
** (out of four)
starring Sam Neill, William H. Macy, Téa Leoni, Alessandro Nivola
screenplay by Peter Buchman and Alexander Payne & Jim Taylor
directed by Joe Johnston
-a review by Walter Chaw | walter@filmfreakcentral.net
***For more film, DVD and books about movie reviews, plus annual coverage 
of The Toronto International Film Festival, visit _Film Freak Central_ - 
http://filmfreakcentral.net | Now with search engine***
_Jurassic Park III_ is completely critic proof, a smirking cash machine 
with its amplifiers turned to "11." That it happens to be an amazingly 
tight little film (every single element of its first half predicts a 
correlative in the second) doesn't excuse its bratty attitude. If _Jurassic 
Park III_ were the insolent snot-nosed little punk it most resembles, it'd 
be turning out its lower lip whilst jutting an insouciant chin at potential 
critics and naysayers: "Go ahead," the pipsqueak would say, "hit me with 
your best shot."
The action sequences are occasionally gripping, although for the brevity of 
the film (a scant 85 minutes dripping wet), there's a surprising amount of 
downtime. And while there are twice as many visual effects in _Jurassic 
Park III_ as there were in the first two films combined, they come in 
showcase clusters. To a one, they are either paced so oddly that they point 
more to a potential greatness than any kind of real thrill (a fitfully 
entertaining pteronodon attack), are unforgivably truncated (a neat battle 
between a tyrannosaurus and a spinosaurus), or just disappoint outright 
(the egregious misuse of the "primate-smart" velociraptors)--and that's 
when you can see what's happening through the hyper-cuts and murky 
cinematography.
What should have been a breathless breakneck pursuit/escape sequence 
involving a whole pack of raptors resolves itself with an extended 
stand-off situation in which humans and lizards engage in a limp-wristed 
staring contest, and the ending is so vein-poppingly ludicrous that I have, 
in my time, imagined more plausible rescues in the sandbox with my army men 
("and then here comes the spaceship--ptchoo! ptchoo!"). The denouement, 
and, frankly, the rest of the film, is so ridiculous, in fact, that 
something troubling occurred to me: _Jurassic Park III_ is making fun of my 
having looked forward to it.
Dr. Alan Grant (Sam Neill) is on a dig when a rich couple, Paul and Amanda 
Kirby (William H. Macy and Téa Leoni), offers his foundation a massive sum 
of money to accompany them on a flyover of Isla Sorna, the beastie-infested 
island from the second Jurassic Park film. Predictably, the plane crashes, 
a resourceful Spielbergian child is introduced, and Dr. Grant is forced to 
guide a bunch of greenhorns across dino-ridden wilderness.
_Jurassic Park III_ doesn't work very well because it thinks it's smarter 
than it is--sort of a postmodern _Scream_-type thing with mildly sarcastic 
attempts at turning the el blando Dr. Grant into a slacker version of 
Indiana Jones. As written by Alexander Payne and Jim Taylor, the pair 
behind the scathing _Citizen Ruth_ and _Election_, there is not a line in 
_Jurassic Park III_ free of dramatic irony, campy foreshadowing, and Gen-X 
wry. It's John Kennedy Toole writing about stupid people running around in 
a literal primordial forest; Infinite Jest if Infinite Jest were about 
smart dinosaurs. By the eighth or ninth time a character stops another 
character and whispers, "wait...listen...you hear that?" one either nods 
wisely, secure that the attempts by Payne and Taylor to mock the _Jurassic 
Park_ monster formula do not, in fact, include mocking you, or one furrows 
his brow, wondering if it's a good idea for a film's screenwriters to 
actually be contemptuous of the project for which they are writing. Knowing 
genre and subverting it is a good idea if it's done with affection 
(_Mimic_), but an exceedingly bad one if it's done with snarky derision 
(_Lake Placid_).
_Jurassic Park III_ would have been a fine movie had bitter wisenheimers 
like Payne and Taylor not been involved in the dialogue; their contempt is 
an unwelcome dash of self-knowledge in an environment where Herculean feats 
of disbelief suspension are the only refuge. Watching the _Jurassic Park_ 
films is a great deal of fun when you do it with developmentally arrested 
simpletons like Steven Spielberg and John Williams. It's a good deal less 
fun with jerks who insist on reminding you that no matter how many times 
someone warns not to, someone in jungle peril flicks will always use a 
bullhorn to yell out their location every few minutes.
For as much as I like dinosaurs and giant robots killing and eating (not 
necessarily in that order) a bunch of idiots, I don't enjoy watching this 
Darwinian buffet as told by people who not only don't share my joy in the 
occasional teeth and cheese-fest, but whom are dedicated to explaining to 
me just exactly why the formula for these things is so stupid.
See, guys, I know it's stupid--what Payne and Taylor don't seem to realize 
is that it's possible to be too smart for your own good and to 
underestimate the Jurassic Park audience. For as smooth as their brand of 
snippy scorn is for abortion politics and the election system, it tastes a 
little sour in what amounts to a glorified )_Godzilla_ movie.
Š Film Freak Central (http://filmfreakcentral.net/). This review may not be 
reprinted, in whole or in part, without the express consent of its author.

Title
Review for Caveman's Valentine, The (2001)
THE CAVEMAN'S VALENTINE
***1/2 (out of four)
starring Samuel L. Jackson, Ann Magnuson, Aunjanue Ellis, Tamara Tunie
screenplay by George Dawes Green, based on his novel
directed by Kasi Lemmons
-a review by Walter Chaw | walter@filmfreakcentral.net
***For more film, DVD and books about movie reviews, plus annual coverage 
of The Toronto International Film Festival, visit _Film Freak Central_ - 
http://filmfreakcentral.net  | Now with search engine***
A strange mixture of _Shine_, _Basquiat_, _Angel Heart_, and Grant Morrison 
& Dave McKean's graphic novel "Arkham Asylum", _The Caveman's Valentine_ is 
a feverish tale of a homeless madman-cum-detective who, on the morning of 
February 14th, discovers a "valentine" just outside his New York cave: one 
of Ella Fitzgerald's strange fruit, stuck in the crotch of a tree--a young 
male model murdered and frozen to a branch. Believing at first that his 
imagined nemesis Stuyvesant, shooting evil rays into his mind from atop the 
Chrysler Building, is responsible for the murder, Romulus (Samuel L. 
Jackson) is put on the trail of an avant-garde photographer in the 
Mapplethorpe mould, David Leppenraub (Colm Feore). His minor sleuthing 
interrupted by the occasional delusional fit and bouts with an ecstasy of 
creation (Romulus was a brilliant Julliard-trained pianist prior to his 
psychosis), Romulus uncovers clues and harasses suspects on his way to 
convincing his police-woman daughter (Aunjanue Ellis) that even though he's 
a nut, that doesn't mean that he can't solve a high-profile society murder.
Every moment an exhausting workshop of ideas, and every character the same, 
_The Caveman's Valentine_ is a concept so "high concept" that it suddenly 
became clear to me that the film fits into the comic book genre of 
entertainment, with Romulus's "Caveman" a slightly more mundane version of 
Todd McFarlane's urban noir hero, Spawn. With a long-vanished wife (Tamara 
Tunie) acting as a spiritual guide, the occasional social caste commentary, 
the secret base in a cave, a divergent genius personality with a network of 
informants and supporters, and a wickedly colourful arch-enemy, the film 
piles on the lurid comic book details and dizzying slapdash colours to such 
a lavish extent that I was vaguely surprised that the blue police cars 
weren't inscribed with "Gotham PD."
That being said, _The Caveman's Valentine_ can only really succeed as a 
heroic fantasy, a Frank Miller graphic novel that has the audacity to 
portray the blood staining a field of virgin snow expanding to form the 
shape of a heart. The difficulties with the film spring from the 
misunderstanding that it somehow adheres to the conventions of a thriller 
or a police procedural when, in fact, _The Caveman's Valentine_ is a 
superhero fable that takes on the cause of the homeless (again like 
McFarlane's Spawn) while attacking the entrenched ruling classes in 
government and the arts. It is no small detail that our hero, Romulus, is 
not only named for a member of the ruling class who lived his life (in 
legend) without knowledge of his royal birth, but also that our Romulus has 
turned his back on the comforts of the literati in favour of a mystical 
existence living in a cave in a park. In the Romulus mythology, signs of 
Romulus' royal blood is brought by twelve vultures, while in the film, the 
call to action for our hero comes in the form of not the carrion birds, but 
of the carrion itself.
Whether or not Romulus of _The Caveman's Valentine_ will found a nation, 
or, in the case of novelist George Dawes Green, upon whose novel his own 
screenplay is based, a franchise, the fact remains that _The Caveman's 
Valentine_ is easily the most misunderstood film of 2001 thus far. It, 
along with M. Night Shyamalan's _Unbreakable_, is a mature cinematic 
extrapolation of the graphic novel format which has, since Miller's seminal 
"The Dark Knight Returns", redefined the comic medium as one suitable for 
mature ruminations on psychologically sticky topics. Readers of Sam Keith's 
brilliant "The Maxx" comic series (or of MTV's short-lived animated 
adaptation of the same) are already familiar with the idea of a homeless 
man placed in the position of knight errant and king of his own twisted 
demesne. The failure of both "The Maxx" TV show and of _The Caveman's 
Valentine_ (not forgetting the initial backlash against _Unbreakable_) 
suggests that the public may not be ready for America's surprising 
contributions to dark fantasy.
Luxuriantly lit, brashly saturated, and comic-panel framed with a virtuoso 
grace by cinematographer Amy Vincent (_Death in Venice, CA_), while 
inhabiting Robin Standefer's (_Practical Magic_) mesmerizing sets, _The 
Caveman's Valentine_ is an unremittingly gorgeous film. Kasi Lemmons, 
following up her brilliant 1997 debut, _Eve's Bayou_, which played on 
similar themes of manufactured realities and mysticism, fulfills much of 
her immense promise with a tale of seraphs and lost boys, artists and 
suffering. _The Caveman's Valentine_ is an elegant and piquant expression 
of hope for justice in a tilted landscape. Clearly not for every taste, 
when approached with the correct paradigm, it is one of the most stunning 
and intensely fascinating films of the year: a redefinition of the hero 
archetype for a post-modern audience with urine-stained wool trench coats 
in place of blue tights and red capes. _The Caveman's Valentine_ is a fine 
and a courageous film, crazy enough to suggest that the delirious yammering 
of an idiot savant is the best and truest paladin of order in the chaos of 
Eliot's rat's alley wasteland.
Š Film Freak Central (http://filmfreakcentral.net/). This review may not be 
reprinted, in whole or in part, without the express consent of its author.
