Authors
Carrie A Gorringe
Number of Reviews
2

Title
Review for Sister My Sister (1994)
Directed by Nancy Meckler. 
Written by Nancy Kesselman, from her play, "My Sister In This House". 
Starring Joely Richardson, Jodhi May, Julie Walters, Sophie Thursfield.
   The infamous Le Mans case of 1933, in which the Papin sisters, 
employed as maids, hacked their employers to death, has been fertile 
ground for writers most notably Jean Genet and his 1948 play "The 
Maids".  No doubt the concept of murder as a means to personal 
transcendence appealed to Genet (at least in the theoretical sense), 
himself not immune to the lure of crime (he wrote his first novel, 
"Our Lady of the Flowers"  in 1942 while serving a long prison 
sentence).  Born illegitimate in 1910, abandoned  when young, in 
reform school by the age of ten, in and out of prison until 1948, 
surviving when outside by hustling and theft, Genet understood 
perfectly both the rage of being an outsider and the compulsion that 
such an outsider has to belong to the society that rejects him or her.  
Fortunately, he had sufficient talent  and, with it, was able to oblige 
the literary world to accept him on his own terms;  granted, he was 
helped along the way by the approximately 150 years of Romantic 
literary theory that proceeded him and which permitted him, in a 
paraphrase of Susan Sontag's succinct analysis of the Romantic 
mindset, to enter the abyss of human existence and then to report 
back to the greater world concerning his findings.  But Genet's 
characters were those who could not file reports, their voices 
having been stymied by socio-economic deprivation.  They act out of 
desperation and in extreme fashion, having no other means of 
personal liberation, even though their liberation is temporary and 
will probably lead to self-destruction.
   Nancy Meckler's directorial debut, "Sister My Sister", 
inevitably draws from this literary source but there is a historical 
dimension added to the mix (courtesy of screenwriter Kesselman, 
who studied the original case extensively).  Christine (Richardson) 
has been a loyal and devoted servant to Madame Danzard (Walters) 
and her frumpy daughter Isabelle (Thursfield).  Danzard is imperious 
to the point of tyranny;  she not only inspects the results of her 
maid's dusting with the proverbial white gloves, but she crushes any 
hint of autonomy emanating from Isabelle as if it were an insect 
crawling out from underneath a lettuce leaf on her salad plate.  It is, 
quite obviously, the type of repressive atmosphere that would break 
the will of the most tempered of spirits, and, as the narrative 
informs us, Christine and her sister Lea (May) were abandoned  in a 
convent while very young by an indifferent mother, and poverty 
leaves Christine little choice but to accept the caprices of Madame 
Danzard.  Nevertheless, by the time that Christine decides to bring 
her younger sister to the Danzard household to work as a maid, 
Christine and Madame Danzard have settled into a social detente 
which is somewhat unsettled around the edges (Christine's 
resentment of her inferior position vis-a-vis this domestic tyrant is 
already apparent, if of necessity muted), but functional.  The 
fragility of this arrangement is made apparent from the moment 
that Lea enters the household.  Lea, her spirit not as inhibited as 
that of her sister, chafes under the rigidity of Madame Danzard's 
rules.  Soon, under the force of Lea's personality, Christine is soon 
set on the course of rebellion leading to murder, a situation 
exacerbated by the sisters' increasingly incestuous closeness.
   "Sister My Sister" contains exquisitely measured 
performances from all of the principals at least for the first forty-
five minutes.  As portrayed by Walters, Madame Danzard has all the 
warmth of liquid nitrogen, and has the same upon those who are 
unfortunate enough to have to endure her presence, especially in the 
case of her daughter. Thursfield allows the character of Isabelle to 
subtly seethe with resentment not only over the physical 
attractiveness of the maids who serve her but also over the glaring 
irony that despite her mother's brutal treatment of them, they have 
more freedom than she, with all of her financial privilege, can ever 
hope for.   Isabelle's spirit is broken, its shards capable only of 
rising up on occasion to sting their owner in her spite.  Indeed, all of 
the characters in this bourgeois prison seem as if they are about to 
splinter into pieces at the first forbidden word spoken aloud.  During 
the first half of this film, Richardson gives Christine a sense of  
self-control that is at once  so palpable and so fragile that her eyes 
can convey a lifetime's worth of indescribable pain in one glance;  
her prickliness is such that it appears as if she might head into the 
stratosphere within two seconds if someone so much as brushed 
against her inadvertently.  May perfectly captures the facade of 
breezy insouciance and what lies underneath it that is necessary for 
Lea to become the catalyst for the tragedy about to unfold.  As the 
outsider who destroys the perverse equilibrium of the Danzard 
household,  and who must do so because she cannot conform to its 
demands, it is Lea who is the most deeply troubled of the four 
women.  She is willful and transcendent;  not wishing to serve 
others, she wants others to serve her.  And yet, given her socio-
economic position, she can act neither openly nor, it might be 
argued, consciously.  Therefore, Lea's only hope is to reestablish the 
interdependent relationship that she shared with her sister at the 
convent.  Only after that has happened can events proceed to their 
illogical conclusion.  
   It would seem from the above that "Sister My Sister" has all 
of the necessary elements for a successful film.  However, the 
central hinge of the script -- that of the incestuous relationship 
developing between the two sisters -- becomes less covert and 
subtle and far too explicit and clumsy.  The explicitness belongs not 
so much to the realm of pornography than to that of overblown 
melodrama ripe enough to verge upon the rotten. The maids' frantic 
search for sensuality within the family sphere bears no resemblance 
to the world of the titillatingly erotic, but it does belong to the 
realm of the desperate.  By virtue of an emotionally and financially-
deprived upbringing, Christine and Lea are so lacking in both 
opportunity and imagination that their lesbian relationship can not 
be seen as a liberating force for either of the participants;  indeed, 
their obsession with each other suggests the behaviour of two 
survivors of a shipwreck who know that their drowning is imminent. 
Yet, for all of the deeply evocative portrayals of these women by 
Richardson and May, and the sympathy engendered thereby, the affair 
itself assumes an almost risible quality to the extent that it would 
have severely undermined the narrative trajectory had there not 
been a flashback at the beginning of the film to remind the viewer 
that these increasingly indiscreet writhings on screen will have 
deadly intent by the final reel.  Only that thin thread prevents the 
film from going under by the force of its own stupidity.  The switch 
in acting style from restraint to hyperbole doesn't help matters very 
much, since it undermines the careful pacing that Meckler 
established from the beginning, not to mention any interest in how 
the film will end because the denouement has been given away.  As 
the film's pace becomes almost dizzying in its intensity, the 
suspense is killed right along with Madame Danzard and her 
daughter, and the maids' relationship merely stands there looking 
overblown. 
   In sum, Meckler should have realised how thin the line is 
between the suspenseful and the asinine when one is dealing with 
extremes of emotion.  Yet, "Sister My Sister" is worth seeing, 
provided that one can stomach the film's alternations between the 
realms of overwrought sexuality and violence.
-- 
Carrie Gorringe                           gorringe@utcc.utoronto.caFILM REVIEWS     http://www.demon.co.uk/london-calling/filmmus.htmlLondon Calling Internet           Indepedent Entertainment Magazine

Title
Review for Denise Calls Up (1995)
"Denise Calls Up".  Written and Directed by Hal Selwyn.  Starring
Tim Daly, Caroleen Feeney, Dan Gunther, Dana Wheeler Nicholson,
Liev Schreiber, Aida Turturro, Sylvia Miles and Alanna Ubach.
        In Hal Selwyn's new film, "Denise Calls Up", one of the central
characters, Gail (Wheeler Nicholson), in a telephone conversation
with her ex, Frank (Daly) pinpoints the central problem that all of
the characters are having.  She tells him, "Work can swallow you up
if you let it."  His response:  "And we let it."  But even this
realization isn't enough to shake any of these young New York
professionals out of their interrelational torpor;  being "zenned out
on work" is the excuse for limiting their communications to
telephone calls;  when they require visual reminders of what
someone looks like, they resort to faxes.  Their entire lives consist
of almost nothing but electronic interfacings.  While this is not an
unusual affliction in the modern era, their problems go deeper than a
mere dependence upon technology;  rather, it is the convenient way
in which technology has allowed them to forego the "messy" nature
of face-to-face meetings, with their inconvenience, demands and
potential for pain.  Laptops and telephones ever at the ready, they
break luncheon and party dates while pouring a never-ending, if
unvarying, stream of post-facto platitudes through their
mouthpieces.  A funeral for one of their group brings out only one
mourner, who consoles one of the nonattendees named Linda
(Turturro) with one of the most ironic lines in the film, "Death isn't
for everyone."   Even their sexual relationships have an aseptic
quality to them;  one couple, Barbara (Feeney) and Jerry (Schreiber)
meet, and conduct a torrid affair without ever once experiencing
physical contact. But, of course, that's exactly the point, since all of
them have become little more than mere extensions of their
electronic equipment (underscored, with a delectably nasty touch, by
the manner in which their friend is found dead).
        Into this emotionally sterile existence bounces Denise (Ubach),
the outsider who literally takes advantage of one of the group during
one of his weaker moments.  It seems that Martin (Gunther) decided
to "do his bit" for society by donating to a local sperm bank.  One of
Denise's friends, who works at the sperm bank, made the donor's
identity known to Denise, who begins to flood Martin with phone call
after phone call with details of her pregnancy while travelling on
various forms of public conveyance (unlike the others, she is not
afraid of the outdoors;  whenever any of them venture outside of
their individual spheres of influence, bad things seem to happen to
them).  Everyone in the group becomes involved in the pregnancy's
progress, and its effect upon the group's dynamics, or lack thereof.
        "Denise Calls Up" is the type of film that will either cause you
to laugh knowingly, but uncomfortably, at your own plugged-in
existence, or it will set your teeth on edge at the monotonously
self-indulgent antics of a group of immature people who, deep down,
are  not only afraid of having a life, but of even getting one.  As if to
underscore just how much, the film cleverly maintains the rhythm of
their short and essentially meaningless communications through
considerable amounts of cross-cutting;  the audience never gets to
see each individual for much more than a few seconds on-screen.
After a while, it becomes quite obvious that, if technology did not
exist as their excuse, it would become necessary for them to invent,
something -- anything -- to take its place.  When these people use
words like "responsibility" and "commitment", you can hear their
voices choking on the terminology.  They have more than a good idea
as to what those terms mean for them:  a relationship equals
compromise which equals a loss of self.  And, although you can't lose
what you never had, that is one fact that they all keep safely at a
distance.  Unfortunately, the more willful forms of self-delusion
have never been a trait exclusive to any era.
        To his credit, Selwyn has assembled a marvelous cast to
conduct his broken-telephone comedy of errors.  Standouts include
Gunther and Ubach as the unlikely expectant parents, whose budding
relationship (in more ways than one) becomes a necessary fulcrum
for balancing the almost farcical solipsism that embodies the rest
of the film.  Sylvia Miles is unhealthily funny as Gale's yenta of an
aunt.  So, if you've been staring at a computer screen too long,
"Denise Calls Up" just might be the recharge you're looking for.
