Authors
SaiTiau
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Cruel Intentions (1999)
"I hate it when things don't go my way.  It makes me so horny."
I'll admit that I'm pleasantly surprised by the completely wicked movie
that is "Cruel Intentions." I expected it to have a lot more sex, money, and
corruption.   A lewd, "Wild Things"-ish movie that knows its place. 
Unexpectedly, the movie actually had some *family values*, epitomized by
Reese Witherspoon's Annette Hargrove.  Admittedly, what confused me
was the film's schizophrenia.  First the first half it's this tongue-in-
cheek, deliciously evil farce about the lives of spoiled rich kids; for the
second half it turns into a sort of bittersweet romance intertwined with
lessons about life.  Thankfully, this discrepancy wasn't too distracting
because the movie cleverly held on to all its essential characters without
dropping them off suddenly like some movies are too apt to do; and Sarah
Michelle's Gellar bitch-from-hell character Kathryn remained
determinedly evil until the very end.  No conversion crap.  
The movie's got a lot of spunk: this is evident a couple of minutes into the
film, when Kathryn, with an angelic smile, tells Christine Baranski's
character that whenever she's in trouble, she turns to God in the form of a
cross worn around her neck.  As soon as she's alone, we see her snuffing
the cocaine that's hidden inside the cross.   The character in large part
contribute to the film's charisma.  Ryan Philippe plays a character similar
to his role in "Playing by Heart," but he surprised me with his ability to
portray the inherently cruel.  Kudos to Gellar this time for actually
belonging in a movie she deserves.  It's amazing that she can play the
innocent, down-to-earth girl in the disastrous "Simply Irresistible" and
become the manipulative ice queen here.  She made the skin of movie-
goers crawl with hatred.  I will give credit to the film though for giving
Kathryn and edge of vulnerability and some ambiguity.  Who knows if she's
really in love with Sebastian and just has a, ahem, drastic way of
expressing her feelings?  Tired of being trapped in the confines of the
upper-class?  After all, she is one *messed up* girl.  I also liked how
Sebastian and Kathryn are able to transform from perfect private school
students into immoral sexaholics.  I'd have been fooled.  Their relationship
is one-of-a-kind, of course, and it was a treat being able to muse on what
direction it might take.  Of course, hatred gained the upperhand.  Reese
Witherspoon does a good job, just a little weaker than the others, as Miss
Morals; and whoever-it-was that played Cecile is gonna give Molly
Shannon a run for her money.   The only character that lacked much
dimension was Ronald.  
At first glance "Cruel Intentions" is just another made-for-teenagers
sexy tale of betrayal, seduction, and irresponsible behavior.  However, I do
believe it has more depth to it that only adds to the enjoyment of the
sometimes juvenile sexual innuendo and delightfully enticing characters,
characters who manage to earn pity despite their behavior.  The death of
Sebastian was an unexpected and much-welcomed twist that elevates the
film out of the "guilty indulgence" category.  The ultimate
("bittersweet") triumph belongs to Annette, who forced Kathryn to
contradict her own words: "People *do* change." The lesson?  Maybe nice
girls do finish first.  
Silver-Screen List Administrator and PVPHS Class of '99
http://members.aol.com/saitiau/welcome.html
