Authors
Thomas Wheeler
Number of Reviews
6

Title
Review for Jumanji (1995)
     Some of this review bounces off a few points made by a reviewer in
my local newspaper, but I also saw the film for myself today.  Any such
points are strictly comparative.
     The local reviewer was comparing it to TOY STORY, and actually
preferred it.  I enjoyed JUMANJI well enough, but it was no TOY STORY,
which I consider the best movie of the season, and I really don't see
it as a major classic in years to come.
     It's amusing enough, though.  But it has some major faults.  First
off is a general lack of enthusiasm from most of the performers.  Not
even Robin Williams gets to really cut loose.  I'm sure everyone in the
movie is a capable actor or actress -- it just seems like they go
through the movie not entirely sure what's going on -- and that
unfortunately comes across in the movie.
     There were some high points.  The local reviewer cited the
drubbing that New-Age pop psychology takes on the part of the adult
woman (whose name now escapes me), and he's right.  And it's a much
needed drubbing, too.  Also the make-up on the young boy later in the
movie was a lot more effective than the special effects -- and we get
another amusing scene in the movie when the boy is experiencing a
certain discomfort. (I make it a point never to blow significant plot
points of a movie in reviews like this).
     The special effects are unfortunately not terribly impressive.
Toy Story wasn't trying to be anything other than computer animated.
Fortunately, it had strong enough characterization, good performers,
and a storyline that worked with the basic premise, so that the movie
was wonderful.
     Granted, it's hard to get characterization out of a troop of
berserk monkeys and stampeding elephants and rhinos.  But one
comparison I read, likening them to JURASSIC PARK, was way off base.
Perhaps it was because these were computer-generated images of living
animals, as opposed to extinct ones, but I was not convinced.  There is
the scene in which some computer-generated elephants stomp a car, which
has been seen in repeated previews, but while the car most surely gets
stomped, the elephants still look more than a bit phony.
     The ending of the movie was, not really confusing, but certainly
anti-climatic.  Ultimately, it rendered all the chaos of the previous
hour and a half pointless, for the most part.  That's no way to end a
movie.
     To be fair, as I said, it's an amusing enough film, and kids will
probably enjoy it who don't mind a good bit of cartoonish action and
chaos and not a whole lot of storyline.  I didn't really dislike it.
But I suspect it could have been a lot better if there had been more
depth to it, which was certainly possible.  The origin of the game
itself is never explained, for starters.  Such considerations were
obviously sacrificed in favor of the special effects.
     I should point out that I haven't read the book upon which the
movie was based, but one other local reviewer, who absolutely despised
the movie, made the point that the movie takes some very substantial
liberties as far as the source material is concerned.
      I wouldn't build it up as much as much as Toy Story, which didn't
need to be as deep as Jumanji should have been.  There's no way I would
equate those two movies.  Actually, they're sufficiently different that
a comparison is really very difficult.  And Jumanji itself, while it
could have been better, isn't really all that bad if you have some idea
of what to expect.

Title
Review for Mortal Kombat (1995)
Presented by New Line Studios and starring Christopher Lambert
     Video-game based movies have never done especially well.  Nobody
wants to talk about SUPER MARIO BROTHERS anymore, and while STREET
FIGHTER wasn't bad, most aficionados of the video game weren't
especially impressed.  I've always felt the reason that such movies
fared poorly was the lack of background information on which to build a
successful movie.  In STREET FIGHTER there were some interesting
characters, and there *is* a fair background to them in their Japanese
incarnation, but really, for a full-length movie, what could you *do*
with them?  There was also a complaint about a lack of *fights*, which
is what the game was all about.
     All of that is easily taken care of in MORTAL KOMBAT.  This isn't a
movie for everybody, and it surely lives up to its PG-13 rating.  Don't
think that this is a kids' movie.  Older kids, yeah, but there are some
truly horrifying scenes, such as the destruction of Scorpion, that are
not appropriate for small children.
     You want fights?  This movie is a cross between a roller coaster
ride and a swift kick in the head.  It is absolute, unmitigated, almost
non-stop slam-bang action that *still* manages to tell an interesting
story, which, for a change, ties in *very* closely with its root concept,
in this case the video game.  Too often, I feel, some producer,
director, or studio takes a concept from some other source; book, comic
book, cartoon, or whatever, and feels the need to twist it around and
put their own mark on it.  This is *not* the case with MORTAL KOMBAT.  If
you like the game, you'll *love* the movie.
     The actor who plays Liu Kang (his name escapes me) is a well known
martial arts actor in various Oriental countries.  Martial arts movies
haven't been too popular in America for a couple of decades now.  We've
gotten used to the types of action scenes that generall involve either
fisticuffs or large heavy equipment.  These fights are truly
choreographed, and the effort put into them shows.
     Then there's the eight-foot tall, four-armed Goro.  This is no
Muppet, folks.  He's one very large, very nasty piece of
audio-animatronics equipment.  The special effects, mostly computer
generated, are truly spectacular.  There's even a bit of humor here and
there, mostly from Christopher Lambert, who plays Rayden and seems to
enjoy playing the least physical role in the movie while everybody else
gets the stuffing kicked out of them at one point or another.
     I went to the first showing, and the theater was *packed*!  This
on a hot Arizona day with school having just started.  Like I said,
this isn't a movie for everyone.  But if you like action movies, and
have even the slightest knowledge of Mortal Kombat, go see this film.
You *will* have a good time.  I'm going again just so I can pick up on
what I missed the first time around.

Title
Review for Toy Story (1995)
     A lot of hoopla has been made about the fact that this film is the
first one ever done entirely on computer.  Fine and well, but I am one
of those people who remains decidedly concerned about computers
becoming too much a part of society (so naturally I'm writing on the
Internet, right?!).  Computer technology is a *tool*, in essence and
basic form no different than a screwdriver or a hammer  just a little
more sophisticated.  Ultimately, by its very nature, computer
technology is mindless, heartless, and soulless and so are many of the
people, I suspect, whose lives revolve completely around it.  I don't
care how advanced the technology gets (and the producers of this movie
are already claiming that within  two years it will be outmoded, and I
don't doubt it), this basic aspect of the technology will NEVER change.
     Will the fact that within a few short years the technology that
made this movie possible make this movie any less enjoyable?  I hardly
think so.  The writers and producers of the film have prepared a story
with a good deal of human warmth, conflict, drama, and no shortage of
humor, centering on a world which we have never seen before  the hidden
world of toys.
     Yes, maybe those toys of yours that seemed to have lives of their
own--really did!  What we have here are intelligent, adult characters
whose occupation is essentially to be a toy!  The conflict comes from
the fact that the favorite toy in Andys Room, a talking pull-string
sheriff doll named Woody, has some new competition, a sleek,
push-button talking science-fiction character named Buzz Lightyear.
Buzz has a few problems of his own, though.  Its not until well into
the movie that he realizes he *is* a toy, and it throws him into a deep
depression, until Woody convinces him that being a toy is actually a
pretty good job.
     Of course, by this time, the two have been captured by the
neighbors kid  a sadistic whelp named Sid who likes to blow up his toys
with firecrackers, and rebuild the parts into horrible plastic
abominations.  Worse still, Buzz and Woodys kid, Andy, and his family,
are moving the next day!  The remainder of the adventure, and I wont
give it away for those of you who haven't seen it, focuses on Buzz and
Woody getting away from Sid and making their way back to Andy.  Its a
great adventure that I highly recommend.
     Just one word of warning: don't go to see it just for the
technical aspects of it.  Sure, the computer animation is highly
impressive.  And maybe it *will* be outmoded in a couple of years, but
this movie *won't* be, and neither will the very *human* talent and
imagination that *really* made this movie possible, and thats something
no computer will *ever* be able to accomplish!

Title
Review for Apollo 13 (1995)
     I've seen a good number of movies this summer--more than usual,
actually, and there's several more I'm looking forward to.  Thus far,
I've been to CASPER, BATMAN FOREVER, CRIMSON TIDE, DIE HARD WITH A
VENGEANCE, POCAHONTAS, and am looking forward to attending JUDGE DREDD,
UNDER SIEGE 2, and MORTAL KOMBAT.
     As much as I've enjoyed each of these movies as they've come
along, none of them have compared for pure emotional intensity as
APOLLO 13.  I am not given to emotional reactions in movie theaters.
This one had me in tears several times.
     Even though we all knew the outcome, that the astronauts would get
home safely, the sheer drama of the film more than compensated for what
would usually be a terrible hindrance for a movie--knowing how it turns
out.
     Every aspect of this drama--the astronauts trying to survive, the
Mission Control people having to scrap everything they knew to find
ways to *keep* them alive and get them back, the families trying to
cope--and the disappointment in being *so close* to the moon--and not
making it, were brought full force to the screen.
     The cinematography was spectacular.  You weren't looking at
"special effects" here.  In fact, some of the filming actually took
place in zero-gravity! Ron Howard, Tom Hanks, and crew got permission
from NASA to use a training plane known as the "vomit comet", which
flies in ascending and descending parabolas to simulate zero-gravity.
     Words cannot easily describe the drama and intensity of this
movie.  Go see it.  You'll see what I mean.
     On a personal note, I was alive in 1970, when all this happened
for real (that this incredible adventure did actually take place truly
enhances the movie).  I was 10 at the time, but my father was in the
news business, so I heard a lot about it.  This movie took me back *and*
brought me up to date.
     The closing words of Tom Hanks/Jim Lovell in the film should be a
rallying cry. "Sometimes I still look up at the moon, and wonder when
we'll return." It can't be too soon.  Would I go? Knowing the dangers,
the risks, if given the opportunity, would this 35-year-old graphic
artist take a trip on a multi-story bullet to the moon? Just hand me an
astronaut suit and point me to the launch pad.

Title
Review for Casper (1995)
     I wasn't entirely sure what to expect when I entered the theater
for CASPER.  I'd seen some of the promos, which looked visually
impressive, but Casper had never been one of my favorite comic/cartoon
characters as a kid.  I suppose my main reason for going was to see if
the special effects would prove as impressive as the advertisements
seemed to show them to be.
     They were that and more.  CASPER is yet another victory for the
people (and computers!) at ILM, who in the past few years have brought
us the magnificent visuals of JURASSIC PARK, and the more cartoonish
images of THE FLINTSTONES.  CASPER is a different sort of entity,
appearing at once cartoonish and yet having to function, along with his
three obnoxious uncles, in a comparatively realistic setting.
     One of the prior reviewers mentioned that, after a time, he forgot
he was looking at computer-generated images and accepted them as just
other characters in the film.  So did I, and I tend to be fairly
analytical when it comes to special effects.  Additionally, this movie
should get an Oscar for set design.  Casper's home makes the Addams
Family mansion look like a reject from a trailer park.
     Speaking of the Addams Family, Christina Ricci turns in a
wonderful performance as young Kat, who quickly becomes Casper's close
friend, the first he's ever really had.  She's so charming, and has
such a pleasant smile, it's a shame she never got to do that much in
the Addams' films --!
     This movie impressed me more on just the technical levels,
though.  Although the story is somewhat disjointed in areas, it works
on the level it needs to.  This movie never tries to be deeply
philosophical, intellectual, or, thank God, political.  All it ever
tries to do is entertain, and in that, it succeeded magnificently.
     The climatic scene, with Casper and Kat on the dance floor during
a Halloween party, is one of the most charming scenes I've seen in
movies in a very long time.  Best of all, there is virtually nothing
offensive in this film.  A couple of scenes could be called, at worst,
tasteless.  For anyone looking for a movie that is just plain fun, and
that you can take the kids to, CASPER gets my highest recommendation.

Title
Review for Indian in the Cupboard, The (1995)
     As with CASPER, I went to THE INDIAN IN THE CUPBOARD uncertain of
what to expect, and not really expecting a whole lot.  It looked
amusing, and certainly interesting from a special effects standpoint,
and it was based on a British children's story book, many of which are
wonderful adventures (I recommend the original version of 101
DALMATIANS to anyone).
     And, as with CASPER, the movie far, *far* exceeded my
expectations.  THE INDIAN IN THE CUPBOARD is a truly wonderful,
marvelous, and magical adventure.  For those unfamiliar with the story,
a young boy named Omri receives, among other birthday presents, an
antique cupboard and a small plastic Indian.  Placing the Indian in the
cupboard (!) and locking it with a special key somehow (and they never
explain how, but this isn't "Star Trek," people--they don't *have* to
explain) brings the Indian to life.  Or more accurately, brings a
miniaturized Iroquois Indian named Little Bear to the cupboard. (I have
to say, it makes you wonder if there's a six-foot plastic Indian out
there in the past someplace after that).
     Omri soon learns a number of lessons, *none* of which are, thank
God, crammed down the audience's throat.  One is that such a wonder as
this cupboard must be treated carefully, as he learns when he crams
Darth Vader, a G.I. Joe, Robocop, a Jurassic Park dinosaur, and a Star
Trek Ferengi and Cardassian in the cupboard, and miniaturized chaos
ensues for a truly hysterical multiple cameo.
     Omri also learns that the little Indian must be treated with care
and respect.  It's a person, not a toy.  It's a lesson that Omri's
friend is a little slow to pick up on, as this youngster brings a
cowboy and horse to life.  But even he learns eventually.
     There are subtle lessons on friendship, respect, life and death,
all woven through the picture, but none pounded over your head.  You're
left with, as I said, a truly wonderful and magical adventure whose
special effects are just as carefully and subtly woven throughout the
movie.  If you've got kids, go see it.  If you don't have kids, go see
it anyway.  I don't, and I still enjoyed it.
