Authors
Stephen Baker
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Very Brady Sequel, A (1996)
Is it just me or does the sequel of a very successful film seem inferior
to the original?
Well here's a perfect example to that statement.  A Very Brady Sequel
didn't have the freshness or the warpness of the original "The Brady
Bunch Movie"  After coming out of the showing of it, I thought that for
myself.
Here we have a same rehash of some of the original episodes that aired
before most of the people who will see this movie weren't weren't even
born and didn't grow up with the show, even in the first time
syndication.  Although, there was some differences between the original
episodes and this movie.  Carol's so-called husband comes back from the
dead, Greg and Marcia start to explore their sexual feelings about each
other, and Peter loses his deep voice at the end of the original movie
and goes back to the whiny high pitched voice that he had in the
original film.
This is not a movie where you'll be getting any laugh out loud comedy
but you do smile during the film and that must be acknowledged.  I
thought that the movie would have worked better if the Bradys were
portrayed again as freaks as they were in the original movie, but mabye
that's not the point of the film at all.
Ok here's the basic story-line of the film.
Carol's adventurer husband comes back from the dead to reunite with his
wife (and also to steal a priceless horse sculptur). Caorl's husband is
really her first husband's assistant Trevor who knows the second horse
that was auctioned off for $20 million is in the posession of the
Brady's and must get it to Hawaii to collect.  Greg and Marcia fight
over the attic as to who gets it because their both older. They end up
sharing the room and start exploring their feelings for each other. 
Peter becomes a assistant to his dad at his firm for the summer which he
doesn't want to do. Bobby and Cindy look for the Kitty-Kerry-All doll
with a junior detective kit and Jan makes up her imaginary boyfriend. 
After stealing the horse from an auction Trevor kidnaps Carol and heads
to Hawaii and the Bradys follow.  
There is some predictibally in the film and you can almost figure it out
before the final result.  For example Carol gets a hair cut and comes
out the same.
You can tell that this film will transfer to video well since it was
filmed in 1.85 instead of the 2.35 wide screen aspect and it might have
worked better as a straight-to-video release.
This film is for true Brady fans who will sit through 90 minutes of the
rehash of the old tv show.  If you don't like the show, don't see the
movie.
