Authors
Chris Casino
Number of Reviews
18

Title
Review for Dracula: Dead and Loving It (1995)
**1/2 out of **** (not up to standards, but has it's moments).
Cast: Leslie Nielsen (Count Dracula), Mel Brooks (Dr. Abarham
Van Helsing), Peter MacNichol (Renfield), Steven Weber (Jonathan
Harker), Harvey Korman (Dr. Arthur Seward), Amy Yasbeck (Mina),
Lysette Anthony (Lucy), Megan Cavanaugh (Chambermaid), Mark
Blankfield (Martin), Ezio Greggio (Coach Driver), Anne
Bancroft (Madam Ouspenskaya).
Crew: Directed by Mel Brooks, Screenplay by Mel Brooks,
Steve Haberman, and Rudy De Luca, from an original
script by Haberman and DeLuca. Produced by Mel Brooks,
Peter Schindler & Robert Latham Brown & Leah Zappy.
Cinematography by Michael D. O'Shea.
What do you get when you team two of the funniest men in
comedy, Mel Brooks and Leslie Nielsen, and have Nielsen
do a takeoff on every classic Dracula film ever made,
with Nielsen parodying Bela Lugosi's Dracula?
A surefire winner like Young Frankenstein? 
Nielsen plays the Count, who is visited by lawyer Renfield
(MacNichol who, despite being amusing, is a poor substitute 
for Marty Feldman, who so obviously would've played this role, 
and done better with it, if he were still alive today) about 
leasing Carfax Abby, the house in England the Count wants
to buy. He takes him on as a slave, and they meet
Jonathan Harker (Weber), his wife Mina, who Dracula
bites, Dr. Seward (an amusing Harvey Korman),
and Lucy (Anthony) whom he kills. When Seward
has his nasty suspicions, he calls upon the
vampire expert, Dr. Van Helsing (Brooks. He's
funny, but nowhere near as funny as someone like
Gene Wilder could've been as Van Helsing)
to confront the Count.
This isn't the best film Mel Brooks has made, not even
close. This isn't up to the "loving tribute" style
his other monster parody, YOUNG FRANKENSTEIN, was--even
though it tries hard to be--and there's a reason for that.
He worked with Gene Wilder on YOUNG FRANKENSTEIN,
and he needed to work with him here too, to make
the film work. If he and Gene Wilder had
collaborated on the script, it might just've worked,
as they work well together. Maybe then, this
would've been in black and white like it should've been.
I also think the cast was wrong. Leslie Nielsen
is one of those comedic actors who's always
funny. Here is no exception, and he does an
excellent Lugosi impression, you can keep him.
Brooks did not act in YOUNG FRANKENSTEIN,
which was a wise idea, and he should've done that here
and given the role of Van Helsing to Gene Wilder,
whom I miss seeing on the screen, and also miss
seeing with Brooks. Comedian Mark Blankfield, who works 
for Brooks now, would've been better suited to be Renfield
instead of guard Martin, and I could see Kenneth
Mars of YOUNG FRANKENSTEIN playing Dr. Seward.
Weber is ideal as Harker as is Yasbeck as
Mina. Only then would this film have been
perfect.
I'd tell you to stick to LOVE AT FIRST BITE, which was
very funny, but I prefer parodies that do not trample
on tradition, which this tries not to do and gets
a passing grade for effort on, and that film does not.

Title
Review for Men in Black (1997)
CAST: Will Smith, Tommy Lee Jones, Linda Fiorentino, Vincent D'Nofrio, Carol Struyken, 
Rip Torn.
I never liked Will Smith as the Fresh Prince, his show was likable but that wasn't his 
doing. As an actor, however, I admire and respect this man, and MEN IN BLACK
makes me admire and respect him more.
I'd seen Will Smith on Jay Leno the night before I saw it. He told you not to go in 
expecting INDEPENDENCE DAY II, which is what people may expect when they go in to see 
this, and admittedly, I'd gone into the theater expecting it, thinking,"Jay Leno
likes Dennis Rodman, so how often is he right?" But this is not INDEPENDENCE DAY II,
it's very different, and that's what's so appealing about it.
Don't get me wrong, I was part of the half of the country that loved ID4, but the
appeal of this film is that Will Smith choses a different type of alien movie here
and doesn't *entirely* typecast himself, and that shows he's good at picking scripts.
Smith plays Agent Jay, a young MIB recruited by Agent Kay (an impressive Tommy Lee
Jones, who works surprisingly well with Smith), a grizzled MIB who's fought aliens
of all shapes and sizes. Anyhow, the plot deals with a giant bug-like alien (D'Nofrio)
who comes to Earth in human form and possesses a farmer in search of a device
which is the key to universal peace. Used in his hands, it can be a weapon
that will destroy Earth in a certain amount of time, unless Jay and Kay recover
it, with the help of a female Doctor (Fiorentino).
This movie tries a lot of different stuff, comedy, SF, and buddy cop movie stuff,
all three of which work well. It mostly concentrates on the buddy cop relationship 
between Smith and Jones, and that's why this movie treats itself like a buddy cop action 
movie, but it also deals with our fears about weird people that we don't know about.
It explores the theory,"What if all the weird people you know are aliens?" Case
in point, when Fiorentino says to Smith at the end,"The Emperor of Allariua wants
tickets to the Bulls game," he replies,"Let's put in some calls to Dennis Rodman,
he's from that planet." If *that* guy wouldn't pass as an alien, I dunno who 
would! 
So if you refuse to see this movie because it's another alien movie with Smith and you 
hated ID4 to begin with, give it a shot, it deserves it, it's worth it, and it's very 
different.

Title
Review for UHF (1989)
Cast: "Weird Al" Yankovic (George Newman), Victoria Jackson (Teri), 
Michael Richards (Stanley Spadowski), Kevin McCarthy (R.J. Fletcher), 
David Bowe (Bob), Fran Drescher (Pamela Finklestein), Stanley Brock
(Uncle Harvey), Sue Ann Langdon (Aunt Esther), Billy Barty (Noodles),
Gedde Wantanabe (Kuni).
I'm a huge "Weird Al" Yankovic fan. I love all his song
parodies, and I have since I was twelve. I have all his albums, and
I even had the priviledge of meeting him three years ago.
Does this have any influence over my review?
A little. But if there is a lousy song on one of his albums, I always
admit it. But this is a geniunely funny movie. Some of the critics
who complained about it said that there was no plot or point to it.
Guys, it was a parody from "Weird Al", what do you expect, Shakespeare?
George Newman (nicely played by Yankovic) and his buddy Bob are constantly
fired from jobs because of George's overactive imagination (which makes
for some nice parodies). He suddenly becomes the manager of a small
UHF station which he uses to create shows from his bizzare imagination.
The baddie of the film is R.J. Fletcher (McCarthy, well cast),
the owner of the rival station who kidnaps U62's franchise
player/janitor Stanley Spadowski (Richards, the movie's real hero)
so he can attempt to buy the station and tear it down.
While the story does suck, the majority of the parodies couldn't be
funnier and the fine cast tries their best. 
Viewed today as a cult classic, when first released it barely
made any movie because it was released beside a dozen
summer blockbusters. Although Al was happy with it (after all,
it got some of the best test scores since the original RoboCop),
this fact was a contributing factor to his not making any more
movies. It really is a shame, as I (and every other fan he has)
would really love to see him do more in the movie industry.

Title
Review for Young Frankenstein (1974)
Cast: Gene Wilder (Dr. Fredrick Frankenstein), Peter Boyle (The
Monster), Marty Feldman (Igor), Madeline Kahn (Elizabeth),
Teri Garr (Inga), Cloris Leachman (Frau Bleaucher), Gene Hackman
(Blind man)
Crew: Director: Mel Brooks, Story/Screenplay: Gene Wilder/Mel
Brooks, Producer: Michael Gruskoff, Cinematography: 
Gerald Hirschfield, Music: John Morris.
Gene Wilder and Mel Brooks were nominated for the best screenplay
Oscar for this film in 1974. What puzzles me is, what they
possibly had that won, and did it measure up to this?
Probably not, as this loving parody of the old Universal
Frankensteins, is not only one of the funniest films
I've ever seen in my life, but if it had been made
forty years earlier, it just might've scared the
living hell out of people.
Wilder (who came up with the concept and fits the mad scientist
role like a charm) plays Dr. Fredrick Frankenstein (that's
Frahnk-on-steen!), a supposedly humble college professor
who is ashamed of what his Granddaddy, Victor, did to
his family name. Nonetheless, Herr Faulkstein, a visitor
to his class from his grandfather's village, comes
to him telling him he inheirted great-granddaddy's
estate. He also inherits Feldman's riotous hunchbacked 
Igor ("What hump?"), who insists that his name is "Eye-Gore",
and Teri Garr's sultry Inga, whom he seduces in spite
of having a somewhat snobbish finacee, Elizabeth (Kahn,
a riot as always). Also aiding him is Cloris Leachman's
caretaker Frau Bleaucher, who makes horses scream like
hell!
Together, they create the usual Monster, and as usual,
despite Freddy's good intentions, Igor screws up and he
becomes a creature who scares everyone, even though he
only wants love.
This is the correct way to do a parody. As hilarious
as this is, if the jokes had been edited out, this
could easily pass as a regular Frankenstein film,
and that's wise. It has an excellent script by Wilder
and Brooks (that got robbed at the Oscars, robbed I tell you!)
fine B&W cinematography, great direction by Brooks, who
proves he can be a fine filmmaker as well as joker
when he wants to be here (despite his standard sexual
puns, which are toned down a bit here), as
well as fine performances by all, particularly
Wilder's mad doctor, Feldman's hunchback (who must've ad-libbed
most of his side-splitting performance), and Boyle's Monster, 
who charms the hell out of the viewer.
Two particular highlights are the blind man sequence with
Gene Hackman, and the Puttin' On The Ritz routine.
I've heard this was ripped off fourteen years later
by a film called Frankenstein General Hospital,
which I have not seen. It's supposed to be the worst
Frankenstein film ever made, and by turning this
film into a color/lab scenes in B&W, low budget
movie set in a hospital, I can see why. It's been
referred to as the poor man's Young Frankenstein. I haven't
seen this film, but I would still advise you:
Accept no cheap imitations. When you try to copy
a movie this good, you will fail. Of course the
filmmakers of Frankenstein General Hospital
failed miserably, however that's their problem.

Title
Review for Thin Line Between Love and Hate, A (1996)
*1/2 out of **** (poor, but has some good moments).
Directed by Martin Lawrence, Written by Martin Lawrence, Bentley Kyle Evans,
Kenny Buford, Kim Bass, Produced by Martin Lawrence.
Cast: Martin Lawrence (Darnell Wright), Lynn Whitfield (Brandi Web),
Regina King (Mia Wilkins), Bobby Brown (Tee), Della Reese (Momma Wright)
The main problem with Martin Lawrence's pet project, A Thin Line Between Love 
and Hate, like any Fatal Attraction variation where the protagonist is a man,
is that his character is an irresponsible jerk, and if that is the
case, it doesn't seem to do anything except justify the woman's
actions.
That is especially the case in Lawrence's Darnell Wright. He is one of
those macho guys with women lined up a mile long. Now don't
think I condone this just because I'm male. My philosophy is,
if you are one of the few heterosexual males lucky enough to get
your hands on a beautiful, kind girl, you should treat her
like a princess and respect her. Darnell doesn't think like this. He 
sleeps with these girls once and dumps them. And by the period
in the film he discovered that his newest target, beautiful, wealthy 
Brandi Web (played nicely by Whitfield) who runs a successful real 
estate business, is out to kill him for dumping her for his 
childdhood friend Mia (King), I found myself thinking, "I'm
supposed to feel sorry for this guy?" 
After all, it is largely Darnell's fault. If he is lining up
all these women, you'd think he'd have enough common sense
to think it would backfire on him one day, as his mother says it
does. But he doesn't, so you get the sense that he's not only
irresponsible, but also pretty dumb. You especially get this
sense that he's dumb after Brandi tells him she killed her
husband for allegedly abusing her. (I'd put my pants on in two
seconds after that!)
Now, Brandi is a psycho bitch, but it's hard not to agree with what she
says to Darnell during the finale about guys like him treating her 
like garbage.
One final flaw, though, is letting Brandi fall for Darnell to begin
with. Brandi is a classy, intelligent woman with an MBA from
Harvard, who initally resists Darnell's "immature play"
as she calls it, as any woman like her would in real life. 
But all of a sudden she says yes. But when you listen to
Darnell's four letter word vocabulary watch his actions,
you wonder why such an intelligent woman would fall for
a guy like Darnell period, much less have such an unhealthy obsession
for him!
Lawrence can be good when he wants to, but in order to prove it, 
he needs to let other people write and direct his movies.
Look at this movie. Four writers, as a result it's too long
(two hours, when it could've easily worked at ninety minutes!)
and it has a lot of subplots and characters that appear and
disappear as quickly as they came (which makes me think the
writers didn't get along), all of which isn't necessary.
There are some bright spots, though. Whitfield, Regina King,
Della Reese, and Bobby Brown all do what they can with
lazily written parts, and they help it out a lot.
And there are some funny parts (like, for example, the
scene where Reese attempts to fight Whitfeld for 
harrassing her son and damaging her property),
but they're just not enough to sustain the film.

Title
Review for Ging chaat goo si (1985)
Crew: Produced by Raymond Chow, Written by Jackie Chan and Edward Tang,
Directed by Jackie Chan
Cast: Jackie Chan (Officer Jackie Chan), Bridgette Lin (Selena Fong), Maggie 
Cheung (May), Ken Tong (Inspector Bill Wong), Chu Yeun (Tom Ku)
I have a tremendous amount of respect for Jackie Chan.
He makes his fight scenes realistic in that he gets hurt all
the time (unlike American action stars) and he risks
his life for his audience. I can't ask any more
from my action heroes than that. Except for one thing:
They should keep making movies like this. 
After returning to Hong Kong after shooting the amateurish
Dirty Harry wannabe movie The Protector for James Glickenhaus
(And where's he now? HELLO!) and putting the finishing touches 
on his version, Jackie Chan decided he wanted to do a cop movie 
his way and cooked up one with his frequent screenwriter Edward 
Tang, and, as expected of Jackie, it's a doozy!
The plot concerns Officer Kevin Chan (renamed Jackie in the
dubbed-for-US version I saw) who is framed for the murder
of a fellow officer trying to protect a witness. He spends
the rest of the movie running from Tom Ku's mobsters,
policemen, and, in a hilarious subplot, his jealous
girlfriend May.
Not much of a plot, I realize, and plots are usually irrelevant
in a Jackie Chan movie. You have so much fun watching the
kung fu stunts and action mixed with the Chaplin-esque
comedy, you don't mind that there's no story around
what's going on. Here is no exception.
However, I do realize I complained particularly in my review
of The Protector of the film's lack of a plot. That
in itself isn't really a problem. The fact that
James Glickenhaus would not allow Chan to be himself
*was*. By turning him into a Dirty Harry cop,
he ruins the appeal of Jackie in the first place.
In an interview years afterward, Glickenhaus
said he did not regret his decision (he obviously never
saw the movie) and said he thought people in the States
wouldn't accept his Asian style. Well, James,
after Rush Hour and Rumble in the Bronx's successes
here, I'll bet you're eating your words (not to mention
free cheese from the government) now, aren't you?
Here, Jackie had total control of this movie.
That is good because he knows how to film
an action movie. James Glickenhaus does not.
Don't believe me? Rent The Protector and Police
Story and compare them side by side, then talk to me again.
As I said in my review of the latter film, if Golden Harvest had hired
John Woo to direct and juice up Glickenhaus' script, it might have
been halfway decent. In the Glickenhaus attempt its'
only saving graces were Jackie and one or two decent fights and
stunts. This isn't the case here. Jackie has total control
and his screenwriter, Edward Tang, totally knows how to
write a real Jackie Chan movie.
I also said in my review of the Protector that they should've
let Jackie be himself in it because Americans would go
wild over a kung fu comedian. In that case, maybe this
film should've been distributed to the U.S.
when it was made like Rumble in the Bronx later was.
Maybe then Americans would've realized what a novelty he
was and he wouldn't have had to've been soured on Hollywood
by The Protector.

Title
Review for Time After Time (1979)
Writer/Director: Nicolas Meyer, Cast: Malcolm McDowell (H.G. Wells), David
Warner (John Leslie Stevenson), Mary Steenburgen (Amy Robbins).
The movie deals with H.G. Wells, a newspaper columnist in Victorian
England, who sees the future as a utopia, where science has solved
all our problems, inventing a time machine that his friend John
Leslie Stevenson (who is later revealed as the mysterious man who's
been killing all these prostitutes, Jack the Ripper) has stolen and
used to travel to 1979. Being that Wells doesn't want Stevenson
wreaking havoc on 'utopia', he uses the time machine to follow him,
and discovers that 1979 is anything but the utopia he envisioned before.
But he does find out that women have become more liberated, which is
something else he'd always hoped for, and he discovers this in Amy
Robbins from 1979 San Francisco (an irritating Mary Steenburgen).
With a plot like that, anybody'd really expect it to be excellent,
and if it isn't, there's something wrong with Nicolas Meyer.
Thankfully, there's nothing wrong with Nicolas Meyer. It's very well
done, McDowell is great as Wells, the film moves along as you'd
expect it, and all in all, it's an excellent film.
Wells is also very well portrayed in the film, too. H.G. Wells was a man who
didn't believe in religion, believed in women's lib, and believed that
science would take care of us. Besides that, he had a very cynical attitude
towards a lot of things, and Nicolas Meyer has written all of this into his
character. He obviously studied Wells, which is very wise, I think.
The only problem is Mary Steenburgen as Amy Robbins. It's partially her
irritating performance, but it's mostly do to her poor character design.
She's supposed to be so liberated, but she never knows what to do once
she's finally convinced that Wells is telling her the truth.
If you can look past that, try the movie out. It's very entertaining,
so I tell you, grab a bucket of popcorn, a glass of soda, and enjoy
H.G. Wells' amusing attempts to catch Jack the Ripper and save utopia.
If you're looking for a good time travel film, you couldn't do much better.
I'd advise would-be filmmakers,"Take a lesson from this flick, folks. This 
is how you make a sci-fi movie."

Title
Review for Doctor Who (1996) (TV)
Directed by Geoffrey Sax, written by Matthew Jacobs, Produced by Peter V. Ware,
Co-Producers Matthew Jacobs and Alex Beaton. Executive producer: Phillip David
Segal.
Cast: Paul McGann (Doctor #8), Eric Roberts (the Master), Daphne Ashbrook (Dr. 
Grace Holloway), Yee Jee Tso (Chang Lee), Sylvester McCoy (Doctor #7).
"He's back, and it's about time." was the motto for this television series
pilot (I call it a pilot, I don't care what FOX network says) revival of the cult 
classic British TV show, DOCTOR WHO, that spawned no series, which means there are no 
smart network execs out there (not exactly news to a lot of people, I know). The
motto was well chosen.
The series was simple, it was about this Time Lord scientist called
the Doctor with thirteen lives who traveled around in a type forty
spaceship called a TARDIS outsmarting all kind of alien baddies,
including the evil Daleks, and the Master, who appears in this
feature, played very badly by Eric Roberts.
As good as this revival was, there is something missing from it to
make sure it was really DOCTOR WHO. Is it the acting?
Paul McGann is just as good as any of the other seven guys who've
played the Doctor (including his predecessor and off-screen friend
Sylvester McCoy, who appears once more for the regeneration scene). He
looks right for the role, is a brilliant actor, and slips effortlessly
into the role, the way my two favorites Jon Pertwee and Tom Baker
would. Daphne Ashbrook brings class to her role as Dr. Grace Holloway,
the Doctor's first companion that he kisses on screen, she is not your
typical female companion who screams, and spends her free time making
coffee for the Doctor, she is a tough, spunky American, and Ashbrook
shows this well. Young Yee Jee Tso shows promise as Chang Lee, and
I've seen him in other stuff in which he usually plays the punk kid
who dies at the end (this film included), which, IMHO, wastes his
talent.
The only problem with the acting is Eric Roberts. One time he had to
say to McGann's Doctor,"I always dress for the occasion." But he broke
it up, and said it so slowly that it wounded up sounding like a song
lyric,"I always... Dress... For the occasion." You need an actor less
slow and less reliant on moving his hands to act, and who's also
British, like McGann is as the Doctor. Executive producer Phil Segal
said he was casted because FOX insisted on having one American star in
the role. I dunno who thought of casting him, but if they're reading
this: NEWS FLASH: Eric Roberts is *not* a star! He rides on his
sister's coattails, and any hit movie he makes has nothing to do with
him.
Is this problem the kisses to the past?
They have references to the show so subtle that non fans would not
notice them, only Whovians would, and they're good.
Is it the script or the movie as a whole?
The script is a classy piece of work, featuring a Master who can spit
slime out of his mouth and nice dialogue, and the movie as a whole is
one fans will love, and it is a good stand alone viewing for nonfans
to enjoy the series.
Simple: No plot. The Master, on his last legs, sends for the Doctor to
rescue him after the Daleks put him on trial on their planet Skaro and
exterminate him.  The Doctor attempts to take his remains back to
Gallifrey, but they accidentally land in San Francisco, 1999, December
31, where the Master, with young street hood Chang Lee's help, opens
the Eye of Harmony, which will suck the Earth through it at midnight
if the Doctor, with the help of female surgeon, Dr. Grace Holloway,
doesn't close it by then. Virtually no plot.
I was told the movie would've featured the Daleks on screen and
started with more of a courtroom drama between the Master and the
Daleks, but a lot of rewriting went on on the set. That shows how
smart people are, as it would have made the movie a hell of a lot more
interesting, and that would've gotten a four star rating out of me.

Title
Review for Ready to Rumble (2000)
Cast: David Arquette (Gordie Boggs), Oliver Platt (Jimmy King), 
Scott Caan (Sean Dawkins), Bill Goldberg (himself), Diamond Dallas Page 
(himself),
Joe Palitaliano (Titus Sinclair), Steve Borden (Sting), Rose McGowan 
(Sasha),
Martin Landau (Sal).
Let me begin this review by saying that I am a huge fan of professional 
wrestling, and
I'm not ashamed to say it. I'm not too fond of Ted Turner's World 
Championship Wrestling,
however, and after this ridiculous excuse for a wrestling movie they 
have put out, I have 
even less respect for them.
Gordie Boggs (Arquette, aptly cast as a moron, as he is one) and his 
best friend Sean Dawkins 
(Scott Caan. The son of James Caan should not be reduced to garbage like 
this!) are two losers from 
Wyoming with no jobs and no girlfriends, who look up to World 
Championship Wrestling champion 
Jimmy King (a terribly casted Oliver Platt), as he is everything they 
are not. They finally 
get to see him live and he is screwed out of his title by the evil, 
ruthless promoter Titus 
Sinclair (a wasted Palitaliano, in a role originally meant for real-life 
WCW President Eric 
Bischoff, whose name was written all over the role!). Gordie and Sean 
track down King in 
Atlanta and discover that he is not really the English king the WCW 
writers created for him, 
but a drunken, ignorant Southerner who is as irritated by these two 
lunkheads as Bob Newhart 
was by Larry, Darryl, and Darryl. They sneak him back onto WCW TV, after 
which Sinclair 
agrees to book him in a steel cage match in Las Vegas at WCW's next 
pay-per-view, against 
his rival, Diamond Dallas Page. If he wins, King gets his title and his 
career back, plus one 
million dollars. 
WCW President Eric Bischoff, knowing his promotion was desperate with 
bad writing and ratings
skyrocketing down thanks to the far superior World Wrestling Federation, 
came up with the idea
for this movie hoping it would save WCW. He was then fired and rehired 
two months ago, but by the 
time he'd left, they had already been contracted to do the film, and 
Bischoff could not play Sinclair 
(which, in itself, is for the best, as anybody who has seen him on WCW 
programming knows that 
Bischoff is NO actor!). The characters of Gordie and Sean show you 
exactly what Eric Bischoff
thinks of his fans. He thinks of them as young, dumb pathetic idiots who 
will believe anything 
that will be put out in front of them is real. That is why he doesn't 
take the fans into 
consideration when he books a Nitro or a pay-per-view. I have news for 
you, Eric: NO wrestling fan in
this day and age is dumb enough to believe that professional wrestling 
isn't for show, unless they 
are four years old. This is 2000, you know, not 1985. Bischoff will try 
to cover up criticism like that by saying it is a comedy, but I have no 
doubt in my mind that if this had been a dramatic, ROCKY-style
film (which it probably should have been. Professional wrestling is 
ridiculed enough as it is, why 
should the first wrestling movie in ten years be a comedy?), Gordie and 
Sean would have been
portrayed in the same light.
Anybody who has seen the documentary WRESTLING WITH SHADOWS, documenting 
WWF owner Vince McMahon's
double-crossing of Bret Hart, will probably realize via the reviews and 
previews of READY TO 
RUMBLE, that it is basically a rip-off of that film's storyline with the 
poor man's Wayne and
Garth thrown in for comedic affect. You can tell Titus Sinclair is 
supposed to poke fun at
Vince, but any self-respecting wrestling fan knows that Sinclair is more 
inspired by Bischoff
than Vince, and that Vince did what he had to do to Bret Hart. All of 
these aspects of the film,
needless to say, seriously offended me as a wrestling fan.
Another thing I found disturbing about the film was the romance between 
Gordie and Nitro Girl
Sasha (The lovely Rose McGowan). Wouldn't it have been easier to bring 
something new into the relationship rather than revealing she was only 
working on Gordie at Sinclair's insistance? I hate that cliche!
The World Wrestling Federation would have made a better film. They are 
the promotion everyone
cares about, they are winning the ratings, they have better wrestlers, 
and they take their fans
into consideration and don't treat fans like morons. So, Vince, how 
about a movie?

Title
Review for Ready to Rumble (2000)
Cast: David Arquette (Gordie Boggs), Oliver Platt (Jimmy King),
Scott Caan (Sean Dawkins), Bill Goldberg (himself), Joe Palitaliano (Titus
Sinclair), Rose McGowan (Sasha), Diamond Dallas Page (himself) Steve Borden (Sting), Martin 
Landau (Sal) and several other WCW guys.
Crew: Directed by Brian Robbins, written by Steven Brill, Executive produced by Eric Bischoff.
Let me just start this review off by saying I am a huge fan of professional wrestling and have been for 
fifteen years. I am not too fond of Ted Turner's World Championship Wrestling, however, and
I am even less fond of it now after seeing this ridiculous excuse for a wrestling movie 
tonight.
The plot concerns two losers named Gordie Boggs (David Arquette, aptly cast as a neandrathal) and
Sean Dawkins (Scott Caan) who are so obsessed with professional wrestling that they believe
everything they see on WCW Monday Nitro is something more than a flashy show. When they
finally get to see their hero, WCW World Champion Jimmy King (played by Oliver Platt.
I personally would have gotten a wrestler to play King), he ends up getting screwed over 
by evil promoter Titus Sinclair (A wasted Palitaliano, in a role originally meant for
real-life WCW President Eric Bischoff before he was fired and rehired six months later, and 
if anyone reads this who knows Bischoff, they will agree with me that the role of Sinclair 
had his name written all over it), they embark on a quest to find him and help him get his 
title back. When they find him, they discover in horror that Jimmy King's real life is 
nothing like it is on WCW TV. King is a drunken Atlanta native rather than an English king. 
After convincing King that they don't care that his persona isn't real, Gordie and Sean
sneak him back onto WCW Monday Nitro, after which Sinclair agrees to book him in a main
event steel cage match for the WCW title and his job back in Las Vegas at WCW's 
pay-per-view. 
Gee, whiz, there are so many things wrong with this movie, I don't know where to begin.
Yes, I do...
1. The characters of Gordie and Sean show you what Eric Bischoff, WCW President who thought 
up this project, thinks of wrestling fans. He thinks of us as idiots who take everything wrestlers do 
seriously. He actually thinks wrestling fans are dumb enough to believe this is meant to be
taken seriously. I got news for you, Eric: NOBODY above the age of four is dumb enough for
that, this is 2000, you know, not 1985! I know he'll probably cover arguments up by saying
it isn't meant to be taken seriously but it is, because that's how big an ego Bischoff has.
2. There was a documentary made in 1998, Wrestling with Shadows, that documented the owner of 
the World Wrestling Federation, Vince McMahon's screwing Bret "The Hitman" Hart out of the
title. This movie's storyline is basically a comic rip-off of that plot with the poor man's
Wayne and Garth thrown in. Eric Bischoff is trying to make Vince McMahon look bad with the
character of Titus Sinclair, but any wrestling fan knows Titus is more like Bischoff than
McMahon, and that Vince did what he had to do to Bret Hart.
3. The movie's main wrestler, Jimmy King, has an English king gimmick and the audience cheered
big for him. No wrestling fan actually enjoys characters like that in this day and age,
we want bad asses today!
4. Why make this a comedy, instead of an emotional, ROCKY-style drama? I know wrestling
isn't a sport, but you can still get behind a guy who struggles as a wrestler and finally
makes it in the end.
5. In the movie, Gordie starts up an ill-fated romance with Nitro Girl Sasha (the lovely
Rose McGowan. What she sees in that freak Marilyn Manson I'll never understand), only
to find that she has hospitalized King's trainer for Sinclair. Wouldn't it have been
easier to just have them fall in love instead of doing the typical spy-girl-for-the-bad-guy
cliche? I hate that.
6. Last, but certainly not least, there was not one single moment in this movie that I
could not predict would happen, nor did I laugh once either.
The World Wrestling Federation should have been the wrestling company to make the movie,
for these reasons:
1. They're the better promotion.
2. They have better and younger talent, performers and wrestlers.
3. They give their fans what they want and don't treat them like idiots.
4. They're winning the ratings and they're the promotion everybody cares about.
5. Simply put, they could make a movie a hundred times better, and they could do
a wrestling movie the right way.
The only good thing about this movie was they played outtakes at the end. And if
I spoiled it for you, good, I saved you from wasting seven dollars.

Title
Review for Spy Hard (1996)
** out of **** (fair for cable, but don't go out of your way for it)
Cast: Leslie Nielsen (Dick Steele), Nicholette Sheridan (Veronique
Urinksy), Charles Durning (the Director), Barry Bostwick (Norman
Coleman), Mason Gamble (McCluckey), Andy Griffith (General
Rancor).
Crew: Directed by Rick Friedberg, Written by Rick Friedberg,
Jason Friedberg, Aaron Seltzner & Dick Chudnow. Produced
by Rick Friedberg, Dick Chudnow, & Leslie Nielsen.
The problem with this mediocre spoof of spy movies
(which should've been much better considering how
good it's star is at this kind of stuff)
is so simple, and that makes me think the person
who gave it the green light must have an I.Q.
lower than Forrest Gump not to realize it.
And I'll get to that in a minute.
Special Agent Dick Steele (Nielsen, who rises above the material,
as he is his usual funny self here) lost his girlfriend
fifteen years ago to his longtime nemesis, General Rancor
(Griffith, who is totally pathetic!) in a parody of CLIFFHANGER,
which caused him to retire. Fifteen years later, Rancor
is still alive and armless. He's preparing to blow up
the world (or something like that, I only saw
this once, give me a break, will you?) with a
prototype bomb invented by special agent 3.14 (Sheridan)'s
father, and Steele is called back into duty.
Anyway, the problem with this movie is, the people
who made the movie are amateurs when it comes to
the parody field (they never even did a film!), and you 
can tell because they try to copy the Zucker Bros. and 
Jim Abrahams and think they can get away with it.
As a result, the occasional misfired joke that
is inevitably found in a Zucker Bros. film every now
and then is all over the place in this movie.
I'm not blaming any of this on Leslie Nielsen,
however. You always have to call him
when you want a parody leading man done
correctly because people like Armand Assante
(FATAL INSTINCT) and Emillo Estevez (LOADED
WEAPON ONE) don't even compare to him.
He's good at this kind of stuff, and he's
always funny. Here is no exception.
In fact, he's the best part of this
movie. If not for him, this movie
might've been worse than FATAL INSTINCT, if that is
at all possible.
Avoid this, please. If you want to see a funny spy movie
spoof, stick to AUSTIN POWERS.

Title
Review for Silenzio dei prosciutti, Il (1994)
Written and directed by Ezio Greggio, Produced by Ezio Greggio and Julie
Corman, Released by Thirtieth Century Wolf.
Cast: Ezio Greggio, Billy Zane, Dom DeLuise, Charlene Tilton,
Bubba Smith, Martin Balsam, Joanna Pacula, Stuart Pankin, Rip Taylor,
Shelley Winters, Phyllis Diller, John Carpenter, Joe Dante, Mel Brooks,
John Landis.
As a longtime fan of Mel Brooks and AIRPLANE! type movies, I'd have
to say I thought this Italian made production (with suspiciously
American actors, spoken in English) deserved a better rep, because
although critics like Leonard Maltin panned it, it really isn't that
bad.
But I hate professional critics anyway. They never judge movies
fairly, and they never give credit to the really good movies, they
just think they do. This film is a prime example.
Rookie fed Joe D. Foster goes on his first big case, tracking
down a serial killer at a motel with the help of Dr. Animal Cannibal
Pizza (an absolutely hilarious Dom DeLuise, with two of his sons in
cameos), in this parody of SILENCE OF THE LAMBS and PSYCHO.
Director/writer Greggio comes up with a reasonably funny farce
(his take on the PSYCHO shower scene is a riot), and
also gives himself a funny role as the serial killer.
If he plays his cards right, he could be the next Mel Brooks.
The only real problem with the film is that he can't
seem to decide whether he wants to do the movie like Mel
Brooks or like AIRPLANE! He kind of mixes them together,
and that's not a combination that works extremely well.
Other than that, the movie's worth a look. It's
pretty funny, and I look forward to many other
films from Italian Ezio Greggio.

Title
Review for Young Frankenstein (1974)
Cast: Gene Wilder (Dr. Fredrick Frankenstein), Peter Boyle (The
Monster), Marty Feldman (Igor), Madeline Kahn (Elizabeth),
Teri Garr (Inga), Cloris Leachman (Frau Blucher),
Kenneth Mars (Inspector Kemp), Gene Hackman (Blind man).
Written by Gene Wilder & Mel Brooks, Directed by Mel Brooks,
produced by Michael Gruskoff, Cinematography by
Gerald Hirschfield, Music by John Morris.
This film, penned by Wilder and Brooks based upon a concept
Wilder came up with, was nominated for a Best Screenplay
Oscar in 1974. What puzzles me is what could've possibly
won over it, because it's easily one of the funniest
movies ever made, and it's also genuinely good because
it could just as easily have been released as a straight
horror film.
This loving parody of the old Universal Frankenstein pictures,
using beautiful black and white photography and a chilling
Universal-style music score by John Morris (Brooks' usual
music man) stars Gene Wilder as Dr. Fredrick Frankenstein (sorry,
Fronk-on-steen, as he prefers it in the film, and says
repeatedly), who inherits his grandfather, Victor's castle,
which he is ashamed of, as well as his assistants
Igor the usual hunchback (a hilarious Feldman), and
busty Inga (Garr). He decides to create his own
Monster (Boyle) in an attempt to clear the family name,
but as usual, the hunchback steals the wrong brain
from the laboratory, and the Monster goes on a menacing
spree throughout the countryside, much to the charign
of the villagers and the one armed, peculiar voiced
Inspector Kemp (Mars, in a funny takeoff on Lionel Atwill
from SON OF FRANKENSTEIN).
This film is an excellent example of the fact that Mel Brooks
and Gene Wilder can make a really good parody that is faithful
to the genre if they like it well enough, which they obviously
did in this case. Mel Brooks directs with the style
of James Whale, and as I say, he could've just as easily
edited out the jokes, despite his usual sexual puns,
which, thankfully, are toned down here--and I'm sure
Wilder is to thank for that--, and it really is
in the style of the old movies.
Not only that, but we also have the excellent performances
from each and every one of the cast members (and thankfully,
Brooks does not appear like he usually does). Particularly
good are Wilder's mad doctor, Boyle's Monster, and Feldman's
riotous hunchback. I'm not forgetting about Kahn as
Elizabeth or Leachman as Frau Blucher (EEEHHEEEHEEEHEEEHEEHEE! 
Sorry, couldn't resist), though.
1. Tie: Puttin' on the Ritz routine/blind man part
2. Feldman and Wilder's banter.
3. Scene where Wilder attempts to reach out to the
Monster.
4. The fact that the Monster isn't as dumb as he looks (see
the movie, you'll know what I mean).
This was ripped off fourteen years later by a low budget
film called FRANKENSTEIN GENERAL HOSPITAL.
I haven't seen this film, but I'm told it
is the worst Frankenstein film ever made, and if it rips
off this film as much as I've heard, I can see
why. Except no cheap imitations, people. It's
foolish to try to think you're going to make
a good movie just by going and ripping this
movie off. This is too good. You try that,
you'll fail. I garauntee you that.

Title
Review for Scream (1996)
Director: Wes Craven, Writer: Kevin Williamson, Neve Campbell, David Arquette,
Courteney Cox, Drew Barrymore, Henry Winkler.
I was anxious to see this for a long time. A friend of mine recommended this to me 
because he has a crush on Neve Campbell, and he wanted to prove that she's as hot as he 
thinks he is. He proved it for me all right, but the reasons I enjoy this film go way 
beyond that.
SCREAM treads on familar ground, horror movie with, as star Neve Campbell puts
it,"Some stupid killer stalking some big breasted girl who can't act who's
always running up the stairs when she should be running out the front door."
It's very familar, your typical horror film.
So why, you may ask after watching it, does it seem so new and original?
Because it treats itself as if it hasn't been done before, and thus the viewer
is disilusioned into believing that it is not old, familar tired stuff.
This raises another question: How does it do this?
Simple: The characters. They're not your typical stupid horror film victims who
don't know what the hell to do when being chased by a guy in a ski mask and a 
machette. They are horror fans, they know how stuff happens in a horror
movie, they know what to do and what not to do, and that makes it scary, and
even funny at certain times.
You can tell this just by watching the opening scene where Casey Becker (Drew
Barrymore) is making popcorn, getting ready to watch a video, and some guy
who sounds like a killer calls her up to play a game with her that involves
horror movie triva that, if she gets it wrong, will get her and her boyfriend killed.
She knows what to answer when he asks her horror film questions, she just can't
answer his final question,"What door am I at?" And that gets her killed. That
scene works because in a normal horror film, half the things that happen in that
scene would never happen.
The plot is typical horror stuff: Sidney Prescott (an impressive Neve Campbell), 
an attractive young high school student who's mother was killed a year ago
tommorrow, is being stalked by a killer who's previously murdered one of
her classmates (Casey, naturally), and everybody in this small, California
town is a suspect, including Sidney's boyfriend, Billy Loomis.
But as I said before, these people know how horror movies work, and that's what
makes it so appealing. That and the references to horror movies, like when
Casey says,"The first (NIGHTMARE ON ELM STREET) was scary, but the rest sucked."
which is obviously director Wes Craven (who does a good job of poking fun of
the genre that made him a legend) patting himself on the back as he directed the first 
NIGHTMARE movie and none of the others, and when Tatum, Sidney's friend, mentions 
the director, Wes Carpenter, which is obviously an homage by writer Kevin
Williamson to not only Craven, but also director John Carpenter.
The cast is well chosen, Neve Campbell pulls off a good heroine (and unlike most
horror film heroines, she *can* act), Drew Barrymore does a good Janet Leigh impression 
for what little time she has in the film, and David Arquette is impressive. Also
good (and funny) in his role is Henry Winkler ("The Fonz") as the school principal.
I took half a point off for the unnecessary (albeit limited) appearance by FRIENDS'
Courteney Cox as reporter, Gail Edwards, Sidney's rival because she covered her 
mother's disappearance. I hate that show, I hate those actors. They're untalented, 
overexposed, and overpaid, IMHO, and I would think Wes Craven is smart enough to know 
those actors are overexposed enough, but I suppose he isn't.

Title
Review for Batman & Robin (1997)
* out of **** (Don't say I didn't warn you)
Cast: George Clooney, Chris O'Donnell, Alicia Silverstone, Arnold Schwarzenegger, Uma 
Thurman, Michael Gough, Pat Hingle, Elle Macpherson, Vivica Fox, Vendella. Directed
by Joel Schumaccer, Written by Akiva Goldsmith.
I want to be involved in show business one day. And I refuse to do any sequels to any 
movie I may make because I believe they only get worse. This movie proves it for me.
I was a little worried about the last BATMAN film, as I thought Joel Schumaccer, taking 
over from Tim Burton, would screw it up. I also assumed Val Kilmer would screw up as 
Bruce Wayne. They didn't. Kilmer did a good job, and the cast was left to carry the
movie, which they did (even Jim Carrey as the Riddler and I can't stand Jim Carrey),
because Schumaccer messed up the direction with his glitzy Gotham and his awkward
camera angles. This film is different. The cast is still impressive, but here,
not only does Schumaccer mess up with the direction (he's one of those directors
who's good with actors, terrible with camera angles), but writer Akiva Goldsmith
doesn't really give an impressive cast anything to do.
The cast is impressive: Clooney is a surprisingly good Wayne/Batman, O'Donnell is
a crafty Robin as usual, They could've casted somebody better as Batgirl (my friend
likes Neve Campbell), but Silverstone is not bad, and Thurman is a good Poison Ivy.
The major problem is Schwarzenegger, who is a terrible Freeze. His accent is so heavy, 
you can't understand what he says, and the trouble with action stars like him is they 
cannot act, and they know it, but they figure that if they flex their muscles, say a 
limited amount of stuff, and kill a bunch of guys, then they figure nobody'll notice.
That's the trouble with me, *I* notice. Schwarzenegger does not deserve billing over
Clooney, or as much money as he got for this, but Hollywood thinks he does.
Patrick Stewart was the person I'd heard that was considered to play Freeze,
and he would've been so much better. Or Sean Connery, but not Arnold "I'm not an actor,
but I play one in real life" Schwarzenegger. I realize that you must be a star to play a 
major role in a BATMAN film, but it would've been nice if they'd casted a star that 
had talent for the role.
Akiva Goldsmith's screenplay avoids some stuff that happens in a normal 
Batman film. In a regular Batman film, they'd concentrate on the relationship with the 
girlfriend a little more, but Elle Macpherson's Julie Madison is so limited here that we 
never get a real sense of who she is.
There is talk of a fifth Batman movie. My interest to see it is low, but I hope it's 
better than this. If you don't want to waste your time, rent any of the other BATMAN 
movies from Blockbuster. Any other.

Title
Review for "Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy, The" (1981) (mini)
The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy (1981)
Written by Douglas Adams, produced and directed by Alan
Bell, Executive producer John Lloyd, Music by Paddy Kingsland.
Cast: Simon Jones (Arthur Dent), David Dixon (Ford Prefect),
Mark Wing-Davey (Zaphod Beeblebrox), Sandra Dickinson (Trillian),
Martin Benson (Vogon Captain), Stephen Moore (voice of Marvin),
Richard Vernon (Slartibartfast), David Learner (Marvin), David 
Prowse (Bodyguard).
This started out as a radio series, then it became two novels,
then this six episode TV series came out, then it became three
more books, a play, a computer game, (appropriately) a bath 
towel, all of which was done by creator Adams, and now a film version 
will be out in 2000 (and you can all bet your bottom dollar that I will
be the first one to post a review on this newsgroup of that
movie), and the plot will follow in a second.
When I was thirteen, I went over to my aunt 
Beth's house, and she had a copy of this book. She suggested
I might enjoy it. I doubted it, but out of curiousity
I picked it up and read it. Five years later, I'm hooked
on this quirky but lovable British piece, and I've become
quite a fan of creator Douglas Adams. In fact, find
me one novel of his I haven't read five thousand times,
I will find a medal for you.
Arthur Dent, a perfectly ordinary Earth man (played
quite well by Simon Jones, whom this role was written
for) discovers after his home is demolished to make
way for a bypass, that his best friend Ford Prefect
(Dixon, who has the right look for Ford) is
not from Earth, and together they hitchhike aboard
a Vogon ship shortly before the green, slimy Vogons
destroy the planet Earth to make way for a hyperspace
bypass. Anyway, after they are read some awful poetry,
they are thrown off into deep space and rescued
by Ford's semicousin, Zaphod Beeblebrox (an
appealing Wing-Davey), the two-headed, three
armed hippy President of the galaxy, his human
girlfriend, Tricia "Trillian" McMillan (Dickinson, 
who is appealing to look at, but has a voice worse than 
Fran Drescher, which is why I wish Adams had stuck
with his instincts and let her do English Rose),
and the depressed, hilarious cyborg, Marvin
the Paranoid Android ("Life, don't talk to me about
life!"). All five of them meet Slartibartfast (A
funny role for the late Vernon), a planet maker
on the planet of Magreathea (forgive the spelling),
and stop by the Restaurant at the End of the Universe
for dinner as they try to find the question to the
ultimate answer, which is 42.
        This has something for everyone. It's
sci-fi, and if you don't like that (which I do),
it's funny, and it even has amusing little 
jokes about stuff like digital watches, towels,
inteligent supercomputers, etc., that Adams
has said to've picked up from personal experiences.
        The miniseries rates lower than four stars
simply because the movie version in 2000 will obviously
have so much more computer generated technology
to make it look more realistic (which this, sadly, does
not most of the time) and it will make the effects here look like
absolute rubbish, which they weren't at the time. This
is going to look like crap compaired to the film.
But that's okay, I'll still love it anyway.

Title
Review for Cable Guy, The (1996)
** out of **** (Fair for cable, don't go out of your way).
Director: Ben Stiller, Writers: Lou Holtz, Jr., and Judd Apatow, Cast: Jim Carrey (The 
Cable Guy), Matthew Broderick (Steven Kovacs), Leslie Mann (Robin), Rick (Jack Black), 
George Segal (Steven's Father), Eric Roberts (himself), Jeanne Gorafalo (Serving Wench), 
Andy Dick (Host).
I'll admit it, I'm not a very big Jim Carrey fan. THE MASK was very good, but
that was about the highlight of his career. BATMAN FOREVER was good too, but that had 
nothing to do with him at all. However, I had heard this film was very different
from what he usually does, I decided to watch it when it premiered on HBO last
night and see what all the fuss was about. This was also the movie which earned
Carrey twenty million dollars.
Carrey plays this lispy Cable installer who grew up in front of the television, and
learned everything he knows from TV. It's so bad in fact that he even assumes so many 
aliases of TV characters that we never learn his real name. One day, he arrives at the 
home of Steven Kovacs, an innocent, likable guy played nicely by Matthew Broderick, who 
has just been kicked out of his apartment by his girlfriend, Robin (appealingly played
by Leslie Mann), whom he loves and will do anything to win back, including blow off all 
of his buddies. Anyhow, Carrey juices him up with free cable, and after that latches
onto him like a bee on honey by calling him day and night and showing up wherever he 
goes. He even gives him advice on how to win Robin back. Steven hangs around with him 
for a while, but after the Cable Guy wins Robin back for him, he blows him off, and 
that's when this movie really starts to get weird. The Cable Guy gets poor Steven fired 
from his job, he wrecks his apartment, he gets him arrested, and he even lies about
Steven to Robin and his parents. Talk about fatal friendship, huh?
We gradually learn that the Cable Guy is so desperate for a friend because he
never had any of his own, he was always in front of the television as his Mom
always went out at night and left him with a babysitter. 
Instead of being the usual kooky Carrey comedy, it's a darker comedy for him, which
doesn't really work because he really has no acting ability. This movie proves 
that. He is his goofy self here, but that doesn't work in a comedy like this.
He can't act like a real actor at all, and I hope people realize he can't before
he starts to make dramatic movies and proves that for himself.
Roger Ebert stated this film could've been funnier if it wasn't a story about
how deeply troubled the Cable Guy is. It's not true. The deeply troubled Cable
Guy story has a message behind it: Kids who watch too much TV can't tell the
difference between fantasy and reality when they grow up, which is true for
most kids. But Carrey movies with messages don't work, because he can't be 
serious, and if he tried, he'd screw it up.
Jim Carrey stated you could never figure the Cable Guy out, whether he really needs
a friend or whether he's playing with Steven, which isn't true. I figured him out, he's 
a lonely nut. The one I most felt sorry for was Matthew Broderick, both character and 
actor. Steven Kovacs is a nice guy who loves his girlfriend, and does not need to be 
hounded and terrorized like he is, and Matthew Broderick is a good, talented actor who 
deserves better scripts than this, and better actors to work with than Jim Carrey. He 
does a good job, but an actor of his stature doesn't really belong in this movie,
and I asked myself watching it,"Why's he in this movie? Especially since a guy he's
a much better actor than is getting a lot more money than he is?"
It's fatal flaw is it's dark side. Because it's so dark and convincing, if you're 
not an anti-social loner, you'll become one after you see this movie, and if you 
are, this'll make you proud of it.

Title
Review for Protector, The (1985)
Cast: Jackie Chan, Danny Aiello, Roy Chiao, Bill Wallace, Kim Bass, Saun
Ellis.
Crew: Music by Ken Thorne, Produced by David Chan, Written and Directed
by James Glickenhaus.
If you likened Jackie Chan and guys like Steven Seagal, Jean-Claude
Van Damme, Stallone and Schwarzenegger to drinks, Jackie Chan would
be a well perserved, ice cold can of V8 juice while the rest of
those guys would be a bunch of eight day old expired milk.
That goes ditto when you compare Chan's writing and directing style
with that of the director of this film, The Protector.
And when James Glickenhaus attempted to make him into an
Asian Dirty Harry, the end result is totally wrong.
Jackie plays Billy Wong, a tough, unstable (!) New
York City (!!) cop who gets in trouble with his
Captain. He is partnered up with Danny Garoni
(a wasted Danny Aiello), and they are sent to
Hong Kong after the wealthy Laura Shapiro is
kidnapped by Triad drug smugglers. That's the plot in
a nutshell, and to be frank, the plot sucks.
It's a mistake to make Jackie Chan into Clint Eastwood
because the whole appeal of him is he's different than
all these American guys who say three words (badly)
and kill five hundred people. He's not a typical
action hero. He's an ordinary man fighting to protect his
friends, and that's the way life is. Movies like this
are not the way life is. Here we have swearing,
nudity, loads of bullets, etc. None of which can usually
be found in an actual Jackie Chan movie.
If the producers had hired Jackie's old pal John Woo to rewrite the
script and give the story depth, soften Billy Wong's
character (as Jackie Chan later did in the Asian version, which 
I intend to look for to see if it is as good as I've heard)
and direct the film, it might've been halfway decent.
With Glickenhaus sitting on the director's chair,
the film's only saving grace are one or two decent fight scenes.
John Woo would've let Jackie control the action
scenes like he should and, a good writer like him
might've come up with a better plot.
Someone else once said the worst part of the movie
was teaming Jackie with Danny Aiello. While I agree
that they should have teamed Jackie up with a
character actor closer to his age so the male
bonding aspects were a little more
realistic (I just don't buy a thirty-one year old
Asian kid and a fifty-four year old Italian guy
rubbing elbows), I don't think you could leave Aiello
out entirely. I would've hired someone Jackie's
age to be his partner and had Aiello be the main villain.
I also happen to feel they should've let Jackie be his
usual comedic self here because American audiences
had never seen a kung fu comedian before at the time,
and maybe if they did, he would've broken through here
a lot sooner.
Jackie Chan's frustrations with the movie led him
to make POLICE STORY. I have since seen that,
and I don't have to tell you which of these two
I would pick if I had to. I was never bored for one
minute watching that movie.
After POLICE STORY, I watched RAMBO. I thought to myself,
"What an injustice. Asians have action stars like Jackie
Chan who has some actual screen presence and would
bend over backwards for their audiences while 
we're stuck with guys like this who most likely only get roles
because they blackmail executives!"
