Authors
Arthur Hu
Number of Reviews
2

Title
Review for Hunchback of Notre Dame, The (1996)
With a title like Hunchback, it looks like Disney really dropped the 
political correctness ball on this one. Heck, even the townspeople call 
him the "bell ringer". Maybe they should just call him "appearance 
challenged. At least they'll be having Americans saying "No - Tra Dom", 
instead of pronouncing it like the football team. 
When multiculturalism is supposed to be about exposing minority children 
to people who look just like themselves, why take them to Paris? What do 
inner city children need to know about a minor religious landmark that 
only rich white and Japanese vacationers will ever live to see? But the 
dark-skinned Gypsies show that even Europe has diversity. In this 
country, we don't have much of a Gypsy "problem", yet when the American 
Jewish Committee did a poll of the best liked and worst hated ethnic 
groups, the people on the bottom weren't black, or Jewish, they were the 
Gypsies. You've got to wonder what these guys did to get such a 
reputation even in this country. One problem is that the Gypsies aren't 
Catholic, or even Judeo-Christian. They believe in fortune telling and 
magic, which draws complaints from some Christians today every time 
Halloween rolls around.
We hear about great African Americans every Black History Month. But the 
best Isabel Fonseca's book "Bury Me Standing" can come up with about the 
Gypsies is that while not all of them are habitual transients, liars, 
and criminals, a lot of them were and still are. She compares them to 
the Jews, but nobody ever accused the Gypsies of being over-achievers. 
The New York Times profiled a Gypsy murder suspect whose mother said 
"Gypsies don't keep regular jobs, but at least they don't kill people", 
and said that the Gypsies make a career of living apart from the 
civilized mainstream. 
Maybe Disney thought they were just simplifying things, but by making 
Clopin the King of the Gypsies, they made all of the Gypsies into the 
beggars and thieves, instead of the poor Frenchmen in the original 
story. We all avoid the "N" word, but don't even realize that to use the 
word `gyp' as a verb implies all Gypsies are cheats. Even that term is 
misleading because they really came from India, not Egypt (which would 
actually make them Asian) These days, many would prefer to be called the 
"Romani". 
Interestingly, the Seattle may be the only school district in the nation 
that breaks out the Gypsies as a disadvantaged group. Well, they might 
have problems elsewhere, but the Seattle data book shows that the 
Gypsies score just as well or better than other white children in test 
scores and grades, and no worse in dropouts or suspensions. When the 
Bell-Curve school says that groups at the bottom are genetically 
destined to stay there, this may prove that at least this white group 
can assimilate into the norm.
In this updated story, Quasimoto's gargoyle friends still sing in "A Guy 
Like You" that his looks are one of a kind. But where the early movies 
were placed in the horror category, Disney's Quasi is just a boy in a 
tower with a big song and dance number. Like the Little Mermaid, 
Quasimoto wants to go "out there" and mix up with the other people. 
He's practically a prisoner in the care of the evil Judge Frollo long 
before the days of child protective services. Talk about your one-parent 
Disney families. Esmerelda is the latest Disney heroine who wouldn't 
look out of place on the cover of Cosmo. If NOW complained about 
Pocahontas's looks, this working girl makes a living making guy's eyes 
pop out. 
Pheobus is the blond he-man who eventually switches teams and joins up 
with the geek to save the girl. It's Phoebus that gets packaged with the 
girl in the Mattell 2 figure gift pack, not title character. The 
creators said that Quasimoto has "puppy" love for Esmerelda, and Phoebus 
has real love. But Spike Lee's "Jungle fever" would probably put the 
outcasts together. Disney made a reasonably happy ending, but in the 
1939 version, Phoebus gets killed halfway through, Quasimoto flings 
Frodo out of the tower, Esmerelda gets tortured, Clopin gets hit in a 
friendly fire incident, and Gringoire, the wimpy poet who got dropped 
entirely by Disney gets the girl. Boy they don't make them like they 
used to.
Two years from now, Disney is slated to give us a legend set in China. 
That is, if we can get over human rights issues, pirated Michael Jackson 
CD's, and see if they hire enough Asian Americans in the cast.
Net pointers - check out the disney site www.disney.com for promotional 
background. The real gem is hidden under the Disney publishing section, 
they are putting up the full pictures from the children's book that 
pretty much gives a condensed plot.
ps, I'm picking up extra burger king toys and I have some
sets of the Skybox cards that were givven out at the
travelling exhibitions with all the characters if anybody
needs them. I'll be putting up the toys on my home page soon.
** Views do not reflect any other organization or group ***
Arthur Hu  fax 206-814-2711 for hot news to pass on.
To comment or join "Fairness in Diversity" mailing list, contact  
arthurhu@halcyon.com  index at http://www.halcyon.com/arthurhu/  
12422 107th Pl NE Kirkland WA 98034

Title
Review for Mulan (1998)
The word is out on Mulan, Disney's latest, and it's very good. Even
the grouchiest activists admit that at least the round-eyed
barbarians didn't screw it up this time. Where I saw it, the teen
girls were swooning when Shang took his shirt off, they gasped at the
battlefield of death, they shrieked when the bad busted out, and were
rolling in the aisles at the jokes. After all the fuss over the
African themed Lion King, Native American Pocahontas, and racially
incorrect casting in Miss Saigon, maybe they finally got it right.
Disney has finally accomplished what thousands of years of Chinese
civilization couldn't do - turn an old Chinese legend into a
worldwide hit when every previous attempt has failed. Disney is even
re-releasing Miyazaki's Kikki's delivery service after signing a deal
to market Japan's equivalent of Disney's animated features which are
huge in Asia, but are still unknown except to Anime buffs this side
of the pond. Every Chinese girl might know about Mulan by heart, but
as a boy growing up with Spock, Luke Skywalker, and the Six Million
Dollar man, Maxine Hong Kingston's "Woman Warrior" was the first I
ever heard about it.
In the original poem, the girl Mulan takes her father's place in the
Chinese army, becomes a hero, goes home to retire, and her buddies
don't find out that he's a she until they visit her much later. In
other versions, she marries the guy, as it's been done with more
variations than the Hunchback of Notre Dame.  One woman on the usenet
complained that the real Mulan was a tough fighter, where Disney's is
sort of a Barbie doll that uses her wits to keep up with the guys.
She falls so that Shang has to carry her load but redeems herself by
using her wits to get the arrow nobody could climb and get.
Speaking of dolls, the Mattel's matchmaker Mulan looks great. It sure
beats the "Chinese Barbie" doll and ornament for those looking for
the rare Asian doll.  Most of the Disney dolls since Pocahontas have
ended up in the clearance bin, but this one might just sell out.
There's also a line about "each one a perfect porcelain doll", which
is where "China doll" came from before it came to mean exotic Asian
brides for Western men. Americans seem to love Asian women as brides,
news anchors and skaters. Maybe now we can add Disney heroine.
Disney's Mulan is a misfit as a potential bride. Her figure is modest
compared to the Cosmo girl builds of Pocahontas or Esmerelda. Mulan
is clearly skewed towards the girls in merchandising. But like most
Disney heroines, she's stuck with a bunch of guys as buddies from
Snow White's seven dwarves to Ariel's Flounder and Sebastian. Every
other McDonald's figurine is a guy, and when you put on her armour,
Mulan is one too! Ling, Yao and Chen Po are 3 stooges as backup like
Quasimodo's gargoyles or Timon and Pumba. But I doubt that they'll be
promoted to their own saturday series, and I'll be amazed if American
kids manage to memorize any names beyond Mushu, Mulan and Shang.
This one movie has more Asian American talent than Hollywood normally
hires in 5 years. It doesn't go quite as far as the 1960's Roger and
Hammersteins's "Flower Drum Song" where the entire cast, acting,
singing, and dancing, was Asian, except for the mugger, who was
white. But it's still the biggest Asian cast in a movie likely to
make the year's top 15 if not top 10.
Ming Na Wen, Mulan's speaking voice first hit it big on the Joy Luck
Club, and has had success on TV in ER and the Single Guy even in
roles originally cast for dumb blondes. Filipina Lea Salonga was the
original Miss Saigon, had a modest solo CD, and was the singing voice
of Alladin's Jasmine. Disney cast Michelle Kwan as Mulan in the
skating ABC-TV special (ha, beat that Tara!). For all that Asians
gripe about casting Caucasian men as Asians, Disney also cast Kristi
Yamaguchi as the Arabian Jasmine, and Kwan skated as Pocahontas as
well.
Captain Shang is built like Hercules, with the prowess of Bruce Lee.
In contrast to the usual complaint that the Asian guy doesn't get the
girl, he eventually warms up to Mulan after the Emporer tells him
"You don't meet a girl like that every dynasty". He sort of typifies
the real man's values when when "Save China" is number 1 on his list,
but "Get girl" is somewhere down the top 10. This must really drive
the girls nuts about us guys. The cassette storybook ending leaves
Mulan without her man at all.
Shang is played by B.D. Wong, from Madame Butterfly, Jurassic Park.
Yeah, he's not quite built like that. He's a real change from the
Asian guy loser stereotype, speaking of which, they also signed up
Gedde Watanabe who helped fill in some of the clunkiest nerd roles in
80's hits like Sixteen Candles.  Gedde lightens up the high pitched
Ling this time. Shang's singing voice is the same Donnie Osmond some
of us remember from his bad 70s hits days as the mormon version of
the Jackson 5. If you can't remember "One Bad Apple", check out the
Lost 45's on KJR-FM some weekend night.
The skating Shang wasn't Asian either, but if Asian parents produced
some strong male skaters and singers instead of just doctors and
violinists, maybe we'd have better luck next time. Shang's father is
James Shigeta, the son in "Flower Drum Song". He's also been cast as
a Japanese admiral and Japanese business executive. Pat Morita's role
as the Asian American version of John Houseman or James Earl Jones is
cemented as the emporer, not bad for a guy who first hit it big as
the wiseguy cook on Happy Days. 
James Hong is Chi Fu, sort of like Lost in Space's Dr. Smith who's
supposed to be on our side, but makes you wonder. He's never been the
star, but like John Lithgow, he's been everywhere including Big
Trouble in Little China, Blade Runner, and Operation Dumbo Drop. Ma
and Pa are Freda Foh Shen and Soon-Teck Oh.  I looked them up on the
internet and found out that they were part of the original 1976
Pacific Overtures, a Broadway play by Stephen Sondheim about
westerners and the Shoguns. Instead of Amy Hill, June Foray does a
fun Grandma, she was the original voice of Rocky the Squirrel
(surprise!). Grandma is disappointed that Mulan returns with the
emporer's medallion, but no man. Then she wants to sign up for the
next war when the hunk arrives at Mulan's heels.
Miguel Ferrer's Shan-Yu is drawn with the sharp edges of a Jonny
Quest villian.  He comes off like the Alien monster who comes back
for more just when we think he's buried. The cute stylized rag doll
is straight out of an anime epic. The scene of a burned out village
and body strewn battlefield was as nearly as striking as Luke's
burned out ranch in Star Wars.
George Takei, plays the first ancestor in a scene that looks like it
came straight out of Hercule's Mount Olympus. He was not only Sulu,
but he's making the reruns now as the poor ARVN guy who gets it
backing up John Wayne in the Green Berets. Is it PC to cast Eddie
Murphy as the black comic relief guy? No matter, as Mushu the Dragon
(yeah, the Chinese soft taco) Murphy is still a god and I've never
seen him funnier. He outdoes the Robin William's Genie without dated
cultural references or special effects
Some might be disappointed by the music. It breaks the string of
Menken hits, with a soundtrack by Jerry Goldsmith. But he's up there
with Titanic's Horner and Star War's John Williams in big time
symphonic scores like the Star Trek movie. It sounds like a return to
those epic Asian movies from the 1950s. It sems that when the PC
police got rid of stereotypical portrayals of Asians, Hollywood gave
up on Asian themes. Oddly, the CD album runs through the songs first
instead of following movie sequence. It also omits the short opening
title, and the mesmerizing synthesizer sequence when Mulan
"transforms". 
My wife tells us that "Honor to Us All" borrows from a common Chinese
folk tune.  It might be a traditional Chinese version of the Flower
Drum Song's "I Enjoy Being a Girl", which still pops up now and then
as the one hit song FDS firmly implanted into pop culture. Liberated
American girls might snicker at Mulan's tortures, while they dress up
in wonderbras, spike heels, and big hair to land their men. "I'll
Make a Man Out of You" might show up in future training or recruiting
films as a cross between Rocky and Enter the Dragon. I think Taiwan
still trains their soldiers this way. It hits home as a reprise as
the guys go into drag to sneak by the guards. "A Girl Worth Fighting
For" sounds a bit like South Pacific's "There is Nothing Like a Dame"
another hit musical comedy about war between Asian powers. Still, the
songs stick with stereotypical gender themes, and they still promote
the idea that guys have all the fun fighting and killing.
Disney soundtracks have always managed to eek out if not score big
with one or two hit songs, but I haven't heard anything from Mulan
yet. Stevie Wonder's True to Your Heart seems tacked on the end as a
party number. Reflection appears as a pop version, though I prefer
Salonga's broadway style solo which is as stiring as Ariel's
signature "Part of Your World". 
The computer graphics effects are Disney's best. They look seamless
with the awesome helicopter shot of the charging huns. The crowd
figures no long look like they're "It's a Small World" robots. Check
out the birds as the soldiers march across a signature Chinese
landscape, I think they're CG too.
Ironically, it's still too American for my parents in law, who can't
understand English dialogue, and think they know the Chinese story
and that Disney movies are for American kids. But my parents loved
it, as will anyone else who can appreciate a good Disney feature.
Check it out.
For a lot more info, check out Angela Kuo's excellent Mulan FAQ on
the web at 
http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/5082/mulanfaq.html
In the East Market she buys a spirited horse,
In the West Market she buys a saddle,
In the South Market she buys a bridle,
In the North Market she buys a long whip.
At dawn she takes leave of Father and Mother,
In the evening camps on the Yellow River's bank.
She doesn't hear the sound of Father and Mother calling,
She only hears the Yellow River's flowing water cry tsien tsien.
At dawn she takes leave of the Yellow River,
In the evening she arrives at Black Mountain.
She doesn't hear the sound of Father and Mother calling,
She only hears Mount Yen's nomad horses cry tsiu tsiu.
She goes ten thousand miles on the business of war,
She crosses passes and mountains like flying.
Northern gusts carry the rattle of army pots,
Chilly light shines on iron armor.
Generals die in a hundred battles,
Stout soldiers return after ten years.
On her return she sees the Son of Heaven,
The Son of Heaven sits in the Splendid Hall.
He gives out promotions in twelve ranks
And prizes of a hundred thousand and more.
The Khan asks her what she desires.
"Mu-lan has no use for a minister's post.
I wish to ride a swift mount
To take me back to my home."
When Father and Mother hear Daughter is coming
They go outside the wall to meet her, leaning on each other.
When Elder Sister hears Younger Sister is coming
She fixes her rouge, facing the door.
When Little Brother hears Elder Sister is coming
He whets the knife, quick quick, for pig and sheep.
"I open the door to my east chamber,
I sit on my couch in the west room,
I take off my wartime gown
And put on my old-time clothes."
Facing the window she fixes her cloudlike hair,
Hanging up a mirror she dabs on yellow flower powder
She goes out the door and sees her comrades.
Her comrades are all amazed and perplexed.
Traveling together for twelve years
They didn't know Mu-lan was a girl.
"The he-hare's feet go hop and skip,
The she-hare's eyes are muddled and fuddled.
Two hares running side by side close to the ground,
How can they tell if I am he or she?"
From:The Flowering Plum and the Palace Lady: Interpretations of Chinese Poetry 
By Han H. Frankel, Yale University Press, 1976. 
