Authors
Jeffrey Haber
Number of Reviews
2

Title
Review for Showgirls (1995)
     "Showgirls" is the first big-budget, big-studio film to receive an
NC-17 rating.  And its release last year came at a time when Senator 
Bob Dole and other politicans chastised the entertainment industry for
promoting sex and violence.  But if "Showgirls" is any indication of
Hollywood's future, the folks in Washington should focus their attack
on a more dangerous threat to American values--bad moviemaking.
     "Showgirls" is a relentlessly exploitive look at the Las Vegas strip
scene, and the film turns out to be just as trashy as its subject matter.
Director Paul Verhoeven and writer Joe Eszterhas, who collaborated on 
another shock-value project, 1992's "Basic Instinct," follow the plight
of a young woman (teen TV star Elizabeth Berkley) determined to make a 
name for herself as a topless dancer.  It's a hackneyed premise to begin
with, so not surprisingly, all of the stock characters are trucked out.
There's the Demanding Producer.  The Loyal Friend.  The Bitchy Competitor.
Lest I forget the Scummy Club Owner.
     Of course, any attempt at character development or a coherent storyline
is just window dressing for the film's main attraction--an endless parade
of full-frontal nudity.  Unfortunately, "Showgirls" doesn't satisfy in this
department.  Verhoeven's slam-bang, in-your-face style of direction proves
neither arousing nor erotic.  To make matters worse, you'll be forced to 
sit through the movie's clothed scenes, which don't cover up for laughable
acting and some of the most absurd dialogue ever spoken in film history.
     Verhoeven and Ezsterhas deserve credit for trying to break ground, but
if it's adult entertainment you want, stay home and watch the Playboy Channel.
You'll be the wiser for it.

Title
Review for Die Hard: With a Vengeance (1995)
     Having enjoyed the first two "Die Hard" installments, I was really
looking forward to this new sequel.  With John McTiernan returning to the
director's chair and Jeremy Irons and Samuel L. Jackson in the cast, my 
hopes were high.  But what a huge disappointment it turn out to be.
     The movie stars Bruce Willis as John McClane, the blue-collar hero 
who always seems to be up against impossible odds.  This time, we find him 
separated from his wife, down on his luck, and back with the New York 
Police Department.  McClane's precinct gets a call from a mysterious
German named Simon (Jeremy Irons) who turns out to be the brother of 
Hans Gruber, the terrorist from the first film.  Simon has already 
blown up a department store, and threatens to go ahead with more 
bombings unless McClane goes to Harlem wearing a racist sign.  McClane
obeys, and is reluctantly saved by a white-hating electronics store
owner, Zeus Carver (Jackson).  For most of the film, Simon phones in
cryptic riddles and leads McClane and Zeus on a wild chase around 
Manhattan to diffuse bombs at various locations, including parks,
subways, and schools.  All of this, however, is designed to keep
the cops occupied while Simon's gang steals $100 billion from the 
Federal Reserve vault.
     One of the problems with "DHWAV" is that it never really generates
any tension between McClane and the bad guys.  Unlike the first two films,
there are surprisingly few gunfights and hand-to-hand fisticuffs; even
those that do appear in the film are awkwardly shot (annoying, jerky 
camera movements are used in some of the scenes).  Most of the action
comes from generic explosions and car crashes, and after seeing this 
for a while, it no longer holds up as a source of excitement.
     Jonathan Hensleigh's script needed a serious rewrite.  There are
acres of plot holes (where did Simon's army come from? How did they
break into the Federal Reserve so easily?), the ending is conveniently
slapped on, and the characters are poorly conceived.  McClane loses a 
lot of his likability; the script unwisely gives him a hangover at 
the beginning of the film, so instead of the street-smart, take-charge
character from the first two movies, we are given a sluggish, slow-footed
McClane.  Meanwhile, Samuel Jackson's role is written as a wide-eyed,
disbelieving black guy who can't stand the white cop he must work with.  
The relationship plays out like a bad ripoff of the Mel Gibson/Danny Glover
"Lethal Weapon" tandem.
     Could "DHWAV" have been done better? Absolutely, and that's the shame 
of it all.  Considering the talent involved and the previous history of
the "Die Hard" films, it's disconcerting to see such a bomb go off.
