Authors
Graeme Huggan
Number of Reviews
13

Title
Review for Carry On Camping (1969)
   Carry on Camping is probably the most memorable Carry on film due to 
some unforgettable scenes and some classic double-entendres.
   Sid Boggle and his mate Bernie (Sid James and Bernard Bresslaw) lure 
their girlfriends Joan Fussey and her friend Anthea (Joan Sims and Dilys 
Laye) to what they believe to be a nudist camp. When they get there, they 
find a half-empty campsite, a campsite owner Mr. Fiddler (Peter 
Butterworth) who is only interested in making money and looking after his 
chickens, and Joan and Anthea insist they sleep in separate tents.
   Meanwhile, Dr.Soaper (Kenneth Williams) and the girls from Chayste 
Finishing School are on a school trip via Stonehenge to the campsite. 
When they arrive at the campsite, Sid and Bernie take a fancy to two of 
the girls, Barbara (Barbara Windsor) and Fanny, but are thwarted in their 
attempts to get to know them by Joan and Anthea, Dr. Soaper and his 
companion, the Matron (Hattie Jacques). 
   Other holiday-makers include a businessman Peter Potter (Terry Scott) 
and his 'laughing like a hyena' wife Harriet Potter, and their new-found 
companion, the impossible Charlie Muggins (Charles Hawtrey).
   The main storyline is about Sid and Bernie's attempts to arrange a 
rendezvous with Barbara and Fanny, but other story threads include the 
undeliberate attempt by Charlie Muggins to split up Peter and Harriet, 
the example of Mr.Fiddler living up to his name, and the continuation of 
the long-running on/off romance between Kenneth Williams' character and 
Hattie Jacques' 'Matron'. 
   There are many memorable scenes, such as, of course, the famous scene 
where Babs "loses" her bra, the opening scene with Charlie Muggins in a 
tent with the shop assistant, and the various scenes between Matron and 
Dr.Soaper. Memorable quotes include:-
  Dr.Soaper- "No, no, Barbara. Tent up first, bunk up later!"
             "Its getting it to stay up, that's what counts!"
   Acting and comical honours go to Kenneth Williams and Hattie Jacques 
who make a perfect double-act, Charles Hawtrey who continues to harass 
the other cast members with his innocent and ignorant portayal of 
Muggins, and Barbara Windsor who shines as Babs! The major parts played 
by Sid, Bernie, Joan and Dilys are well-performed but are 
undistinguished, as is Terry Scott's portayal of Peter. The minor part of 
 Mr.Fiddler is a 'tour-de-force' for Peter Butterworth.
   Even though the film suffers from a wafer-thin plot and seems to have 
no ending, it is still a great piece of British comedy entertainment. The 
actors are in very high spirits (even though it was filmed in November on 
a green-painted muddy field), the double-entendres come thick and fast, 
and the numerous memorable scenes make this movie a classic of the Carry 
On's. Well-worth watching.

Title
Review for Carry on Doctor (1968)
                Copyright 1996 Graeme Huggan
  
 The second of four Carry on films set in a hospital is considered one of 
the most memorable of the Carry on genre, as it establishes the on/off 
relationship between the characters of Kenneth Williams and Hattie 
Jacques and it surpasses it's highly successful predecessor (Carry on 
Nurse) with funnier sub-plots and jokes.
 The main story is about Dr.Kilmore (Jim Dale) who thinks that Sandra May 
(Barbara Windsor) is going to commit suicide on the roof as her amorous 
advances towards Dr.Tinkle (Kenneth Williams) have gone unwanted, but 
really she is just having a quick sunbathe! When Kilmore goes to 
investigate, he is accused of peering at her. The formidable Matron helps 
Dr.Tinkle to sack Kilmore, although Tinkle needs to persuade her not to 
mention the night when she and Kilmore found May in his room with him.
 Other story threads include Francis Bigger's fall off a stage while 
preaching and his subsequent stay in the hospital, with him dead set on 
believing that he is going to die. Bernard Bresslaw plays a patient who 
is constantly trying to get into the women's ward to meet a girl (Dilys 
Laye) he likes. 
 Hattie Jacques is great as Matron, Kenneth Williams plays Dr.Tinkle to 
perfection and there is a good comic performance by Frankie Howerd. Joan 
Sims has a small, 'out-of-character' and ineffective role as Bigger's 
bride-to-be, and Sid James is a patient in the hospital whose blood 
pressure increase may have something to do with him stirring the 
thermometer in his coffee. He is in bed for most of the film, as in real 
life, Sid had just recently suffered a heart attack. His role is 
therefore given less importance. 
 Two actors who also appear in small parts are Barbara Windsor, who is 
effective but leaves the film with 25 minutes to go, and Charles Hawtrey, 
for although he does not appear in many scenes, is quite funny as someone 
who is suffering from a sympathetic pregnancy!
 The film is good overall, although at certain points it does seem to 
lull and some of the jokes don't quite reach the mark. However, due to 
the strong character performances and a sense of high spirits all the way 
through the film, I would recommend everyone to watch this film.
 My Star Rating: 3 out of 5 stars.
 By Graeme Huggan  

Title
Review for Carry On Again, Doctor (1969)
   One of the funniest Carry on movies and the third with a medical 
setting. The main story is about Dr. James Nookey (Jim Dale) who is 
disliked by his superiors, Frederick Carver, head of the hospital 
(Kenneth Williams), and Dr. Ernest Stoppidge (Charles Hawtrey) who seems 
to dislike everyone. They attempt to cause him as much trouble in the 
hospital as possible and all the blame is laid on Nookey. Carver learns 
of a possible job opportunity from wealthy Ellen Moore (Joan Sims) on a 
distant tropical island and gets Nookey trannsferred there. 
   When Nookey arrives at this island, he meets Gladstone Screwer (Sid 
James) who has lived on the island just about all his life. Screwer is in 
possession of a wonderful slimming drug made from natural ingredients. 
Dr. Nookey returns with the drug to England and sets up a new slimming 
business with Ellen Moore's financial backing. However, Nookey and Moore 
face opposition from Screwer who goes to England to cash in on the drug, 
and Carver and Stoppidge who want to know the ingredients to create a 
rival drug.
   The performances are all very commendable. Sid James has a slightly 
ambiguous character to play this time and he excels in his role. Kenneth 
Williams, as usual, plays the unpopular and cunning head of the hospital. 
Joan Sims is entertaining as the wealthy benefactor and Jim Dale should 
really head the cast with his excellent portrayal of bumbling Nookey.
   Charles Hawtrey plays an 'out-of-character' role as Dr. Stoppidge, the 
nasty and evil practitioner who wants to knock Nookey off his perch. Some 
critics have said that this combination of Hawtrey and Stoppidge does not 
work well, but I think that it at least gives Hawtrey a new part to play 
instead of the usual dimwit characters. As a matter of fact, Hawtrey is 
suitably cunning in the part.
   Other regulars in the movie include Hattie Jacques as the Matron yet 
again (but this part is probably her most boring 'Matron') and Barbara 
Windsor as Nookey's love interest and unofficial 'Women's lib' 
campaigner, Goldie Locks. Both Jacques and Windsor play their parts well.
Patsy Rowlands appears briefly as Miss Fosdick, and there are very small 
cameos from Wilfrid Brambell (from 'Steptoe and Son' fame) and Peter 
Butterworth.
   The jokes are mostly very funny, the story is quite appealing, and the 
regulars seem interested in what they're doing. Although it is another 
medical Carry on movie and some of the jokes are borrowed from previous 
movies, it still comes out on top (it is the best medical Carry On) 
because of the above factors. A must-see Carry on movie.

Title
Review for Carry On Henry (1971)
                Copyright 1996 Graeme Huggan
  
 Carry on Henry is all about Henry VIII and his eight wives! Sid James 
plays Henry, who no sooner has the film started, is getting rid of his 
present Queen and hopes to find another one soon. As part of his alliance 
with France, he requests the hand-in-marriage to the Queen of Normandy 
(Joan Sims). She comes to England in the hope of marrying Henry but when 
he finds out that she loves garlic and has a reeking garlic breath, he is 
totally averse to the idea of marriage. 
 Henry's court is very corrupt, with the Cardinal (Terry Scott) trying to 
bribe Cromwell (Kenneth Williams) and Cromwell trying to bribe the King. 
There is a state of crisis when the King puts Marie the Queen (Sims) in 
the Tower of London ready for execution. The Queen is pregnant but she 
has not liased with the King before, so fingers are pointed at Sir Roger 
de Lodgerley played by Charles Hawtrey, who has a rather lecherous 
character to play this time. 
 The Cardinal and Cromwell decide to get a signed confession from Sir 
Roger by using all kinds of torture devices! Owing to circumstances, Sir 
Roger is sometimes needed to sign that he is the father and sometimes 
that he isn't. This is because of renewed threats by the King of France 
(Peter Gilmore) to come over himself, which in the end he does. By then, 
Henry has found himself a new Queen, played by none other than Barbara 
Windsor! It looks like he has some explaining to do!
 There are stand-out performances by Sid James as Henry, Joan Sims as 
Marie, and Terry Scott in an unusual role as the Cardinal. Also there are 
cameos from Kenneth Connor and Peter Butterworth, who plays Barbara's 
father. The set and costume design is first class and the overall 
production of this film is good. There is even an early appearance from 
David Prowse, who later became the Green Cross Code Man and Darth Vader. 
 The film does have it's downsides though, as it is getting pretty 
routine for the Carry-on team to stage historical films and the inventive 
streak of the script seems to run out pretty quickly. There is also the 
absence of Hattie Jacques and Bernard Bresslaw, who could have helped the 
film along. However, overall the film is funny and there are plenty of 
laughs and saucy jokes, so that is why I mainly recommend it to Carry on 
fans only, but there is enough humour in the film to make it worth 
anyone's while to sit down and watch it.
 My Star rating: 4 out of 5 stars
 By Graeme Huggan  

Title
Review for Carry On Behind (1975)
   One of the last entries in the long-running Carry on series, Carry on 
Behind is very similar to Carry on Camping in that it involves a group of 
holidaymakers descending on a 'caravan' site.
   Professors Anna Vrooshka (Elke Sommer) and Roland Crump (Kenneth 
Williams) and a group of archaeology students stay in the caravan site 
owned by Major Leep (Kenneth Connor) so that they can explore the nearby 
Roman settlement remains. Anna has a little trouble understanding english 
and sometimes people get the wrong end of the stick:- for instance, when 
Anna is asking for 'scrubbers for dirty caravan', she means that she 
wants a scrubbing brush to clean the caravan!
   Arthur Upmore (Bernard Bresslaw) and his wife Linda (Patsy Rowlands) 
take her mother Daphne Barnes (Joan Sims) and her minah bird on holiday 
with them. Mother-in-law jokes prevail. Furthermore, the trouble that Joe 
and Norma Baxter (Ian Lavender and Adrienne Posta) have with their large 
Irish greyhound allows for some comical moments between the two families.
   Fred Ramsden (Windsor Davies) and Ernie Bragg (Jack Douglas) leave 
their wives (Liz Fraser and Patricia Franklin) behind for a fishing 
holiday. However, they have more in mind than fishing when they catch 
sight of two young girls, Sandra (Carol Hawkins) and Carol (Sherrie 
Hewson). 
   The story involves the disruption caused by the archaeological 
professors of the day-to-day running of the camp, the search for the 
minah bid and greyhound, the Major, Fred and Ernie's desperate need of a 
woman, a misunderstanding leading to a striptease at the caravan park's 
pub, and a shock in store for Daphne.
   The partnership between Sommer and Williams is very effective and 
amusing. This is what binds the movie together. Joan Sims stands out as 
the demanding mother-in-law, Bernard Bresslaw and Patsy Rowlands work 
well together as husband and wife, and Carol Hawkins and Sherrie Hewson 
are a welcome addition to the cast.
   On the other hand, there are low-key performances from Kenneth Connor 
and Peter Butterworth as Barnes the handyman, and there are very poor 
performances by Windsor Davies and Jack Douglas who spend far too much 
time on the screen! 
   Even though there is no real plot to speak of and the jokes are 
getting bluer due to the new scriptwriter Dave Freeman, there are enough 
truly comical moments and bright and breezy performances to lift this 
Carry on above many of its predecessors. Although the regular cast is 
depleted, the ones that remain show that they can still make a good Carry 
on film. 
   A relative flop at the cinema, this movie deserves a lot more 
recognition.

Title
Review for Carry On Abroad (1972)
   This is the last Carry on film with its full regular cast in 
attendance, and a sense of fun is still evident in this movie.
   'Wundatours Holidays' take a group of holidaymakers to the 'lovely' 
resort of Elsbels in Spain. In charge of the tour is Stuart Farquhar 
(Kenneth Williams) and his assistant Moira (Gail Granger). When they 
arrive, they find a shoddy and half-built hotel. The hotel manager Pepe 
(Peter Butterworth) takes on a number of different roles, as the butler, 
the manager and the porter. Meals are sub-standard due to the put-upon 
cook Floella (Hattie Jacques), who cannot handle her old stove. 
   Various storylines include the prude Evelyn Blunt (June Whitfield) and 
her husband Stanley's (Kenneth Connor) attempt to 'enlighten' her, the 
complications for Vic Flange (Sid James) as he is on holiday with his 
wife Cora (Joan Sims) and his love interest Miss Sadie Tomkins (Barbara 
Windsor), and Brother Bernard's (Bernard Bresslaw) attempt to leave his 
order (who are on holiday) as he has become increasingly attracted to 
Lily (Sally Geeson). 
   The motley bunch leave the hotel for a day in town. However, when they 
get there, Eustace Tuttle (Charles Hawtrey) wanders into the brothel 
wanting to play piggy-back! When Madame Fifi throws him out, a fight 
ensues involving all the holidaymakers. They are thrown in prison but are 
let out when Moira uses her special charms. Back at the hotel, they enjoy 
a farewell party. Little do they know that Pepe has built his hotel on a 
riverbed and the recent torrential rain is flowing down in streams!
   A good Carry on film because of its regular cast and its interesting 
characterisations, but the jokes are waring thin and some comical moments 
do not work such as the fight sequence. Sid James is as lecherous as 
ever, Joan Sims is good as the downtrodden wife (again!) and Barbara 
Windsor goes through the motions as Sadie. Peter Butterworth expertly 
plays the crazy Spanish hotel manager and Hattie Jacques shows that she 
can be comical in a small but very different part (not as a Matron-type 
figure again). Furthermore, the performances of Kenneth Connor and June 
Whitfield are very memorable.
   On the other hand, Kenneth Williams takes a back seat in the 
proceedings, Carol Hawkins is annoying as Marge (Lily's friend), and 
David Kernan as Nicholas and John Clive as Robin provide us with two 
irritating and annoying performances. Also, we are subjected to the 
abysmal performances of Jimmy Logan as Bert Conway (Sadie's eventual love 
interest) and a cameo by Jack Douglas as Harry. I would suggest you press 
the mute button on your remote control when these two appear!
   Carry on Abroad was the last Carry on film with Charles Hawtrey. This 
was probably due to him being drunk on set. His performance as Eustace is 
very amusing, especially his scenes with his mother and on the bus. The 
final scene, which alludes to Eustace's alcoholism, is rather poignant.
   There are many good aspects and flaws in this Carry on film. The story 
is okay, the regular cast are entertaining as usual, but the supporting 
cast of non-regulars leave a lot to be desired.

Title
Review for Carry On Matron (1972)
 Carry on Matron is the last great Carry-on film in my opinion. Made in
1972, it still features most of the regulars of this genre. Sid James 
plays the head of a gang of crooks intent on stealing contraceptive pills 
from the local maternity hospital and selling them off to make a profit,
Kenneth Williams is Sir Bernard Cutting, head of the hospital but also a
hypochondriac, Hattie Jacques re-takes her role as Matron, and Charles
Hawtrey is the psychiatrist Dr.Goode. 
 The jokes come in fast and so do the laughs, with humorous antics 
between the Matron and Sir Bernard. This time, Williams is after Matron
(Jacques) when he needs to prove himself that he is a man after visiting 
Dr.Goode. The doctor (Hawtrey) is sworn to secrecy:-
  "I assure you, that anything you say to me today will go in one ear and 
 straight out of the other!"
Bernard thinks he is having a sex change and needs to prove himself. 
 There are great cameos from Joan Sims, an expectant mother who is many 
weeks overdue and is eating constantly in every scene, and from Kenneth 
Connor as the expectant father who still thinks he's at work (at the 
railway station).
 Sid James' gang including Cyril his son (Kenneth Cope) try to find out 
where the pills are by getting Cyril to dress up as a nurse and live in 
at the nurses home. He has to share a room with Nurse Ball (Barbara 
Windsor) and she soon sees through him!
 The film ends with the attempted robbery of the hospital's pills with 
panic ensuing. 
 There are good performances by Hattie Jacques as the Matron, however her 
character seems a little more subdued and quieter than her previous 
'Matron's'. Williams is, as usual, on top form, but Sid James isn't given 
a very good part in this movie and I would forgive anyone to forget that 
he was in the movie at all. The same does not go for Charles Hawtrey, for 
although he only first appears in the movie after 30 minutes gone and has 
scarce screen time, he seems to steal every scene he is in. 
 By not making use of Sid James and Barbara Windsor's talent to full 
effect, the film seems to flounder, but it certainly makes up for it with 
it's good storyline and it's other appealing characters. This film is 
genuinely funny and i could watch it again and again and not get bored! 
 By Graeme Huggan  

Title
Review for Don't Lose Your Head (1967)
   Originally titled 'Don't Lose Your Head', this parody of the Scarlet 
Pimpernel story was the first Carry On to be produced by Rank Film 
Productions. 
   Two English fops, the 'powdered, be-wigged, be-ribboned' Sir Rodney 
Ffing (Sidney James) and his counterpart Lord Darcy Pew (Jim Dale) decide 
to travel to revolutionary France in an attempt to rescue their fellow 
French royalists and aristocrats from losing their heads by the 
guillotine. Due to a series of machinations and disguises, they are 
largely successful. Ffing becomes known as 'The Black Fingernail' because 
he leaves a calling card behind which shows two fingers sticking up, one 
with a black fingernail.
   After the Fingernail rescues a prominent royalist the Duc de Pommfrit 
(Charles Hawtrey), Citizen Robespierre (Peter Gilmore) orders the head of 
the Secret Police Citizen 'the Big Cheese' Camembert (Kenneth Williams) 
and Citizen Bidet (Peter Butterworth) to follow the Fingernail to England 
and do away with him. (In fact, Darcy and Ffing are their coachmen!) Once 
at Calais, the Fingernail meets Jacqueline (Dany Robin) and they fall in 
love instantly. He tells her his identity and gives her his locket. When 
Camembert realises that the Fingernail is nearby, he searches the inn at 
Calais and captures Jacqueline, thinking that she is wearing a diguise 
and is really the Fingernail!
   Jacqueline is imprisoned in the Bastille and Camembert, his love 
Desiree Dubarry (Joan Sims), and Bidet all travel to London in pursuit of 
the Fingernail. They pretend to be of noble stock, calling themselves the 
Duc and Duchesse de la Plume de ma Tante (with Bidet their assistant) and 
are invited by Darcy to a Ball held by Ffing. Desiree finds out that 
Ffing is the Fingernail by wearing the locket around her neck, but she 
ends up falling in love with him. Ffing attempts to stall Camembert so 
that he can return to the Bastille to rescue Jacqueline, Camembert has 
her moved to the 'Chateau Neuve', and a climactic sword-fight decides who 
will lose their heads at the end of the film!
   A more complex story than most Carry Ons, this film enjoys good 
production values (sets, costumes) and an on-form cast. Sid James is 
excellent as the English fop and Black Fingernail, Kenneth Williams 
excels as the evil Camembert, and Peter Butterworth expertly plays the 
substantial part of Camembert's thick-witted crony. Other acting honours 
go to Joan Sims who is perfect as Desiree and Charles Hawtrey who is 
excellent as the French aristo Pommfrit. 
   Although it suffers from a disasterously over-long sword fight at the 
end of the film, it is largely successful due to the performances of the 
main stars, its slick and professional production, and its 
better-than-usual script. Definitely one of the best of the series and a 
joy to watch.

Title
Review for Carry On Dick (1974)
   This is the last Carry on film with its almost intact regular cast and 
it is the swansong of Hattie Jacques and Sid James.
   Dick Turpin (Sid James) and his gang which includes Harriett/Harry 
(Barbara Windsor) and Tom "Doc" Scholl (Peter Butterworth), terrorise the 
countryside by staging highway robberies: "Stand and Deliver!"
   Owing to the increased occurrence of Turpin's robberies, Captain 
Desmond Fancey of the Bow Street Runners (Kenneth Williams) and his 
sidekick Sergeant Jock Strapp (Jack Douglas) visit Turpin's area of 
influence to bring him to justice. They are under the express orders of 
Sir Roger Daley (Bernard Bresslaw). Their intellect does not count for 
much and when they increasingly become suspicious of Reverend Flasher 
aka Dick Turpin (Sid James), whom they confided in earlier, they still 
cannot believe that the rector has any part in these robberies. 
   However, once they catch Harriett and put her in jail, and Sir Roger 
Daley takes complete charge, it seems that there is no hope for Dick 
Turpin. Then again, Sir Roger has assigned the dimwits Fancey and Jock 
Strapp aswell as the old dithering Constable (Kenneth Connor) to keep an 
eye on their prisoner!
   There is no doubt that this is a 'Sid James' Carry on movie. He excels 
in double roles (as in 'Carry on- Don't lose your head') and his 
performance as Flasher and Turpin is hilarious. Barbara Windsor is also 
funny as Harriett the sex mad housemaid and member of the gang, and 
Hattie Jacques' small but effective role as the rector's housekeeper 
Martha Hoggett is played to perfection.
   Jack Douglas plays a milder version of his excruciatingly annoying 
on-screen persona and Kenneth Williams is given a rather mundane part. 
Peter Butterworth is not allowed to shine in his boring performance as 
Tom, and Bernard Bresslaw's character appears only briefly in the film. 
The only notable performance from the support cast comes from Joan Sims 
as Madame Desiree, who is travelling around the country escorting her 
starlets the 'Birds of Paradise' and sporting a fake French accent. When 
her girls and her are robbed by Turpin, she is determined to catch him 
and helps the Reverend to find the culprit! 
   A Carry on by the numbers, this movie is only notable for the great 
performance by Sid James in his last Carry on movie. The jokes are bluer, 
the script is poorer (it is the last script written by Talbot Rothwell), 
but the music is a marked improvement. Although nearly all the regulars 
appear, they seem to be just going through the motions. None of the high 
spirits of the earlier films are apparent here. Just a selection of crude 
jokes and repititive double-entendres.

Title
Review for Carry On Cowboy (1965)
   Set in the Wild West, this Carry on centres around the arrival of The 
Rumpo Kid (Sidney James) and his cronies in Stodge City. His dodgy 
dealings and summary shootings aggravate Judge Burke (Kenneth Williams) 
so much that he asks Sheriff Albert Earp (Jon Pertwee) to drive Rumpo out 
of town. Instead, the Rumpo Kid shoots the sheriff dead. Therefore, Judge 
Burke sends for a law marshall to come in and clean up the City.
   Due to a misunderstanding, an English sanitary engineer called 
Marshall P. Knutt (Jim Dale) is assigned, without knowing it, as the law 
marshall for Stodge City. He arrives at the same time as Annie Oakley 
(Angela Douglas) who is seeking revenge for her father, the Sheriff's 
murder. When Marshall arrives at Stodge City, he soon becomes aware of 
the misunderstanding and due to his rather limited intellect, he is 
manipulated by The Rumpo Kid and always ends up getting things wrong.
   In the end, there is a head-to-head between Rumpo and Marshall. With 
the Rumpo's past experience, it would seem that Marshall is out of his 
depth, but using his sanitary skills and learning the ways of the West 
from Annie Oakley, he at least stands some chance!
   Sid James, with an American accent, is perfect as The Rumpo Kid, a 
part which suits him down to the ground. Jim Dale provides one of his 
best Carry on performances as the stupid sanitary engineer, and Angela 
Douglas is very effective in her role as the revengeful daughter.
   Other regulars that appear in this movie include Charles Hawtrey and 
Bernard Bresslaw (in his debut) as Big Heap and Little Heap respectively. 
Big Heap is the local Indian leader and the crazy casting of Hawtrey for 
this part is very amusing, as is his performance:- he steals every scene 
he is in even though he does not enter the film until thirty minutes 
past. Joan Sims provides useful and amusing support as Belle, the local 
bar owner who takes a fancy to the Rumpo Kid. 
   However, the part of Doc played by Peter Butterworth and Sheriff 
Albert Earp played by Jon Pertwee are not really necessary, and Pertwee's 
performance is rather poor. Kenneth Williams uses a new voice but 
struggles with the weak part of the 'Judge'. Even so, this Carry on was 
Sid James and Kenneth Williams' favourite.  
   A very different Carry on film, in that it is played more seriously by 
the actors and possesses more realism than any other Carry on. The death 
count is the highest of any Carry on film. Sets, costumes and action 
sequences are all very commendable. The songs that are included in the 
movie (the title song and Annie's song) are very impressive. A strange 
but therefore very interesting Carry on film. Not the best of its kind 
but it is certainly the most distinctive film of the series.

Title
Review for Carry On Up the Khyber (1968)
   One of the best of the Carry on films. Set in India in the 1890's, the 
main story is all about the attempts by the Khasi of Kalabar (Kenneth 
Williams) to oust British rule from Kalabar forever. He pits his wits 
against the British viceroy Sir Sidney Ruff-Diamond (Sidney James) and 
the British army, otherwise known as the 'Devils in Skirts' due to them 
wearing a kilt and not wearing any underwear. 
   When Private Jimmy Widdle (Charles Hawtrey) is found wearing underwear 
while on patrole at the Khyber Pass by Bungdit Din, the Khasi's associate 
(Bernard Bresslaw), it brings the whole regiment into shame and fuels the 
Khasi's desire to kill the British who are no longer the 'Devils in 
Skirts'.
   Other story threads include Sir Sidney's wife, Lady Ruff-Diamond's 
(Joan Sims) attempt to help the Khasi and in return she will become one 
of his wives, and the romance between the Khasi's daughter Princess Jelhi 
(Angela Douglas) and Captain Keene of the Regiment (Roy Castle).
   At the end, there is a climactic battle for supremacy in Kalabar 
during which the British keep a stiff upper lip. The final scenes around 
Sir Sidney's dinner table are hilarious.
   A high-spirited and good-humoured effort, with great performances from 
Sid James as the lecherous old governor and Joan Sims as his 'dutiful' 
wife. Charles Hawtrey's characterisation reaches its zenith with his 
portrayal of Private Widdle, a bumbling and dim-witted fool. Kenneth 
Williams still plays a nasty character but adds a new voice to his 
repertoire and is exceedingly funny. Julian Holloway is perfect as Major 
Shorthouse and Roy Castle (in his only Carry on film) is well-suited to 
the part of Captain Keene.
   On the other hand, the other regulars try their best but suffer from 
some very limited parts. Peter Butterworth as Brother Belcher the 
missionary is surplus to requirements, as is Terry Scott as Sergeant 
Major MacNutt. Bernard Bresslaw plays the boring part of Bungdit Din but 
still manages to be amusing.
   Up the Khyber is a great Carry on film. The actors are praiseworthy, 
the sets and costumes are lavish, and production values are better than 
usual. The plot is very complex compared to other Carry on's and there 
are many memorable scenes, such as the final dining room scene and 
Private Widdle's scene involving the loss of his undergarments!
   This was the producer Peter Rogers' favourite film and is one of mine 
too. However, I do not think that it is the best Carry on film. 
Nevertheless, it is certainly unmissable.

Title
Review for Carry On Up the Jungle (1970)
   What many have called 'one of the lesser Carry on movies', this spoof 
on Tarzan movies is all about the expedition in search of a long-lost son 
and the rare oozalum bird. 
   Lady Evelyn Bagley (Joan Sims) lost her husband and her son many years 
ago in the jungle. She decides to return to that same jungle area to try 
and find out what happened to them. Also on the expedition are Professor 
Inigo Tinkle (Frankie Howerd) and Claude Chumley (Kenneth Connor) who are 
in search of the oozalum bird. Aiding them is expert hunter and poacher 
Bill Boosey (Sid James) and local guide/ head of tribe Upsidasi (Bernard 
Bresslaw). 
   After searching for days in the blinding sun, they find the oozalum 
bird and also have to escape from a gorilla. Furthermore, they lose 
Bagley's assistant June (Jacki Piper) who decides to stay with her new 
found friend 'Tarzan' (Terry Scott). When Lady Bagley catches sight of 
him one night, she knows that he is her long-lost baby!
   Before she can acquaint herself with him, the whole expedition is 
captured by an all-woman tribe Aphrodisia led by Tonka (Charles Hawtrey) 
who decide to use the men to further populate their tribe. When Lady 
Bagley discovers that Tonka is her long-lost husband and Tonka falls from 
power, their only hope of escape is to be rescued by Tarzan and June!
   There are good performances from Joan Sims as the upper-crust lady on 
expedition and Frankie Howerd as prude Inigo (a part originally meant for 
Kenneth Williams, but due to his work commitments, was given to Howerd). 
Valerie Leon is entertaining as Leda, the eventual leader of Aphrodisia, 
and Terry Scott and Jacki Piper's partnership works well. On the other 
hand, Sid James' part is useless as is Kenneth Connor's part as Chumley. 
They are only in the movie to make up the number of regulars. 
Furthermore, Bernard Bresslaw suffers in the mundane part of Upsidasi. 
The small part of Tonka is well-suited to Charles Hawtrey. As leader of 
an all-woman tribe, he is hilarious. Similarly, the flashback to when he 
got lost in the jungle with little 'baby-waby' is very amusing. However, 
apart from a very very brief appearance at the start, he does not enter 
the movie until after sixty minutes duration.
   This Carry on suffers from some very poor parts and some weak 
performances (Connor and James). There are very poor production values as 
the whole film was made in the Pinewood studios and so the jungle looks 
terrible. The oozalum bird is ridiculously tacky and cheap! The jokes are 
getting very repititive by this stage and the absence of so many regulars 
(due to the need for only the characters of Bagley, Tonka, Tarzan and 
Tinkle) illustrates how basic the story is. Even so, this Carry on is 
entertaining and is not the worst of its kind.

Title
Review for Carry On Emmannuelle (1978)
   This was the last Carry on movie (if you discount 'Carry on Columbus' 
as a Carry on movie) and was made by a new production company.
   Based in Central London, this movie is about the attempts by 
Emmanuelle Prevert (Suzanne Danielle) to bed her husband Emile the French 
Ambassador (Kenneth Williams). When he seems unwilling, she is given his 
permission to bed anyone she likes, such as the Prime Minister and the 
U.S.Ambassador. Her antics get her into trouble and the British press 
spread these rumours all over their front pages. She is invited to talk 
on television to set the record straight but only confirms the rumours 
instead. Meanwhile, Theodore Valentine (Larry Dann) is in love with 
Emmannuelle after a chance encounter in the toilet of the Concorde and is 
determined to marry her. However, she is only interested in restoring her 
husband's ardour which seems a little difficult after Emile's accident 
with a church spire!
   This film is the second worst Carry on movie, the worst being 'Carry 
on England'. It is embarassing to see some of the remaining regulars 
struggle through this diabolical script by Lance Peters and try to pull 
off some of the crude and tasteless jokes that he has written. 
   Newcomers Suzanne Danielle and Beryl Reid (as Mrs.Valentine) are 
mildly funny, but Larry Dann as Theodore is excruciatingly bad. Kenneth 
Williams only appears in a few scenes and his lacklustre performance is 
warranted, given the script. The small parts for Jack Douglas as Lyons 
the butler, Joan Sims as Mrs.Dangle, Kenneth Connor as Leyland the 
chauffeur, and Peter Butterworth as Richmond, are worthless and 
embarassing. In fact, all four parts are surplus to requirements. 
However, the only humourous scene in the film is when the four of them 
and Emmannuelle talk about their most amourous escapades. 
   An awful script, a terrible collection of jokes, very poor production 
values (especially the scene where Emmannuelle takes her clothes off at 
St.James Palace), a ludicrous and cringeworthy musical score, and a 
non-existent plot or storyline. Its just a succession of awful set pieces 
about who Emmannuelle will bed next! Jack Douglas is not so annoying but 
is more boring, Joan Sims and Peter Butterworth are wasted, and Kenneth 
Connor and Kenneth Williams put in some poor performances as Leyland and 
Emile. A complete waste of time, this movie was trying to catch up with 
the new sexually permissive Seventies. It was a Certificate 15 film but 
by 1978, there was little interest in this kind of film and it flopped at 
the box office and was only given its premiere on UK terrestrial 
television in April 1998! Avoid at all costs!
