Authors
Lim Boon Wee
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Selena (1997)
I have to confess that I know little about Selena when I watch the show,
and 2.5 hours later, I felt what thousands felt when she passed away in
1995, sadness and grief.
This movie was bypassed from the big screens here as the targetted 
audience might be small, but what a mistake it is. It is one of the most
moving show I have seen this year.
We are given a visual treat from the very beginning of the show, it would
be hard not to be shakened by the enormous reception Selena got from her
fans at the concert. You might be mistaken that she must be Madonna. A
song later, we are transported back to the time where her father was still
in his teens, trying to make it as a pop group, only to fail because of
language barrier.
A few decades on, he discovered that his daughter and his other 2 children
had the potential to fulfil his long time dream, to become famous ie. So,
his three children exchanged their stones and footballs for the mic, drum
sticks and the guitar. A typical journey for any pop star, it has to start
of from humble settings, get recognised and then move on to big things.
That is what we will get to see. What we are constantly reminded of is, it
is important to keep your dreams alive and see it happen.
Jennifer Lopez gave an outstanding performance as Selena, she does deserve
the Oscar nomination last year. She oozes the charm and energy that Selena
had. Edward James Olmos who plays her father, Abraham, also gave a strong
performance a concerned father and manager of his daughter. Sad to say,
Jon Seda's (Chris Perez) role as Selena's husband was not exploited, the
same can also be said for her brother and sister.
What probably spoiled the mood of the show is that you know what is you
know what is going to happen next. A colourful and happy journey for the
audience (and most importantly, for Selena herself) turned sour towards
the end, no thanks to her mistrust towards her employee.
One will feel what a waste of talent that was, she had the looks, she had
the voice and she had the fashion tastes, at the time where she was on the
verge of bigger times, she had to go. She was only 23.
Selena Quintanilla Perez (1971 - 1995)
MY HOME!           http://www.iscs.nus.sg/~limboonw
Man Utd        Page           http://www.iscs.nus.sg/~limboonw/mufc.html
UK Chart Page      http://www.iscs.nus.sg/~limboonw/Ukchart/
