Authors
Eric Brochu
Number of Reviews
3

Title
Review for Jing cha gu shi III: Chao ji jing cha (1992)
Starring: Jackie Chan, Maggie Cheung, Michelle Yeoh
Directed by: Stanley Tong
Jackie Chan has rocketed to mainstream acceptance with
Rumble in the Bronx, and Miramax and New Line have
deals lined up to distribute four more Jackie Chan
films between them.  With Jackie in the public eye so
much, many new fans are wondering about his older
films.  Unfortunatly many of the most readily available
rentals are old, dull films, made before Jackie Chan
really developed a personal style.  With this series of
reviews, I intend to cover a broad range of his better
works.  While they are not easy to find, I hope that
people who read these reviews and are interested in the
films will be inspired to seek out the specialty shops
and Chinatowns where these movies _are_ available, and
see Jackie not as he appears in his early chop-sockey
films or even as he appears in the weak Rumble in the
Bronx, but as the charming, talented, amazing
entertainer that he is.
One of Jackie Chan's most spectacular and 
enjoyable films is his 1992 hit Police Story III: 
Supercop.  While it is the third installment of this 
highly successful and entertaining series, there is no 
difficulty in understanding it if you haven't seen the 
first two.  In these films, Jackie plays a determined 
and eager Hong Kong cop named Chan Chia-chu, who finds 
himself in the midst of all manner of criminal 
mischief, which he kung fu kicks and jokes his way out 
of with a "just part of my job" stoicism.  A running 
gag which crops up in this movie is Chia-chu's 
relationship with his pretty, but jealous girlfriend 
May (Maggie Cheung).
At the beginning of Police Story III: Supercop, we 
learn that Interpol and the Royal Hong Kong Police are 
looking for a cop to do the almost impossible (and 
extremely dangerous, natch) job of doing something 
about drug smuggling in Southeast Asia.  Guess who gets 
tricked by his superiors into volunteering?  
After a classic Jackie bit in which Chia-chu makes 
arrangements with May in case he doesn't return -- 
without telling her he's doing anything dangerous -- 
he's off to China, where he is given an undercover 
identity as a small-time criminal by Director Yang, a 
Chinese police officer who just happens to be a 
beautiful woman (Michelle Yeoh).  Well, in all honesty,
I had trouble following the plot after this point; it 
has holes the size of a freight train, and I think 
there are some scenes missing in the version I saw (or 
maybe it just seems like there are).  If you can look 
beyond this, though (and even I, fussy movie watcher 
that I am, had no problem with simply ignoring the 
gaps), you're in for a real treat: the movie, 
particularly the second half, alternates between 
hilariously funny and absolutely amazing, featuring 
some of the most amazing stunts ever put on film.
Jackie is in great form here.  Sure, he doesn't 
have an amazing range as an actor, but that's not the 
point.  He's as charming, witty and charismatic as 
ever, and a real joy to watch.  And when he performs 
his stunts and fight scenes, it is easy to see why he 
is so deservedly popular an action star.  In one heart-
stopping scene, he leaps from a rooftop onto a rope 
ladder dangling from a helicopter, which then flies 
through downtown Kuala Lumpur trying to shake him off.  
The camera angles make it perfectly clear both that it 
really is Jackie on the end of that rope ladder and 
that it was shot without special effects: he really is 
flailing around thirty stories up or passing so close 
over a train that he is momentarily obscured by the 
engine's smoke!
Yeoh is also enjoyable to watch as the efficient 
Communist cop who ends up teaming with Jackie.  Not 
only is she very attractive, she is a great action 
movie star, and she gets some of the best fight scenes, 
comic situations (just watch what she does when she 
finds herself in the middle of a gunfight with a 
bullet-proof vest full of dynamite (!) ), and stunts 
(in one amazing sequence, she jumps from a hill to the 
top of a moving train on a motorcycle).  At times, she 
threatens to upstage Jackie on his home turf, certainly 
no easy feat.  
One of the few weak points of the film, though, is that 
Yeoh and Jackie don't really have any chemistry 
together.  I got the impression that nobody was really 
sure if they should have a cop-buddy relationship or 
some sort of sexual tension between them, so they 
decided to have neither, though there are a few hints 
at both.  While it doesn't really hurt the film, it 
would have been nice to see something besides general 
coolness between these two engaging entertainers,
especially since the unconventional but successful
Chia-chu and the tough, by-the-book Inspector Yang are
obviously meant to represent Hong Kong and mainland
China: it would be nice to explore that subtext in
a bit more detail.
There is, however, great chemistry between Jackie 
and Cheung, whom he runs into while undercover in 
Malaysia, and it is not at all hard to see why their 
relationship has been a thread running through the 
series.  Jackie is at his most engaging when he has 
someone equally charming and down-to-earth like Cheung 
to work off of.  The scenes where Chia-chu is torn 
between the demands of his job and his unwillingness to 
risk angering May are some of the warmest and funniest 
of the film.
Overall, this is a great action film, and features 
some of Jackie Chan's most amazing stunts, as well as a 
great supporting cast and some very funny bits.  It is 
also one of his most "western" films in terms of action 
and style, and people who think they might be turned 
off by Jackie Chan's brand of kung fu comedy but are 
still interested in the man might want to look at this 
film first.

Title
Review for Cité des enfants perdus, La (1995)
Starring:  Ron Perlman, Judith Vittet, Daniel Emilfork,
     Dominique Pinon
Directed by:  Marc Caro (artistic director) and Jean-  
     Pierre Jeunet
A circus strong-man named One breaks chains with the 
power of his lungs.  A street preacher proclaims the 
wonders of entering a cult whose members ritually blind 
themselves.  A greasy, opium-smoking assassin with a soft 
heart turns people into murderous zombies with flea-
delivered drug injections.  A group of clones sing a 
birthday song to a disembodied brain in a glass tank.  
Welcome to the bizarre world of _The City of Lost 
Children_, a stunning fantasy film from Jean-Pierre 
Jeunet and Marc Caro, the makers of the widely-acclaimed 
darkest-of-dark comedy _Delicatessen_.  If you've seen 
_Delicatessen_, you probably have some idea of what to 
expect from these brilliantly imaginative French 
filmmakers, and while I'm not sure it ultimately holds 
together as well as _Delicatessen_ does, _The City of 
Lost Children_ more than makes up for it in terms of 
sheer imaginative power.
The setting of the film is a port city somewhere in a 
never-never land equal parts Dickensian London, prewar 
Paris, and drug-induced hallucination.  The carnival 
barker announcing the strongman's show is stabbed, and 
when the strongman and his three-year-old brother return 
home that night, they are attacked by members of a child-
stealing cult known as the Cyclopes, who blind themselves 
and wear brass eyepieces to see electronically.  The 
strongman, One (Ron Perlman) gives chase but loses the 
gang.  The Cyclopes, it turns out, are stealing the 
children for the twisted Krank (Daniel Emilfork), who 
cannot have dreams of his own, and is forced to subsist 
on the stolen dreams of children.  
Krank is the creation of a scientist who has now 
disappeared, and he lives on a strange offshore 
laboratory with the scientist's other creations: a 
ruthless midget "princess" (Mireille Mosse); Uncle Ervin 
(voiced by Jean-Louis Trintignant), a disembodied, 
migraine-ridden brain, kept in a glass tank from which he 
speaks through a pair of Victrola-style speakers; and six 
dim-witted, narcoleptic clones (all played by Dominique 
Pinon), one of whom is convinced he is the original from 
which the others were made.  
The Cyclopes trade One's little brother to the clones for 
some of the electronic eyewear and ultra-sensitive 
hearing aids.  Meanwhile, One, searching for his brother, 
runs into Miette (Judith Vittet), a member of a band of 
child-thieves working for a pair of villainous Siamese 
twin sisters (Genevieve Brunet and Odile Mallet).  Miette 
gets One to help in a safe-cracking operation (he 
staggers out of the building with the massive safe in a 
wonderfully choreographed escape sequence), but then 
leaves her fellow criminals behind to join One in his 
search for his brother.  
I won't spoil the movie for you by detailing the twists 
and turns the plot takes and the other delightfully 
strange characters Miette and One run into, but rest 
assured they do meet up with Krank and his fellow 
experiments in a climax that is alternately hair-
raisingly creepy and gut-bustingly funny.  
_The City of Lost Children_ opens with a dream sequence.  
It's Christmas, from a small child's point of view.  
Santa Claus comes down the chimney, smiling and cherubic, 
and bearing delightful toys.  Then another comes down the 
chimney.  Then another, and another, and pretty soon the 
room is filled with Santas, some engaging in most un-
Santa-like behavior.  A reindeer relieves itself on the 
floor.  The child starts to bawl its head off, and the 
dream sequence ends.  This scene sets the feel of the 
film that follows.  _The City of Lost Children_ is 
littered with dark humour and oddball sight gags.  It is 
often hilarious, but there is a menacing atmosphere to 
many of the jokes.  Many of the sight gags involve the 
deformities of the characters; when one of the Siamese 
twins takes a puff on her cigarette, for example, the 
other coolly exhales.  Others involve oddly mechanical 
situations: one memorable scene involves a flying tear 
which sets of a chain of events that leads to the 
collision of a spectacularly massive ship.  The humour is 
imaginative and unapologetically idiosyncratic, and not 
for those who don't like their laughs mixed with a touch 
of dementia lurking somewhere nearby.
Caro and Jeunet have made the film a phenomenal visual 
experience, full of striking imagery.  It is beautifully 
shot by Darius Khondji (_Seven_), who uses unconventional 
camera angles and wide-angle lenses to bring Marc Caro's 
artistic vision to life.  Caro's wonderfully 
claustrophobic sets create a permeating sense of 
impending menace throughout the film: brick walls and 
fire-escapes have never looked so eerie.  Even the actors 
look perfect for the film.  Perlman's misshapen, but 
warm, features and impressive physique suit his kindly 
muscleman perfectly; as Krank, Emilfork is impeccably 
haggard and twisted; and Vittet, a strikingly pretty 
child with long black hair and unflinching countenance, 
looks simultaneously innocent and world-weary.  
While many Hollywood fantasies look either unimpressively 
pedestrian or get caught up in a series of over-designed, 
under-imagined spectacles that beg for the chance to awe 
you with their budgets, _The City of Lost Children_ 
manages to strike a perfect balance between dreamlike 
surrealism and real-world reference points.  There are 
very few films that can match _The City of Lost Children_ 
in the sheer power of its imagery, which I'm sure will 
stay with me for weeks.  Whether it's the sight of Uncle 
Evrin, the disembodied brain, wheeling towards an 
elevator at breakneck speed or Miette and One in a 
rowboat drifting through a fog-shrouded field of giant, 
floating mines, the images are consistently beautiful, 
strange and compelling.  It is easily one of the finest 
examples of Expressionist filmmaking on this side of the 
silent era.  In short, the film looks fantastic, in both 
senses of the word.
_The City of Lost Children_ also features first-class 
acting.  Ron Perlman, Dominique Pinon, and Daniel 
Emilfork are all real pleasures to watch, and they all 
look like they're having a great time.  The real find, 
though is Judith Vittet.  I don't know how old she was 
when she made this film (she looks about ten), but she 
does a great job in a difficult, if somewhat cliched, 
role as a streetwise child who has built up a tired, 
cynical facade to mask her loneliness.  It is to her 
credit, and those of the other child actors, that they 
are never typical Hollywood kids; they are not 
wisecracking miniature adults or panderingly cute 
annoyances: they are people, and Miette and her fellow 
thieves are the most human characters of the film.  The 
filmmakers have obvious sympathies towards the children 
without making them into a transparently nostalgic vision 
of what an adult filmmaker _thinks_ kids in a film should 
be.
Alas, _The City of Lost Children_ isn't perfect, though 
its weaknesses are far from fatal.  Most notably, the 
film sometimes gets bogged down in its imagination and 
uses gorgeous imagery where plot might have been more 
satisfying in the long run.  The Cyclops cult, for 
example, is marvelously costumed and suitably oddball in 
behavior and belief, but while they are central early in 
the film, they disappear completely in the second half, 
without any kind of resolution.  They're never even 
mentioned: you're just left to wonder about them.  
Similarly, the explanation of what, exactly, Krank is 
doing when he steals childrens' dreams is so vague it 
simply left me scratching my head, which is quite 
unfortunate, as Krank's dreams are pivotal in the film's 
climax.
These criticisms, however, are tiny compared to the 
unique experience of seeing this exciting, funny, stylish 
film.  I rarely watch a movie a second time without a 
long period in-between, but I went to _The City of Lost 
Children_ two nights in a row.  The second time, I knew 
what was going to happen, so I just sat back and let the 
images wash over me, and I enjoyed it even more.  
Unfortunately, I'm not sure the dark splendor of _The 
City of Lost Children_ will survive being shrunk to fit 
on a TV screen; this is the kind of film that must be 
seen in the theater to really be appreciated on the level 
its creators intend.  Fortunately, I suspect it will 
become a staple of repertoire and "art house" theaters.  
If you have an opportunity to see this film in a theater, 
don't hesitate to do so.  Magic like this doesn't come by 
every day.

Title
Review for Jui kuen II (1994)
Starring: Jackie Chan, Anita Mui, Ti Lung, Felix Wong
Directed by: Lau Ka-Leung
        General Introduction:  Well, Jackie Chan has just 
made his big North American debut (again), this time with 
the high-energy Asian hit Rumble in the Bronx.  Not one 
to miss an opportunity to sing the praises of one of my 
favorite film stars, I am writing this series of reviews, 
each about one of Jackie Chan's Hong Kong movies, all 
highly recommended to both fans of Jackie Chan and those 
who are simply curious about the man currently being 
billed as "the world's most popular action star."  The 
only real problem might be finding them.  While they is 
not available at the local Blockbuster, pretty much any 
city of any size is likely to have at least one video 
store catering to an Asian audience.  Find it and rent 
them.  I promise you won't be disappointed.
        I confess: I'm not much of a fan of martial arts 
films.  Bruce Lee never impressed me with his macho down-
with-one-punch fighting; I have trouble taking Jet Li's 
wire stunts with the seriousness I'm supposed to; and, 
like many people, I tend to think of the generally 
interchangeable chop sockey films on the shelves of my 
local video store as tripe-wannabe.  
        But I love Jackie Chan, and Drunken Master II, one 
of Jackie's most martial arts-heavy films of the last few 
years, is a major cause of my admiration.
        In Drunken Master II (I haven't seen Drunken Master 
I, and I didn't get the impression I was missing anything 
in this film) a lavish (by Hong Kong standards) period 
piece, Jackie Chan plays Chinese folk hero Wong Fei-hong, 
whom he presents here as a kind of turn-of-the-century 
Chinese generation Xer, who spends his time hanging out 
in the market with his friends and goofing off with the 
family servant.  Fei-hong is a good-but-not-great martial 
artist regularly, but he is a master of "drunken boxing," 
which means that when he's drunk, he becomes a 
staggering, unpredictable dynamo.  Early in the film, 
Fei-hong fights with a mysterious stranger he finds 
acting suspiciously while on board a train waiting to 
cross the border.  The fight is just one of the film's 
many stunning set pieces, starting under a train in 
quarters so cramped you're amazed the actors can move, 
let alone fight, and it continues under a boardwalk and 
into a barn.  During the fight, Fei-hong's box of ginseng 
is mixed up with the stranger's box, which, to Fei-hong's 
surprise and distress, contains an Imperial Jade seal.  
Naturally both the good guys and the bad guys want it 
back, and Fei-hong finds himself in the midst of a plot 
of the British Consulate to steal Chinese artifacts and 
ship them off to England.  It all comes to a head in the 
film's stunning climax in an iron foundry, which features 
some of Jackie Chan's very best stunt-work, including a 
scene where he crawls backwards over a bed of hot coals!
        Unlike most Jackie Chan films, the plot here holds 
together relatively well.  Sure there are a few holes 
(and a couple of big ones), and no one will mistake it 
for The Godfather, but it serves its purpose: it connects 
the fights and jokes, and it manages to work in real 
character development, pathos and a sociopolitical 
subtext about the relationship between a colony and the 
mother-state.  
        This film gives Jackie a chance to really show off 
what he can do physically.  The fights are thrilling, 
breathtaking pieces of imaginative and complex 
choreography, easily the best I've ever seen.  They do a 
great job of showing off Jackie Chan's incredible grace, 
skill and timing, and to top it off, he has a great 
screen presence and a real comic sensibility: Jackie 
Chan's fights come across looking like all the best parts 
of Fred Astaire, Gene Kelly, Buster Keaton and Charlie 
Chaplin movies.  His trademark use of props is readily 
apparent, and he deftly swings and tosses around chairs, 
benches, tables, fans, flowerpots and wine bottles with 
remarkable regularity.  At one point he tosses a purse 
into the air, ducks a blow, catches the purse and places 
it on top of his opponent's head, punches him several 
times, and catches the purse as his foe falls, all in one 
fluid motion over the space of a single shot mere seconds 
long.  The scenes where Fei-hong fights while intoxicated 
in order to use his "drunken boxing" are particularly 
impressive; these scenes give Jackie an opportunity to 
make faces and stagger from punch to punch, dodge kicks 
while falling against walls or guzzling wine, toss 
bottles into the air to keep them from being knocked out 
of his hand, and generally clown around.
        Jackie Chan is as warm and charming as ever, and 
looks good enough at forty that he is not too 
unbelievable in the role of an aimless but well-
intentioned twenty-something living with his parents.  
However charismatic and watchable Jackie is, though, he 
is not a good enough actor or strong enough personality 
to hold a film on his own.  It's fortunate, then, that 
this film has such a great supporting cast, especially 
Fei-hong's parents.  Ti Lung plays Fei-hong's strict 
father, Wong Kei-ying, as a man of wisdom and strong 
emotion.  In the movie's most heart-wrenching scene, Kei-
ying throws Fei-hong out of the house after he drinks so 
much he accidently strikes him.  You can see on his face 
the conflict between his rage at what he sees as a lack 
of proper respect and his love for his son: surprisingly 
human emotions for a martial arts film.
        Anita Mui, who is woefully underused as the shop 
owner in Rumble in the Bronx, also shines here as Fei-
hong's pregnant, adoring stepmother, who is a little too 
eager to use her own kung fu in her delicate condition.  
It's a great role, and she plays it for all it's worth, 
camping it up with an infectious enthusiasm.
        The direction and editing are superb.  The pacing, 
in particular is very good.  The fight scenes never get 
to be boring or exhausting.  They always leave you 
wanting to see just a little more, to watch Jackie just a 
little longer, a technique which works well in this film, 
which can actually deliver on the promise of more and 
better things to come later while still impressing you at 
the time.  And the rest of the film isn't just filler: it 
is very funny, sometimes moving, and always engaging.  
The opening scenes, where a train pulls into a station 
and is mobbed by vendors selling food to the passengers 
through the windows, while Fei-hong and the family's 
servant wander the train have such a great energy that 
the first fight feels like icing on the cake, rather than 
the start of the action.  As a footnote, the man that 
Jackie fights under the train in that first fight scene 
is the film's director, Lau Ka-Leung, who is rumoured to 
have been replaced during the shooting, with the 
director's job given to Jackie Chan.  Regardless of who 
did the job, though, it's excellent work.
        The film's weakest point is the villains, whom we 
never really get to know outside Jackie Chan's fights 
with them.  The character who should be the main villain, 
the sadistic British politician in charge of the art 
treasure smuggling, is only on-screen to boss around his 
henchmen, and eventually just disappears, without facing 
any sort of punishment.  The henchmen are appropriately 
despicable, especially after one strips Fei-hong and ties 
him up in the town square after he fails to provide a 
good fight, but they are not particularly memorable.
        This weakness is just a nitpicking point, however.  
On the whole, Drunken Master II is an excellent film, and 
first class entertainment.  I personally feel that New 
Line made a big mistake in releasing the comparatively 
lackluster Rumble in the Bronx instead of Drunken Master 
II as North America's reintroduction to Jackie Chan.  
This film has far superior fights, stunts, acting, 
writing and direction, and showcases Jackie Chan's 
talents far better, and I LIKED Rumble.  I give this 
movie my highest recommendation.  Fortunately, it is 
slated to be released in North America late in 1997, 
provided Rumble in the Bronx is a hit, but there is no 
reason to wait that long: do yourself a favour, make the 
extra effort and rent this movie, even (or perhaps 
especially) if you didn't like Rumble in the Bronx or, 
like me, you don't like martial arts movies in general.  
Even if it doesn't make a hard core Chan fan out of you, 
it is still more exciting, entertaining and generally FUN 
than any of the sterile megabudget Hollywood action 
blockbusters of the last five years.
