Authors
Ethan Solomita
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Lion King, The (1994)
     First, the animation quality was amazing!  It was the best I've
ever seen from a Disney movie, certainly for anything of the length of
a feature film!. And, best of all, I couldn't tell where the computer
effects were used.
     In ALADDIN, I could pick it out: carpet, cave-o'-wonders,
carpet-chase, etc.  Here, I only had guesses.
     Also, unlike ALADDIN, the background artwork was a major factor in
the quality.  No boring backgrounds here (well, except for the simple
sheer rock cliffs).
     Moving on, however.  Yes, the songs needed improvement.  The
opening "Circle of Life" I really liked, thanks mostly to Hans Zimmer and
the Chorus.  And, like a prior poster, I thought that 'Can't Wait to be
King" felt thrown in just because they *had* to have a showy dance
number.  However, I did think the animation was quite good, and
interesting the way everything changed for that segment.
     The plot ...  Ah yes, the plot ...  Well, it was more "adult" than
old-time movies like BAMBI, in that it presented life more harshly.
But it was very rushed.  I'm afraid the sudden growth during "Hakuna
Matata" doesn't make up for character development!  In an effort to save
money, and time, Disney won't make their movies longer.  Other movie
houses have to spend $100M+ to bring in the blockbusters, and Disney
won't do it.  Disappointing.
     So it was enjoyable, and it really was very funny (I often
couldn't hear the lines over the laughter in the theater), but in the
end it was so rushed I wasn't drawn into the characters (especially
Simba) to care.
     By the way, was that the entirety of the lion pride?  Where's
everyone else?  How about some other males?  (Maybe I just don't know
enough about real lion packs, but then again, most lion packs don't
have kings that rule the jungle. :-) )
     So, that's it!  I did enjoy it, and I'm sure I'll see it again,
but for me the storyline didn't hold the adult level of appeal of
BEAUTY AND THE BEAST.
