Authors
Jan Bednarczuk
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for U-571 (2000)
It isn't the most original movie.  It doesn't have the most
interesting characters.  It's been done before, in a multitude of
ways.
The premise of U-571 is a familiar one.  A submarine crew gets
called out to do An Important Mission, that may Win the War for
the United States. (Oh, were there other countries that were in
the war on the Allied side, too?  No matter, it's irrelevant.)
We saw this in Hunt for Red October.  We've seen it in countless
World War II movies.  We even saw it in Crimson Tide, for crying
out loud.
So what makes this movie different?  Well, the details of the
plot are slightly different.  This time, the plucky submarine
crew is out to capture a coding device from a crippled German
submarine.  The coding device must be captured at all costs.  It
is more important than the lives of any of the men on the crew.
Also, there is an Executive Officer who was only recently turned
down for a captain's position, because his commanding officer
felt that he was not ready to order men to their deaths.  Hmm.
Combine these two plot points, and I'm sure you can see where the
movie is heading.  
And even as predictable as all of this is, I still liked this
movie!  It's a great adventure movie, uncluttered by any of the
irrelevant crap that so often weighs down otherwise-good
adventure movies.  There was no romantic interest, pining away at
home for her man at sea.  There were no unnecessary shots of the
commanding forces back on land, planning out what should be done.
There was only the submarine, the men, and the enemy, and a fine
adventure story tying them all together.
Sure, the character development was crappy, but it was also
unimportant.  You knew what you had to know about these
characters:  this man is the crusty drill sergeant, this man is
the hothead who's going to screw everything up, this man is the
noble and principled commander, and this man is the plucky
enlisted man who will do anything for his captain.  For this
movie, those outlined character sketches were all that were
necessary.  
I found myself biting my nails during a few key points of this
movie.  The suspense and drama drew me in, made me want to know
what happened next.  This is not a movie during which I would
have felt comfortable leaving for ten minutes to get popcorn --
not because I would have missed important plot, but because I
would have missed the action, and in this movie, the action was
what was important.  Will they avoid the depth charges?  Will the
submarine survive at this depth?  Will the commanding officer be
able to give the command to abandon some of his men?  What will
happen?
All things considered, I'll give this movie a favorable review.
It's not the best movie ever, but it was a fun ride, and that's
all I wanted it to be.
