Authors
Adam Godfrey
Number of Reviews
2

Title
Review for Pleasantville (1998)
   Recently I read 4 reviews of Pleasantville-one from Entertainment Weekly,
one from a newsgroup, and two from different online resources. Each review
compared this film to The Truman Show.
   Why? The only reason people compared Pleasantville to Truman is due to the
fact that their lives are on television. Other than that, the two movies are
completely different from each other. Reviewers seem to love to pick one movie
(i.e. The Truman Show), obsess over it, and make it a guideline for other
movies. When Pleasantville and EDtv opened, all critics seemed to treat the two
films like they were subjects of King Truman. The same goes for The Thin Red
Line, as well. When it opened in Decemeber, probably 98% of reviews compared it
to Stephen Spielberg's Saving Private Ryan, giving Thin Line no chance
whatsoever. Critics loved Private Ryan so much, that they automatically decided
no movie is good enough to reach its standards.
   This is why I think Pleasantville was underrated. If The Truman Show had
never been made, Pleasantville probably would have received better reviews,
done better at the box office, and would be remembered after it's long been on
the video store shelves. Sure, it wasn't perfect, and it wasn't very
believeable, but neither was The Wizard of Oz or Star Wars, and there stands
two of the most prominent movies in history. 
   With the exception of Don Knotts as the annoying "TV repairman" the film is
cast perfectly: The Ice Storm's Tobey Maguire is David in real life; he watches
the old 50's sitcom "Pleasantville" to escape from his feuding parents. His
twin sister, Jen (Reese Witherspoon) is a popular slut who (steriotypically)
smokes and wears revealing clothes. But what makes her character believeable is
the dialogue-those excessive 90's terms such as "like", "whatever", and "cool"
make her sound like the total dimwit she's supposed to be. The twins, with a
little help from a TV repairman (casting Don Knotts in this role was obviously
a cameo-esque cast rather than a true acting one), are sucked into
Pleasantville by a magical new remote. Their new parents, played by William H.
Macy and Joan Allen, are perfect in every way. Their new names are Bud and Mary
Sue, and right away they start to corrupt the town of Pleasantville.
   After the siblings fit comfortably in their new roles, the movie begins to
take form. It's just like watching a sitcom in itself; you don't want it to
end. "Mary Sue" has sex with her date, the school basketball champion; when he
tells all his friends about it, they stop preforming perfectly at basketball,
and things start to take color. 
   Soon we learn that these people don't know how to express true emotions, and
when they learn to do so, they eventually turn into color. This eventually
sparks a racial war between the "coloreds" and the "black & whites."
   Entertainment Weekly reviewer Lisa Schwarzbaum claims the movie has, "none
of the depth, poignance, and brilliance of The Truman Show..." Yes, The Truman
Show was maybe a little more intelligent. But the racial setting-intensified by
the forcing of the coloreds to sit in the upper box of the courtroom-certainly
classifies as deep, considering it's what I least expected. 
   Gary Ross did not try to create an intelligent, award masterpiece-he just
tries to convey moral messages within his work. Take for example Big and Dave,
his past films. Big-be careful what you wish for. Dave-Good or bad lying is
still lying. Did these movies win big awards? No, but they won the heart of
millions.
   Pleasantville could have done that too, if it wasn't for snotty reviewers
who set precedents with preceeding films. Pleasantville: A-
Ad2am 
"I almost lost my nose...and I like it. I like breathing through it."
-Jack Nicholson, Chinatown

Title
Review for Edtv (1999)
  At times, you'd think EdTV would be an entertaining film. I mean, who can
resist the story of your average Joe becomming a celebrity by having his life
filmed every minute of every day? 
  But this average Joe, Ed Perkuny, (Matthew McConaughay), is a sappy, lifeless
creation that wanders around, trying to solve everyone's problems and settle
his own. McConaughay is awful, especially because he is trying to pull off his
usual Hollywood charm with a 3 week beard and torn jeans. Frankly, he had more
charm in the devestating flop The Newton Boys. He overacts in every way: his
overexaggerant body language, obsession with kissing women every second he gets
the chance, and that cliched scene where he loses someone in his life, and
drops to his knee and cries.
   The rest of the cast is very good; especially Martin Landau (as Ed's
step-father), who plays a cute role as the close-to-death old guy that makes
all the witty comments. Jenna Elfman is good, (but a little overemotional); her
main problem is that she keeps getting sucked into bad films, i.e. Can't Hardly
Wait, and Krippendorf's Tribe. Woody Harrelson, as Ed's brother Ray, does his
usual egg-headed role, with his comic wit as well (he wrote a book entitled,
"My Brother Pissed on Me.") Elizabeth Hurley is perfectly cast as the easy
slut, and Dennis Hopper, in a quick cameo as Ed's biological father, is a nice
choice (ironically coming after the role he turned down as Christof in The
Truman Show).
   Ellen Degeneres stood out as the executive who, after awhile, decides the
show must not go on much to the opposite of the head exec, Rob Reiner's
opinion.
   I hate to compare this film to The Truman Show, but the fact is, I was
ashamed to see this movie. It felt that I had dropped from College to
Kindergarten after seeing Truman and Ed. EdTV had no real wit or genius; it was
typical Hollywood. Extracting the TV part of the movie, you have the simple
plotline: Man steals brother's girlfriend, girlfriend leaves town, man gets new
slut girlfriend to feel like he can move on, slut breaks up with him, real
girlfriend comes back, and voila, you have a romance.
   I got so restless during this movie, I almost walked out. The only reason it
doesn't drop below a "C" grade is because of the fine supporting performances.
Grade: C-
Ad2am 
"I almost lost my nose...and I like it. I like breathing through it."
-Jack Nicholson, Chinatown
