Authors
David E. Smith
Number of Reviews
17

Title
Review for Practical Magic (1998)
Practical Magic (1998) - Sandra Bullock, Nicole Kidman, Stockard Channing,
Dianne Wiest, and lots of people we'll never hear from again because this
movie utterly ruined their careers
   I don't know why, but witchcraft sells movie tickets. From "The Craft"
   to "The Witches of Eastwick," movies can instantly make a respectable
   profit just by invoking the magic of, well, magic.
   In deference to 100 years of Hollywood, I won't delve into the myriad
   religious inaccuracies all those movies, and the new "Practical
   Magic," are filled with. The truth about witches wouldn't sell many
   tickets.
   Sandra Bullock and Nicole Kidman, on the other hand, sell tickets in
   spades. In "Practical Magic" they play sisters, Sally and Gillian
   Owens, trying to shake off a family curse. Should one of them ever
   fall in love, the object of her affection will die a horrible,
   untimely death.
   Of course, this happens to Sally's husband (Mark Feuerstein), then to
   Gillian's latest fling, Jimmy Angelov (Goran Visnjic). Jimmy has a
   "thing" for kidnapping and beating women, though, so when they kill
   him it almost seems justified. He keeps coming back from the dead, and
   hilarity ensues.
   For some reason, "Practical Magic" is billed as a dark romantic
   comedy. (No, it doesn't sound terribly romantic or even funny.) There
   is a bit of comedy, though it's sparse and not terribly well-done.
   There's even a bit of romance, but it doesn't show up until nearly an
   hour into the film. When it does, it finally takes the form of Aidan
   Quinn as a cop from Arizona trying to track Jimmy down.
   The cast is top-notch. Bullock and Kidman are both capable actresses
   and have plenty of on-screen chemistry. They laugh and fight and jug
   as sisters do, and in the process almost manage to save the movie from
   the bottom of the barrel.
   Stockard Channing and Dianne Wiest play the family's eccentric aunts,
   but they seem restrained and not nearly as eccentric as they should
   be. Visnjic, in the inherently juicy role of villain, is fun to watch
   in that guilty-pleasure sort of way, but he doesn't get as much screen
   time as his subplot deserves.
   Sadly, even magic can't salvage very much of what was a very good
   idea. "Practical Magic" is based on the novel by Alice Hoffman; for
   the five bucks your movie ticket will cost, you can take the book home
   with you. The only reason to see the movie would be the popcorn.

Title
Review for Pushing Tin (1999)
        Air traffic controllers have one of the most demanding jobs on the
planet, by most accounts. With nothing more than strips of paper and small
radar scopes, they are responsible for thousands of lives daily. The
profession "boasts" high rates of alcoholism, depression, burnout, and
suicide.
Talking like auctioneers on meth, controllers have to keep track
of dozens of airplanes, getting everyone where they need to go, on time,
without killing anyone. The airspace around New York City has three major
airports within twenty miles of each other, and the small facility
responsible for controlling that area is the unlikely setting for "Pushing
Tin." (The title, by the way, is controller lingo for maximizing use of
airspace to keep planes on schedule.)
Nick "The Zone" Falzone (John Cusack) is the best controller in
New York. Unlike most of his co-workers, his life outside the workplace
isn't quite as intense as his job - for the most part, he's content to go
home to his wife Connie (Cate Blanchett), his only outward concession to
his six-figure salary a nice sportscar.
Enter Russell Bell (Billy Bob Thornton), another legend in the
field, the one man better at his job than "The Zone." His Zen-like
approach to the job and quiet demeanor shadow a wild nature - he rides a
mean motorcycle and has a wife half his age (Angelina Jolie). He is very
nearly the definition of "intensity," standing under landing 747s to get
caught up in the backwash. And it pushes all of Falzone's alpha-male
buttons.
"Pushing Tin" could have used a controller, as it seems to have
trouble picking a theme. At times, Nick and Russell are engaged in a war
of machismo, as they constantly try to outdo each other in everything from
shooting free throws to bedding each other's wives (and, of course,
landing planes). The mutual antagonism (and, very occasionally, mutual
respect) would have made for a great movie on its own.
But at times it flies into comedic territory as well, though the
jokes are generally subtle. Dry, intellectual humor can be difficult to
pull off, but when they're given the chance, the cast does a fair job of
it. The laughs are sparse enough that "Pushing Tin" can't really be billed
as a comedy, though.
The last thirty minutes touch on the romance that the movie is
billed for, and even elements of the classic male-bonding buddy movie. Any
of these aspects could have been drawn out to make a movie with a
consistent theme, that wouldn't feel quite as disjoint as "Pushing Tin."
Perhaps because they can't latch onto any given kind of story in
which to act, the cast turns in mediocre performances at best. Thornton
has already done his controller schtick (in "Armageddon"), and Cusack's
character just doesn't have anything distinctinve about it. Blanchett and
Jolie, both award-winning actresses, are underutilized to the point of
merely being attractive set dressing.
With a top-notch cast and intriguing setting, I wanted to like
"Pushing Tin." But the script tries to push more tin than it can handle,
leaving this movie hanging in midair and eventually crashing in the video
store.
(This review was originally published in The Capaha Arrow, the student
newspaper of Southeast Missouri State University.)

Title
Review for Payback (1999)
"Payback" - Mel Gibson and some other schmucks
        With an ad slogan like "Get ready to root for the bad guy," it's
clear that "Payback" isn't going to be a happy, uplifting movie. But the
ads do it a terrible injustice; it is downbeat, and has its fair share of 
action, but it's also a thoughtful, dramatic, black comedy.
Mel Gibson is Porter, a crook so straightforward he doesn't even
need a first name. After he and partner-in-crime Val Resnick (Gregg Henry)
commit their latest robbery, Val and Porter's drug-addicted wife (Deborah
Kara Unger) shoot him. Always ready to hold a grudge, Porter comes back
five months later to get his money. Along the way, he has to deal with
crooked cops, drug dealers, and the Chinese mafia, and they all want to
kill him (again). The only person he can trust is a hooker (Maria Bello),
and his only weapons are justifiable revenge and snappy one-liners.
Set in a blue-hued Chicago, a moody soundtrack and Gibson's
periodic voiceovers set the tone and draw the viewer in. Granted, Porter's
certainly not a good guy - he picks pockets, steals from panhandlers, and
generally does things that ensure him a spot on Santa's `naughty' list.
But everyone else in the movie is so much more despicable that you can't
help but think they deserve it.
And what they deserve, they it in colorful detail. People get shot
and beaten; have their toes hit by a sledgehammer; their sons are
kidnapped and their dogs are scarred for life. Not everything is shown
explicitly, but the camera and sound are carefully engineered to make an
impact on the audience nonetheless.
"Payback" largely relies on the strength of its acting to keep the
viewer involved; thanks to Mel Gibson and a strong supporting cast, it
succeeds admirably. Gibson has a knack for playing the witty, violent type
(as he has done in all the "Lethal Weapon" movies, and even in "The Road
Warrior" to some extent), and falls into this role with a professional's
grace. And the bad guys - the real bad guys - are portrayed with similar
skill by people like William Devane and Kris Kristofferson.
The only short shrift is given to the ladies - there are exactly
three of them in the entire two hours, one junkie and two hookers (one
with an almost-comical sadomasochism complex). Beyond that, "Payback" is
an entertaining amorality play, with plenty of redeeming qualities even if
its characters have none.
(This review was originally published in The Capaha Arrow, the student
newspaper of Southeast Missouri State University.)

Title
Review for Rush Hour (1998)
Rush Hour (1998) - Jackie Chan, and a bunch of people that aren't as cool
as him
   You have to give Jackie Chan some credit. He's absolutely determined
   to break into the American action-star market, but has he gone too far
   with "Rush Hour"?
   Neither Inspector Lee (Chan) nor Detective Carter (Chris Tucker) are
   used to working with partners, and both have reputations for causing
   more trouble than they're worth at times. So when they're both
   assigned to work on the same case - the kidnapping of a Chinese
   consul's daughter - the FBI agent in charge (Tom Wilkinson) just tries
   to get them both out of the way. They keep getting in the way, of
   course, doing their best to solve the case on their own.
   This new film divorces Chan from many of the elements that made him a
   minor celebrity in the States with a small but devoted following. Gone
   are the rest of the Hong Kong action stars who, like Chan, perform
   their own stunts; gone are the equally famous Chinese directors and
   their sometimes-bizarre camera styles.
   More traditional, and therfore more predictable, American elements
   take their place. The humor is much more pedestrian, dominated by the
   inevitable "fish out of water" humor as the stereotypical uber-hip
   L.A. cop (Tucker) is forced to work with the quiet professional
   (Chan). The fights are more American, with far more gunplay than the
   typical Chan movie.
   Tucker, best remembered for his role as the bizarre, cross-dressing
   reporter from "The Fifth Element," once again flexes his comedic
   muscles to the fullest. His snappy wit is a bit risque at times but
   keeps the movie rolling nicely along. This is contrasted with the more
   subtle, drier humor of Chan, and it makes for a brilliant combination.
   The two play off each other well, helping ensure you'll leave the
   theater with a smile.
   You want action? "Rush Hour" has some of that, too. It's standard
   action-movie fare, nothing spectacular. In particular, Chan's
   incredible talent is underutilized here. (You want real action, go
   rent "Supercop.") But the stunts are all competently done (even if
   most of the cast, save Chan, called for stunt doubles).
   "Rush Hour" is tongue-in-cheek, but so are most of Chan's movies. And
   his "straight man" to Tucker's more overt comedy only helps. Don't
   take it too seriously, and you'll have a great time at this movie.

Title
Review for Antz (1998)
Antz (1998) - voices of Woody Allen, Sharon Stone, Sylvester Stallone,
Gene Hackman, Christopher Walken
   "Antz" is the Secret roll-on of movies - strong enough for an adult,
   but pH balanced for kids. It's full of computer-generated eye candy,
   obviously targeted toward the "buy me a bunch of toys" set, but the
   humor (and occasional mild profanity) are meant for their parents.
   Neurotic New Yorker Woody Allen provides the voice of Z, a neurotic
   worker ant. Unhappy with his lot in life, his world is shattered when
   the lovely Princess Bala (Sharon Stone) goes slumming in a bar where
   worker ants go after a hard day of digging. Predictably, Z falls madly
   in love, but the best scheme he can think of to see her again is to
   switch places with a soldier ant for a day.
   Then General Mandible (Gene Hackman) declares war, in an elaborate
   plot to overthrow the caste system and assassinate the queen ant (Anne
   Bancroft). Thrown into the goriest massacre this side of "Saving
   Private Ryan," Z eventually sets on a quest for the mythical
   Insectopia, all to win Bala's heart.
   "Antz" is just "your basic boy meets girl, boy likes girl, boy changes
   underlying social structure" movie, according to Z. And that's just
   the kind of humor many children won't understand. Fortunately,
   screenwriters Todd Alcott, Chris Weitz and Paul Weitz realize who
   their audience is. Liberated from his body, Allen's one-of-a-kind
   anxiety seems fresher than ever.
   Working within the limitations of computer-generated insects, the
   characters are wonderfully expressive. They all look pretty much the
   same, except the good-natured soldier ant voiced by Sylvester Stallone
   - for better or worse, he looks like Stallone. And the supporting cast
   is a veritable Hollywood "Who's Who" - Christopher Walken, Dan Akroyd,
   Jane Curtin and Jennifer Lopez all lend their voices to "Antz," with
   each lending his or her distinctive character to the characters.
   The visual effects are little short of stunning. Imagine thousands of
   ants combining to form a giant wrecking ball, or storming across a
   field to combat the termite menace. The effects carry well for the big
   to the small - you can almost see the actor's facial expressions on
   the computer-generated bugs.
   "Antz" might not be the most appropriate movie for the children that
   its ads are trying to suck in. But if you go with your family, you can
   have some interesting discussions on "Community vs. Individuality" and
   a lot of good laughs.

Title
Review for 54 (1998)
54 (1998) - Mike Myers, Ryan Phillippe, Neve Campbell, Salma Hayek
   Based on the true story of a New York nightclub, "54" strives for the
   essence of all things cool - sex, drugs and disco. It's got plenty of
   all three and a number of rich stories trying desperately to get out
   and be seen amidst all the '70s ambience.
   On the surface, it's the story of Steve Rubell (Mike Myers), the owner
   of Studio 54 - the place to be seen in the Big Apple. Steve is cast as
   a visionary, a man who wants to host a never-ending party. But Steve's
   success is based as much on his crooked b ookkeeping as it is on his
   club's wild, lurid atmosphere.
   Into the mix comes Shane (Ryan Phillippe), a gas-station attendant
   from New Jersey who sees the exclusive club as his way out of a quiet
   life of seeming mediocrity. After getting hired on as a busboy, he is
   quickly immersed in the dangerous lifestyle of S tudio 54 and its
   celebrity clientele.
   "54" has a number of equally deep stories hiding behind the disco
   beat: Steve's business practices; Shane's search for his own identity
   and a touch of romance with soap-opera star Julie Black (Neve
   Campbell); and the shaky marriage of another busboy and an aspiring
   singer (Breckin Meyer and Salma Hayek).
   It's a shame that some of those great stories are barely touched upon,
   but the elaborate sets that upstage them are so eye-catching that you
   may not notice. Whether for good or ill, the real star of "54" is the
   club itself, with true-to-life recreations of famed set pieces like
   the cocaine-snorting crescent moon. Its twisted, dark atmosphere fits
   the dark deeds associated with the club, like drugs served along with
   the champagne.
   In contrast to the shadowy sets, the late '70s soundtrack is bright
   and uplifting but rarely distracting. In fact, it complements the film
   perfectly, providing that essential reminder that "54" is loosely
   based on real life.
   Myers, best known for his roles is odd comedies like "Austin Powers"
   and "Wayne's World," isn't likely to win any Oscars for this film, but
   at least he has the chance to demonstrate that his acting talents
   range beyond pure comedy. Most of the other actors are under-utilized
   and rarely given a chance to shine - even Phillippe, whose Shane is
   ostensibly the main character of the film.
   "54" is a classic example of style over substance. Visually and
   aurally, it's a sharp movie, but it's not so sharp that you completely
   forget about the stories. Director Mark Christopher tries to take us
   to the best of all possible worlds, but j ust leaves people wondering
   what happened to the characters. Rather like the dying drugs-and-disco
   scene of the time, "54" is shallow, decadent and ultimately not
   fulfilling.

Title
Review for Never Been Kissed (1999)
"Never Been Kissed" (1999) - David Arquette, Drew Barrymore, Molly
Shannon...
        Drew Barrymore is well on her way to becoming the latest classic
American sweetheart with solid performances in "The Wedding Singer," "Ever
After," and now "Never Been Kissed." The latter movie, opening April 9,
was also produced by Barrymore, and her influence helps make this a solid
entry in the crowded teen-oriented movie market.
On the surface, "Never Been Kissed" has rich comic potential. Drew
Barrymore is Josie Geller, a quiet copy editor at the Chicago Sun-Times,
and her first assignment as a reporter is to go undercover - at high
school. The first time around, she was an awkward, braces-wearing ugly
duckling with the cruel nickname "Josie Gross-ie" and, as the title
suggests, she's never been kissed.
Between bad memories and being ten years out of touch with
contemporary culture, the myriad possibilities of a "fish out of water"
story are obvious. South Glen South H.S. has it all: the social elite
(three Valley Girls and their jock boyfriends), cliques, booze, drugs,
rock and roll. All of these are explored, leaving more than a few good
laughs in their wake.
The romance doesn't enter in until later, when Barrymore finds
herself falling for a Shakespeare teacher (Michael Vartan). In the proud
tradition of romance throughout literature and film, it's seemingly doomed
from square one: he thinks she's a student, and that's just not kosher in
these days of sexual harassment suits; and she can't tell him how she
really feels without blowing her cover.
"Never Been Kissed" takes the phrase `romantic comedy' to heart,
delivering plenty of both. Barrymore and Vartan don't actually share a
great deal of screen time, but they do share a good amount of on-screen
chemistry which makes the romance and their characters believeable.
Unlike many films in this genre, "Never Been Kissed" knows better
than to take itself too seriously. David Arquette steals more than a few
scenes in his improbable role as Barrymore's older brother, who also goes
back to high school in hopes of being noticed by a major league baseball
scout. Through a hidden camera, the rest of the Sun-Times staff watches
Barrymore's life like a soap opera. Even the closing credits are good for
a chuckle; the cast and crew are shown - using their high school yearbook
pictures, of course.
"Never Been Kissed" has plenty of laughs, a heartwarming love
story, and a hint of attitude - all the ingredients for a tasty romantic
comedy stew. 
(This review was originally published in The Capaha Arrow, the student
newspaper of Southeast Missouri State University.)

Title
Review for Life (1999)
"Life" (1999) - Martin Lawrence, Eddie Murphy...
        Last fall, Eddie Murphy took on a very subdued (at least by his
standards) role in "Holy Man," and turned out a splendid performance that
deserved much better than the mediocre reception it received. In that
movie, he wasn't constantly stealing scenes, and his trademark horse-laugh
was nowhere to be found. Both he and the movie were remarkably funny, and
Murphy's restrained performance was both admirable and successful. I
thought that maybe, after almost twenty years, Murphy had finally learned
that he's not the most important person in the theatre - the viewer is.
Last weekend, "Life" opened around the country, earning over $20
million. It is funny, but intermittently. Certainly not as funny as it
could have been, had Murphy remembered what he learned from G, the
Zen-spouting mystic he played in the previous movie.
"Life" gets off to a slow start, taking over thirty minutes to get
leads Murphy and Martin Lawrence into the central premise - two New
Yorkers given a life sentence to a Mississippi state prison, circa 1932.
Convicted of a murder they didn't commit in the segregationist South, the
story of how they got there is so bizarre and convoluted it could only
happen in the movies.
Once there, the movie really takes off, introducing the viewer to
a whole cast of usual suspects. Miguel A. Nunez Jr. is the probably-gay
character, Bokeem Woodbine is the probably-savant character, and so on.
Rarely are characters drawn out past the point of a stereotype, but in
this case it works. "Life" goes for the quick gag, the cheap chuckle, and
more often than not gets it. Unfortunately, this means that very little in
the way of character development ever happens, and (in classic, old-school
Murphy style) roughly half of the script consists of words that can't be
printed in this paper.
Occasionally, it gets even more ambitious, trying to work in a bit
of a story too. These efforts generally fall flat, a shame because the raw
material available given the premise and setting is so rich. "Life" is
primarily a comedy; those who want a far better version of `the message'
should watch (or read) "The Shawshank Redemption," Stephen King's seminal
prison tale. The broad stereotypes that work so well to build comedy are
exactly why the drama fails to register.
Running just shy of two hours, "Life" isn't exactly a life
sentence, but it is very slow-paced in all the wrong places. Much of the
bathroom humor (and language) wears thin; why some of those slow spots
weren't filled with original jokes, or character development, remains a
mystery. Even the outtakes, shown at the end of the film with the credits,
are funnier than some of what was used in the movie proper.
"Life" has a few bright spots, scattered randomly throughout the
rest of the film. Wait for the home video release, and make a game out of
trying to find them. It'll be at least as entertaining as the rest of the
movie.
(This review was originally published in The Capaha Arrow, the student
newspaper of Southeast Missouri State University.)

Title
Review for Other Sister, The (1999)
"The Other Sister" (1999) - Diane Keaton, Juliette Lewis, Giovanni Ribisi
        "The Other Sister" features Juliette Lewis and Giovanni Ribisi
playing characters with unspecified mental disabilities. Since this has
little bearing on the fact that it's a very good movie, it will only be
mentioned twice more during this review.
In part, "The Other Sister" is about a character most of us can
relate to: the overprotective parent, in the form of Diane Keaton. Lewis
has spent most of her life away from home at a boarding school, but
finally comes home. She has to re-adjust to her sisters ("a dedicated
underachiever and a gay workaholic," quips Keaton), her parents, a new
school, a whole new environment.
Keaton thinks she knows what's best for all her daughters, while
her more laid-back husband (Tom Skerritt) is generally willing to let them
make their own mistakes.
Lewis and Ribisi, both outcasts of a sort, meet and go through all
the traditional courting rituals, right down to a Halloween dance at their
trade school (where the always-ambitious Lewis is studying to become a
veterinary assistant).
That's right, it's a love story. That means it's bright, generally
cheerful, and we all know how it ends. It's also very well done, invoking
only a few of the cliches inherent to the genre. The unique nature of the
leads' roles even allows humor in some surprising places (watch for the
"sex talk," the ongoing references to "The Graduate," or the comic-erotic
use of marching band music).
"The Other Sister" is blatantly formulaic, from the requisite
overbearing parent to the "falling in love" montage. But everyone on
screen practically oozes charm, such that when the expected complication
in the relationship comes up, we know on a gut level that everything will
be alright.
Matching the positive mood of the movie, the technical credits are
about two notches above average. Visually, the film is as bright as its
irrepressible characters, and the soundtrack, featuring everyone from
Savage Garden to Alison Krauss, is similarly uplifting without being
obtrusive.
In fact, it's hard to find anything even remotely depressing
happening on-screen. This movie is uber-cheerful, making it almost
impossible to not like it. It somehow pulls this off without making it
obvious that it's happening.
"The Other Sister" was made by Touchstone Pictures, a part of
Disney. So it's not unfair to say that its depiction of mental retardation
is about as accurate as "Aladdin's" depiction of the Middle East. But this
is the only real failing in an otherwise excellent movie. This sin, while
arguably a large one, can be forgiven since the rest of the movie is so
darned uplifting.
(This review was originally published in The Capaha Arrow, the student
newspaper of Southeast Missouri State University.)

Title
Review for Matrix, The (1999)
"The Matrix" (1999) - Lawrence Fishburne, Carrie-Anne Moss, Keanu
Reeves...
        "Cyberpunk" is a young literary genre, but one intriguing enough
that Southeast already has a class devoted to its study. Dominated by
writers like William Gibson ("Mona Lisa Overdrive," "Neuromancer") and
Neal Stephenson ("Snow Crash," "Cryptonomicon"), cyberpunk fiction tends
to focus on a dark, gritty near-future setting where attitude and high
technology reign.
"The Matrix" is one of very few films that would fall into the
cyberpunk genre - the only other in recent memory is "Johnny Mnemonic"
(which, coincidentally, also stars Keanu Reeves). To fans of the genre,
"The Matrix" will likely seem a bit derivative, but the rest of us will
discover a action-packed film with a gripping story and some of the most
awe-inspiring visual effects since "Dark City."
Our hero is, naturally, a computer programmer. By day Thomas
Anderson (Keanu Reeves) works in a Dilbert-style dystopia, but by night
he's Neo, computer criminal. For the most part, his life is quiet and
lonely, uninspiring, the kind of cubicle Hell most of us have nightmares
about. He sits in his apartment most of the time, a bank of computers his
only friends, selling computer data like drugs.
Enter Morpheus (Laurence Fishburne), THE legendary hacker.
Morpheus offers Neo an answer to the one question even he can't fathom -
"What is the Matrix?" As it turns out, the Matrix is the ultimate
computer, the ultimate virtual-reality device, and the ultimate hack, all
rolled into one.
Explaining too much more would give away the plot, which would be
a shame since the rest of this review will be dedicated to convincing you
to see this movie.
So Keanu Reeves can't act. Many of his lines are delivered with
all the conviction of a cup of coffee. So what? The other actors
(Fishburne, Carrie-Anne Moss, Hugo Weaving, Joe Pantoliano) don't do too
much better, but they get the point across. The real stars of "The Matrix"
are the story and the effects.
The story was written by Andy and Larry Wachowski ("Bound"), who
have turned out a splendid sophomore effort. "The Matrix" and its
McGuffin, the Matrix, has just enough twists to keep you off-balance, but
not so many as to make you dizzy.
That's the role of the camera and the special-effects team. Some
shots will, in fact, make you dizzy, but that's exactly the point. And the
visuals are uniformly stunning - you've seen the commercials, where
characters dodge bullets by making time seem to stop around them, but
those are actually some of the film's less impressive effects. All the
best parts are reserved for the theatre. The action sequences are
similarly stunning.
So, what IS the Matrix? That, gentle reader, would be telling. But
if you go see "The Matrix" you'll find out, and you won't be disappointed.
(This review was originally published in The Capaha Arrow, the student
newspaper of Southeast Missouri State University.)

Title
Review for Ronin (1998)
Ronin (1998) - Robert De Niro, Jean Reno, Natascha McElhone...
   Ronin, noun. In feudal Japan, a samurai warrior without a master,
   operating independently. This was considered dishonorable, and many
   ronin committed ritual suicide.
   "Ronin," noun. A new movie starring Robert De Niro which has very
   little to do with the previous definition.
   Sam (De Niro) is a ronin of sorts, a modern warrior separated from his
   former master, the CIA. His latest job: working with a group of fellow
   fired guns, retrieve a briefcase before it can be sold to the Russian
   mob. Their enigmatic employer (Natascha McElhone) won't tell them
   what's in the briefcase, or even who they're really working for, but
   at least the pay is good.
   Sam's partners in crime include Gregor (Stellan Skarsgaard), a quiet
   electronics whiz; Vincent (Jean Reno), French coordinator; Larry
   (Skipp Sudduth), the designated driver; and Spence (Sean Bean),
   English weapons specialist. Whether CIA, IRA or KGB, each of these
   warriors are ronin in the waning of the Cold War.
   "Ronin" is best described as a thinking man's action film - more time
   is spent on setting up the action than the action itself. A good
   portion of the movie depicts the characters sketching out plans on a
   whiteboard, then carefully executing these plans.
   A real-world mercenary would, of course, need to do this, but in-depth
   planning isn't exactly exciting. The cerebral aspect is emphasized for
   these scenes, and viewers with a bit of patience will appreciate this
   nod to realism.
   De Niro is, as always, excellent. His portrayal of the independent,
   professional, often arrogant Sam is on target - and that's the
   problem. Sam is entirely too detached from his work, making it hard to
   relate to the character. The rest of the cast follows that lead,
   turning in uniformly good performances, but everyone seems distant.
   At long last, though, the action starts, one shoot-out per plot twist.
   It's carefully thought-out, emphasizing the intellectual. Everyone
   relies on his firearms, and people who get shot tend to stay dead,
   just like in real life. The camera work is a bit shaky at times, but
   effective overall. "Ronin" also has an abundance of increasingly
   outrageous car chases, each one expertly executed, even if they strain
   credulity towards the end.
   Like the ronin in the movie, "Ronin" has a veiled master plan. The
   shadowy manipulator in this case is playwright David Mamet (writing
   under a pseudonym), and his influence is evident. The result is a film
   that is intelligent, sharp and worth seeing.

Title
Review for Blast from the Past (1999)
"Blast From The Past" (1999) - Brendan Fraser, Alicia Silverstone, ...
        Last year's underrated "Pleasantville" tossed a couple of modern
teens into the 1950s, and occasionally went so far as to touch on social
issues. This year's "Blast From The Past" is its conceptual opposite,
launching a young man from the early 1960s into the eerie modern world
with a much lighter touch.
The story is one that could only happen in the movies. Convinced
that the Cold War is about to turn hot, Calvin and Helen Webber
(Christopher Walken and Sissy Spacek) lock themselves up in their bomb
shelter. 35 years later, they send their son, optimistically named Adam,
to the dreaded outside world for much-needed supplies. Adam (Brendan
Fraser) has never seen the sun, or wacky religious cults, or public
transportation, and so promptly gets lost.
Enter Eve (Alicia Silverstone), the consummate 90s girl from L.A.
Adam needs a guide to this post-Apocalyptic wasteland. She knows what a
liquor store is, and she even knows how to drive. Over the next hour and a
half, Adam gets a practical education in the modern world... and, of
course, in love, while Eve realizes this may be the one man left who won't
try to ruin her life.
Yes, it's a romantic comedy, and it's utterly predictable. So
what? Fraser, with goofy charm, is already well-versed at the "fish out of
water" routine, having done it before in "Encino Man" and "George Of The
Jungle." Once again, he pulls it off with subdued flair. The
always-lovely Silverstone, complete with puppy-dog eyes, is equally
charming in her role. And Dave Foley, in the cliched role of the gay best
friend (as Eve's brother Troy), steals a few scenes too.
Back in the 1960s, Walken and Spacek do their jobs as well.
Christopher Walken has always been good at doing "spooky-cool," but like
Spacek, rarely gets a chance to do pure comedy. While Walken raises his
son as a Renaissance man, Spacek goes stir crazy, and they generate more
than a few chuckles in the process.
Visually, "Blast From The Past" is serviceable. Aurally, though,
it's outstanding. The soundtrack is nearly a copy of the Billboard charts,
if you splice together this week's chart with one from 1964. And those
tunes are used to good effect, but rarely over-used. Pardon the pun, but
musically it hits almost all the right notes.
There's only one major flaw in this otherwise sparkling romantic
comedy. The first half-hour is spent underground, showing Adam's
childhood; while it may help build the character, it waffles between
almost-funny and almost-tedious. But that's what the fast-forward button
is for, right? Blast through the first few minutes of "Blast From The
Past" and what's left is thoroughly charming.
(This review was originally published in The Capaha Arrow, the student
newspaper of Southeast Missouri State University.)

Title
Review for Knock Off (1998)
Knock-Off (1998) - Jean-Claude Van Damme, Rob Schneider, Lela Rochon, Paul
Sorvino
   What do you get when you bring together sometimes-memorable action
   star Jean-Claude Van Damme, former "Saturday Night Live" comic genius
   Rob Schneider and the lovely Lela Rochon?
   I'm not sure either, but that particular chaotic mishmash is in
   theaters everywhere under the oddly appropriate title "Knock-Off."
   There is something vaguely resembling a plot, but it's so convoluted
   that any attempt to summarize it would only lead to even more
   confusion. Schneider and Rochon are CIA agents investigating a flood
   of such fine products as "Pumma" sneakers and other cheap copies, or
   knock-offs.
   Van Damme's character figures in there somehow, and so do the Russians
   in a cliched attempted to take over the world. As this film is
   nominally set in 1997, during the return of Hong Kong to China, this
   is just one of many things that utterly defy logic.
   Why would the CIA have people in Hong Kong, investigating a small ring
   of petty thieves?
   The actors certainly don't do much to make the audience care. Van
   Damme seems only to be there to crack heads in, showing remarkably
   little personality. Rochon is treated a bit better in her
   action-intense role, but is also stifled in the acting department.
   Schneider manages to show off a bit of his comic talent, whipping out
   the occasional witty one-liner, but that's just not enough to save
   this movie.
   So we're left with gratuitous violence, and at least a noble effort is
   made. Famous Hong Kong director Tsui Hark does the best with what he
   has to work with, using all the tricks that made him famous -
   slow-motion, stop-motion, dizzying camera angles and the occasional
   blur. "Knock-Off" ends up looking like a good Hong Kong film, just
   waiting for Jackie Chan or Chow Yun-Fat to show up.
   They don't show up, of course. All three of the leads do their best,
   and should at least be credited for the effort, no matter how far
   short it may fall of the goal.
   In the end, "Knock-Off" is itself just a knock-off of all the good
   films you could be watching instead. Save the 5 bucks and go rent
   "Hard Boiled" or most any Jackie Chan flick. That way you'll be sure
   of getting the real thing.

Title
Review for At First Sight (1999)
"At First Sight" (1999) - Val Kilmer, Mira Sorvino...
        Is there a better way to say "I love you" than by undergoing
experimental surgery?
"At First Sight," with Val Kilmer and Mira Sorvino, strives to
answer this question. Along the way, it delivers a moving romantic drama
that can soften any heart. 
Kilmer plays a blind massage therapist working at a resort spa in
northern New York. Sorvino is an overworked, stressed-out architect from
the Big Apple. When her co-workers convince her to take a few days off,
she ends up at that very spa. They swap stories over Shiatsu massage,
eventually falling for each other. 
Eventually, Kilmer moves to New York City with Sorvino, to go
under the knife (or, in this case, the laser) in an experimental procedure
to restore his sight. As he learns to cope with this new sense, "At First
Sight" gets more insightful too. Watching Kilmer adjust, the audience is
pulled along for both drama (a hockey fan, Kilmer sees his first Rangers
game) and some dark humor (Kilmer almost gets hit by a cab after standing
in the middle of the road, watching it close in, fascinated by its
changing perspective).
"At First Sight" is an emotional roller-coaster: it goes up
(Kilmer and Sorvino fall in love), and down (Kilmer's over-protective
sister, played by Kelly McGillis, berates Sorvino for giving him "false"
hope), and back up (Kilmer can see, but he's not sure if he wants to). It
even picks up passengers along the way, such as Nathan Lane as an offbeat
visual therapist (to help Kilmer's eyes adjust to complex stimuli, they go
to a strip club).
Kilmer shows off his acting talents more than he has in a while;
in contrast to some of his earlier, goofier roles ("Willow," "Batman
Forever"), his portrayal of Virgil shows true depth. Sorvino has a similar
career epiphany, playing cute and charming consistently, but believably.
Even the visual effects are well-done. The camera tricks used to
show things through Kilmer's eyes are technically simple, but in the
context of the story are entirely appropriate. They help the viewer not
only in seeing as he sees, but also to understand his perspective on the
world and to identify with his character.
The romance is done splendidly, without being too sappy, and makes
for a funny, charming movie. It also challenges the traditional belief
that blindness is a handicap, showing that the real problem can be trying
to "fix" it. The message isn't heavy-handed, and actually makes "At First
Sight" a rich movie experience that's well worth seeing. 
(This review was originally published in The Capaha Arrow, the student
newspaper of Southeast Missouri State University.)

Title
Review for Holy Man (1998)
Holy Man (1998) - Eddie Murphy, Jeff Goldblum, Kelly Preston
   The poster for "Holy Man" shows a serene, Zen-like Eddie Murphy
   sitting atop a giant bar code. The movie is a lot like the poster -
   gentle, soft-spoken and nowhere near as funny as you might hope. But
   behind this simple packaging lies a subtle film that's not perfect,
   but still a better entertainment value than most.
   Jeff Goldblum stars as Ricky Hayman, an executive for a home-shopping
   network. His life isn't quite perfect - his tailored suits can't quite
   hold his work-induced ulcer, and his sportscar is about to be
   repossessed. The whole network is on the verge of going under, and
   media analyst Kate Newell (Kelly Preston) is brought in as their last
   resort.
   On their way to a meeting, Ricky and Kate run into G (Murphy), a
   wandering holy man on a spiritual pilgrimage. Literally. With the
   sportscar. In an uncharacteristic show of guilt, Ricky invites G to
   stay in his apartment while G waits for the doctor's OK to continue
   his quest.
   A few nonsensical contrivances later, G is an on-air personality,
   mixing Deepak Chopra-ish sound bites with hawking bizarre products
   like the "Hood Buddy" (it cooks while you drive) and "L'il Squirt" (it
   goes in the toilet; use your imagination). "Spirituality on a home
   shopping network?" execs cry, but sales are up - way up.
   Murphy is remarkably subdued in "Holy Man," and it's both appropriate
   and successful. His famous laugh is absent, as is his traditional
   scene-stealing. He's finally learned the valuable lesson that he
   doesn't have to constantly be the center of attention to turn in a
   memorable performance.
   Unfortunately, Goldblum and Preston seem to still think of him as
   "the" star. They turn in adequate, but not stellar, performances.
   Playing off his normal status as center of attention, they rarely
   allow their acting talents to shine. In addition, the producers'
   apparent need to put Preston in unnecessarily tight clothes merely
   because she is the female lead had to be distracting at some point.
   Their characters' romance seems forced, as they have remarkable little
   chemistry with each other. The presence of Murphy can cover a lot of
   flaws, though; everyone who interacts with G seems just a bit more
   relaxed. If only there were more of him in this film.
   Throughout "Holy Man" the humor is subtle and dry, and all too often
   whitewashed to near invisibility by the preachy anti-consumerism
   message. Even infomercial stars like Morgan Fairchild have trouble
   selling this movie, but you shouldn't have much trouble renting it.

Title
Review for Rounders (1998)
Rounders (1998) - Matt Damon, Edward Norton, Gretchen Mol, Martin Landau,
John Malkovich
   Everyone has their little problems. Matt Damon's character in
   "Rounders" has a big problem - a gambling problem that threatens to
   ruin his life more than once. "Rounders" flirts with being a great
   story about Mike McDermott (Damon) and his difficult path to a Pyrrhic
   victory, coming close, but never really making it.
   Despite having never joined a 12-step program, it's clear that Mike
   doesn't have all the cards in his deck. In the opening scenes of the
   movie, he loses his life savings, including the money he was using to
   pay his law school tuition. With some difficulty, he takes up
   low-paying night jobs and settles down with his girlfriend Jo
   (Gretchen Mol).
   Nine months later, an old card buddy with the appropriate nickname of
   Worm (Edward Norton) gets out of prison and promptly gets beat up for
   skipping out on his old gambling debts. Mike reluctantly returns to
   the shady world of illegal high-stakes poker to help Worm pay his
   debts, remembering why the game is so irresistible and watching the
   rest of his life collapse.
   Damon and Norton are both excellent actors, and it shows. The audience
   is given remarkable insight into Damon's character, from narrative
   voice-overs to the slightest facial expressions. Norton's "Worm" is,
   well, a bit of a worm - stacking decks with the best of them, Norton
   projects just the right blend of good intentions and bad habits.
   For the most part, the supporting cast - with character names like
   Petra, Kinish and Grandma - is also excellent. Martin Landau has a
   small but significant part as a law professor and McDermott's
   enigmatic mentor. John Malkovich, as the card shark, "KGB," is
   suitably devious and insane; his Oreo-munching performance alone is
   cause to see this movie.
   But "Rounders" fails to sell the story convincingly on two fronts. One
   is the premise - not everyone is familiar with poker, so a lot of the
   jargon may go right over some viewers' heads.
   The other is Mol. A key part of McDermott's fall from grace is the
   collapse of his romance with Jo, but it simply isn't plausible. Mol's
   emotional gauge is stuck on over-perky ex-cheerleader. There simply
   isn't any chemistry between her and Damon, and it's hard to care about
   their alleged relationship.
   "Rounders" - the term refers to a poker player who makes the rounds of
   local games - has so much potential. It could have been the next
   "The Color of Money," but merely deals us a pair instead of a straight
   flush.

Title
Review for Apt Pupil (1998)
Apt Pupil: Brad Renfro, Ian McKellen, David Schwimmer, Elias Koteas
   The opening scene of "Apt Pupil" is set in a high school at the end of
   a week of studying the Holocaust in history class. The teacher reminds
   the students that if they want to know more, they can always turn to
   the library.
   Instead, Brad Renfro turns to experiential learning, leading to some
   frightening conclusions.
   Renfro is Todd Bowden, a bright, bored high-school student. Using
   leaps of logic that would impress even the Scooby Doo crew, he deduces
   that neighborhood recluse Arthur Denker (Ian McKellan) is in fact Kurt
   Dussander, who ran one of the Nazi concentration camps during the war
   and is still wanted by the Israeli government.
   For some reason, instead of turning Dussander over to the police, Todd
   blackmails him - firsthand information about the death camps in
   exchange for his silence. "Tell me what the schools are afraid to," he
   pleads.
   As Dussander's tales grow ever more glorious and graphic, Todd grows
   more and more unraveled - having gas chamber hallucinations in the
   shower, doodling swastikas in his notebook, falling behind in school.
   Then he grows truly disturbed, killing birds and the occasional
   homeless man.
   Based on a novella by Stephen King and directed by Bryan Singer (who
   helmed the Oscar-winning "The Usual Suspects"), "Apt Pupil" clearly
   had a lot of potential. King's story, and thus the screenplay, is
   sufficiently spooky if you can wade through the mounds of mediocrity -
   it doesn't get truly suspenseful until the second hour.
   McKellan, winner of multiple film awards, turns in an acceptable
   performance as the despicable Dussander, right down to the faux German
   accent. And the supporting cast, from David Schwimmer to Elias Koteas,
   is right on target as well.
   Renfro, however, is a disappointment. His character seems disturbed
   even at the start of the film, so his descent into depravity has
   little effect on the viewer. This lapse is inexcusable in the key
   character in the film. We should be mourning for his shrinking
   humanity, not for the movie.
   Few would argue that the Second World War and the Holocaust were among
   the greatest atrocities in history. Last weekend though, a new
   atrocity was unleashed upon the world - the mediocre, eminently
   forgettable "Apt Pupil."
