Authors
Mike V
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Star Trek: First Contact (1996)
[Note that followups are directed to rec.arts.movies.current-films and
rec.arts.movies.startrek.current only, not to rec.arts.sf.movies.  -Moderator]
     It pains me to see so many people ogling over this rather mediocre
picture.  I intend this review to be short and to the point, so I will not
discuss the plot except where it is relevant to my opinions.  If you are
looking for a brief synopsis, check out any of the other reviews on this
newsgroup.  
     The film begins in tragic fashion with yet another time travel
paradox.  This is generally what writers come up with when they cannot
think of a decent science fiction plot.  We are all familiar with the
paradoxes associated with such a move, and we also know that the matter
has never been satisfactorily dealt with.  Not only does Stak Trek fail
where all others have failed, it doesn't even address the paradox -- as if
there is no paradox to be addressed.  
     Things go from bad to worse when the Borg magically appear on the
Enterprise, now back in the 21st century (it appeared that the Borg probe
was destroyed, so where did they beam on from?).  Now, the borg are
certainly a fascinating species as portrayed on the show (Next
Generation).  It also appeared as if they had already been dealt with.
But here they are ressurected with a terminator style vengeance.  They are
hellbent on assimilating everything that moves.  
     It is precisely for this reason that I find the movie so
displeasing.   It is a horrible disservice to sci-fi fans to turn an
interesting sci-fi plot into an action movie.  This, however, is done time
and time again (Jurassic Park, Independence Day, the last Star Trek, and
so forth).  At this point in the film it became abundantly clear that I
could put my brain on hold and just watch the action as I might watch
Die-Hard.  
     the only thing that salvages the film is the interesting relationship
that develops between Picard, his crew, and the earthlings.  Still, I
found a thoroughly vindictive Picard somewhat implausible.  I very much
doubt that this character would sacrifice the fate of humanity to exact
revenge upon the Borg.  
     Furthermore, haven't we had enough of Data trying to be human?  He
has the emotion chip already -- is there really a further need for some
kind of erotic stimulation from a cyborg?  Data's quest to become more
human has also been dealt with on many occasions (and far more coherently)
on the show (a great episode was the one in which he became "father" to a
new android).  
    Finally, the notion that a burned out rocker creates the very first
warp drive shuttle is just absurd.  His character was utterly implausible,
and it wasn't because of the acting.  Are we to believe that the greatest
scientific discovery, one that bridges the gaps of space, was stumbled
upon by an embittered drunk looking for an isle of nymphs?  
     In conclusion, let me first apologize for the poor structure of this
review.  It was written off the kuff, without any forethought plan of
attack.  In any event, every sci-fi notion in the film was dealt with much
better in the show.  This movie has nothing new or interesting to offer,
and it ultimately degenerates into another hollywood action film.  
