Authors
Jeremy Vay
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Summer of Sam (1999)
         The craft was, for the most part, there. It's just that the
materials used in the crafting could have, perhaps, been better. This
film seemed like a lesser Do the Right Thing, exploring many of the same
themes, but with much less of an impact.
         Most of the acting is pretty good- at least better than
average. John Leguizamo, Mira Sorvino, and Adrien Brody (among others)
give good performances, but don't seem to have very good characters to
work with. The viewer is never actually allowed to grow close enough to
any of the characters to really care what happens to them. The story
seems to be about how the enviroment of the time and place lead people
to change and even turn on each other, but from the very beginning of
the film, al the characters seem to be too wretched to really hold dear.
         Because of this, much of the tension simply seems forced, so
when it is meant to explode, it really only seems to obscure itself
somehow. Perhaps this is because Lee wastes his own stylistic talents
here. He uses many clever stylistic techniquies and approaches, but
because the characters and events have never become too involving, the
bravura of the moment is lost and we're left with Lee's crafty
camerawork or editing simply looking like a silly up-cropping of
pretension.
         There was one scene that was actually somewhat satisfying: a
Hollywood montage sequence of the neighborhood usuals all doing their
things to get through the restless summer, most of them seeming to fall
apart at least a littlein the process. This is all put to the tune of
The Who's "Won't Get Fooled Again," and may be the best or most
interesting seqeunces of the film, yet it loses its impact because it
sticks out from the rest of the film which is mostly steps blow this. It
would simply have worked better if the film had found a way to flow into
and out of it, but it didn't and that is a shame because this film had
probably a greater potential than was put to use.
Sent via Deja.com http://www.deja.com/
Share what you know. Learn what you don't.
