Authors
Teresa Lamb
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Congo (1995)
     After having JURASSIC PARK nearly ruined by reading Michael
Crichton's novel/script, nothing that had anything to do with CONGO
reached the eyes of this reviewer.  This helped CONGO's enjoyment, but
did not save nor make the film anything less than unsatisfying.
Frustration was the word for JURASSIC PARK, with a desire to see some
of the book's subplots developed on screen more than a minor suggestion
of dino breeding by Sam Neil upon finding egg shells.  CONGO leaves
many of the same roads untraveled; even without the benefit of any
extra knowledge possibly supplied by the book.  Continuing the
comparison to JURASSIC PARK, CONGO's cast suffers from the
cookie-cutter class that makes JURASSIC PARK almost unreal or
comic-bookish.  Most actors do fine with such light weight material;
Ernie Hudson (who's been in some pretty awful films recently, THE CROW
(1994, Miramax/Dimension) and NO ESCAPE (1994, Savoy)) shows a slightly
new side with a British accent.  Tim Curry's character remains
strikingly under-developed beyond being the treasure mad explorer who
leaves the film in a painstakingly predictable fashion.  The female
lead is a close clone of Ellie Sadler (Laura Dern) from JURASSIC PARK
and Joe Don Baker is a much gruffer version, but still cut from the
same single-visioned character cloth as Richard Attenborough's Hammond
in JURASSIC PARK.  Even the dialogue mirrors JURASSIC PARK with
pseudo-philosophical/intellectual passages that only provoke laughter
rather than insight.
     Praise can only truly be bestowed upon CONGO's special effects.
Lucas Digital's ILM receives credit for effects of a wide range beyond
those of animatronic gorillas; which do, by the way, appear very
authentic throughout most of CONGO.  The main monkey, Amy, possesses an
ability that is a scientific breakthrough; however, this ability is
sadly seldom demonstrated for audience effect/reaction or to propel the
thin plot.  Other tech credits are top notch with a full deep coating of
Paramount "sheen" on the film giving it a schlock look that greatly
benefits a shallow film like CONGO.
     If you wear your lowest powered thinking caps and curiosity belt
and trade the ensemble in for an extra large, extra buttered popcorn
and super size beverage, CONGO (in the right digital equipped THX
approved theater) might just make for passable entertainment.  Consider
yourself warned!
     Endangered is wrong; we get plenty of films like this one ...
sadly.  2 stars on the Popcorn Summer Scale out of 4 stars possible (we
were feeling quite generous, too!)
