Authors
Nikki Lesley
Number of Reviews
7

Title
Review for Truman Show, The (1998)
Starring: Jim Carey, Ed Harris, Laura Linney, Noah Emmerich.
A movie like The Truman Show is really hard to come to terms with. For
a start, there's all the hype associated with it. I like to go into a
movie with very little idea of what's about to unfold, making it
possible for me to judge a movie on its content alone. With the
publicity machine and the positive word of mouth that is associated
with this movie, it's close to impossible to do that.  Consequently,
I'm heading in to The Truman Show with a whole lot of baggage, not the
least of which is the notion that everyone else loves it. Second, it's
one of these movies where it's not clear whether the film maker is
being clever, or whether the reviewers/audience members are reading
something that's not there. I'll come back to this point. Given these
concerns, my capsule summary would be that it's quite enjoyable but
not all that it's billed to be.
This is yet again a movie advertised to be Jim Carey in his first
serious role. While Carey does a competent job with the part of Truman
(Truman, for goodness sake; has no-one heard of subtlety?), it is by
no means the stand-out performance of the year. His part is still a
caricature: an over-the-top, hammed-up performance.  His appearance in
Cable Guy was streets ahead of what's happening here.
As I try to discuss the performances, I come up against the point I
made in the opening paragraph: what is this movie really trying to do?
I think there are a couple of possible ways to read it.
i) Is it meant to be about a real person who was caught up in this
artificial, televised world? We are shown many details that seem to
suggest that this is the case: intricacies of how this event is staged
are revealed, to a level that is meant to convince us that it is
feasible; certain actors (Noah Emmerlich as the best friend for
example) play their parts in the television show as if it is meant to
be real; the shots of the general public again suggest that this is a
real phenomenon.
      Ultimately, however, The Truman Show falls well short. The whole
concept just doesn't bear close scrutiny under this premise. Firstly,
how exciting would it really be to televise someone's life 24 hours a
day? Even if it was deliberately filled with choreographed events,
there's just way too much mundaneness to fill the screen. We're told
that people leave the television on at night to sleep while Truman is
sleeping, a reasonable premise only if you're in the same time
zone. Ok, that takes care of the night but what about travelling to
work every day, sitting at work for eight hours, showering, eating?
How often would that be interesting and are people really going to be
watching continuously, just in case something interesting happens? And
don't even think about what the actor who is playing the wife is
called upon to do. Also, (spoiler following but if you don't realise
that this is going to happen in the movie, then there are a lot of
Hollywood movies out there that you can enjoy), if you had spent all
your life living in what you thought was reality only to find out that
it was a television set, don't you think you'd have some sort of
pretty serious nervous breakdown?  Add to this Laura Linney
shamelessly over-acting in the role of Truman's wife and Jim Carey
hamming it up and it just can't be real.
ii) Clearly it must be an allegory. Let's treat the pieces that
suggested realism as merely attempts to make the allegory plausible,
so that we can't just brush the film away as something that could
never happen. Then what's the film trying to say about human
existence? We watch too much television? We need to question our
reality more? The media is manipulative? What is life but a series of
events, orchestrated by some unseen conductor, where we are not even
the players but rather the instruments?
      Well, The Truman Show could be saying any of these things. This
is where it all comes down to interpretation. Is the movie being so
clever that it's not forcing its message down the viewer's throat,
touching on all these issues but ultimately leaving it up to the
audience to do some work and take away what they can from it? Or, is
it simply a collection of interesting ideas rather than a coherent
allegory, thrown together to make up the mandatory 2 hours? Much as
I'm a huge fan of Peter Weir, I fear it is the latter rather than the
former. (For an movie that fits into the former category, see Peter
Weir's Fearless.)
      The Truman Show seems to be one of those movies created from an
idea thrown around at lunch time. The concept is not a particularly
original one: since philosophising began, people have postulated the
idea that everything around us is a figment of our imagination. All I
can know is myself: what proof do I have of other people's existence?
Well, I'll take it on trust that the reality I see is
reality. Alright, let's take this concept.  Suppose the reality I see
isn't reality. Wouldn't that make a cool movie? But what can I really
do with this concept now? One of two things: either the protagonist
discovers that the reality isn't real or he doesn't. Well, it's not
much of a movie if he doesn't, so he'd better discover it.
      With whom are we meant to identify in this movie? Truman?
Perhaps, but I think instead the intention is that we identify with
the viewers of the television show. In this way, we can watch what's
going on with a knowing complicity: Truman should question reality but
we know we live in the real world. Ultimately perhaps this is the
point of the movie: are we really any better off in our real world,
watching Truman, than Truman is in his orchestrated one? If so, again
there are problems. The choice of the television viewers seems
disingenuous, to say the least. Are they meant to represent the
ordinary people? Two bar-maids, two security guards, a slob in a
bathtub and two old crones, none of whom are tremendously
appealing. They're really there for their comic potential, rather than
for their representation of the everyperson. We never get to know them
well; in face, we never really get to know anyone well, not even
Truman. As such, I'm not drawn in to this movie, and I don't really
care too much about the plight of anyone. In this position, it's hard
to get caught up in the allegory.  The media manipulates? Not here. I
don't care about anyone.  Question my reality? My life's not like
anyone's in the movie so that doesn't apply.  There's a conductor
manipulating the events of my life? If so, my only choice seems to be
to leave. It seems that as an allegory, The Truman Show is not a
roaring success either.
All this suggests that I'm slamming The Truman Show, but that's not my
intention.  All I'm saying is that it's a bit confusing, since
different actors seem to think they're in different movies. It's also
a bit disappointing since there seem to be some interesting directions
the movie could have chosen to go but didn't. Overall, however, The
Truman Show is mostly a moderately interesting movie with nowhere near
the depth that it's purported to have.

Title
Review for Gingerbread Man, The (1998)
Starring: Kenneth Branagh, Embeth Davidtz, Robert Downey Jr., 
Daryl Hannah, Robert Duvall, Tom Berenger.
Based on a novel by John Grisham. 7 little words that usually 
send me running in the opposite direction. This time, however, 
the waters were muddied with the accompanying phrases: Directed 
by Robert Altman and Starring Kenneth Branagh, Robert Downey Jr. 
and Robert Duvall. On top of that, I'd read an interview with Robert 
Altman where he said something along the lines of "I sent the 
finished film to John Grisham. His response was that it was an 
interesting movie but nothing to do with him." I was sold. And so 
I headed off to the cinema in search of some Robert Altman magic. 
My quest was only partially satisfied. The first hour or so of set 
up is brilliant. The film is set in Savannah, Georgia but instead 
of the usual long, hot, sultry days of the south in the U.S. of A., 
we have the precursor to a hurricane, rain, rain and more rain. The
weather evokes a moodiness that suffocates and confuses, wonderfully 
complimenting the action up to the moment of confrontation between 
Rick Magruder (Kenneth Branagh) and Dixon Doss (Robert Duvall). 
The acting throughout is superb, with Ms. Hannah as Lois Harlan 
giving a great performance. Similarly of high quality are the efforts 
of Mr. Branagh and Mr. Downey Jr., even to the point of fake southern 
accents, with only a word or two to give away that they aren't Savannah, 
born and bred. 
I cannot say enough good about the first section of the film: the 
ambiance, the acting, the plot all weave together beautifully leaving 
me breathless and intrigued, with little idea of what is going on or, 
more to the point, who is behind it. My advice would be that once 
Magruder and Doss confront one another, leave the cinema: any ending you 
can think up will be better and more satisfying than the one presented 
in The Gingerbread Man. 
On that score, much as I am a serious detractor of Mr. John Grisham, 
having once been trapped in a house with one of his novels, I cannot 
believe even he would have come up with such a simplistic and
unconvincing 
ending. At least in his novels, badly written as they may be, there are 
wheels within wheels, plots and conspiracies. In The Gingerbread Man, 
there is none of that. 
Even ignoring the insubstantiality of the plot, it makes no sense. 
Why would the trap that Magruder set about the will cause the reaction 
that it did? In the interest of not giving away too much of the plot, 
I'll stop there but rest assured, I could pick more holes, given the 
opportunity. 
Perhaps the ending wouldn't have seemed quite so bad if the 
beginning hadn't been quite so good: a case of exciting one's 
anticipation. The reverse of The Devil's Advocate where the ending 
was so much fun, I left the cinema feeling much better about the
movie than it deserved, perhaps in this case I am being wrongly harsh, 
having emerged from the movie theatre so let down. My recommendation: 
go see the movie and emerge, feeling smugly superior knowing that you 
could write a better ending. Of course, that feeling is only fleeting 
as you realise that these people are getting paid millions for their 
efforts. 
Nicole Lesley             http://www.cs.usyd.edu.au/~nikki/        
Basser Department of Computer Science, University of Sydney
ph: (02) 9351 6098  rm: G90b    email: nikki@cs.usyd.edu.au        
Movie Reviews: http://www.cs.su.oz.au/~nikki/m_r/Intro.html

Title
Review for Topless Women Talk About Their Lives (1997)
Starring: Danielle Cormack, Joel Tobeck, Ian Hughes, Willa O'Neill,
Shimpal Lelisi.
Topless Women Talk About Their Lives falls into that category that I
mentioned in The Devil's Advocate: movies that have a brilliant
beginning but don't know how to end. It begins by introducing us to a
selection of characters who all know each other.  There is Liz, who
oversleeps and so is running late for her appointment, Prue who is
getting married, Geoff, Liz's boyfriend, Neil, her previous boyfriend,
Ant who has written a screenplay.  For the first hour, we get to know
these people through everyday activities, as they talk on the phone,
go out to dinner, hang clothes on the line.  The interactions seem so
truthful and guileless that it is almost as if the film-makers hid
cameras around the place and filmed these people unbeknownst to
them. At times, the events border on the ridiculous, like the
screening of the film, but they still seem in keeping with the
characters and their lives.  This doesn't sound like a brilliant
premise for a film - "we just follow a lot of people around who are
vaguely related" - but it's the execution of the idea that makes
Topless Women Talk About Their Lives so engrossing.
Unfortunately this level of honesty isn't maintained. With about half
an hour to go, a sense of impending doom invades Topless Women Talk
About Their Lives and from there is descends into melodrama. Such a
disappointment after such a brilliant start.
The actors are all quite good with Ms. Danielle Cormack as Liz being
particularly impressive. The energy of her character is palpable and
is a major reason the movie is so watchable. A lot of the performances
are a bit rough around the edges but this suits totally the
documentary feel of the film. It seems like these are real people we
are watching rather than actors playing roles. That is why the
melodramatic turn of events comes as such a shock. Up till that point,
I was transported to this world where these real but mildly insane
events were taking place. While the final half hour is not beyond the
realms of possibility, it's unlikely in a way that is jarring to
someone caught up in the world of the film. Not just the events, but
also the tone of some of the end is wrong, clashing strongly with the
sense of fun that has preceded it.
This is not to say that Topless Women Talk About Their Lives is not a
good film. As stated above, the first hour is superb and even the end
is above average. It just takes a turn which means that an otherwise
brilliant movie loses some of its gloss.
Nicole Lesley             http://www.cs.usyd.edu.au/~nikki/        
Basser Department of Computer Science, University of Sydney
ph: (02) 9351 6098  rm: G90b    email: nikki@cs.usyd.edu.au        
Movie Reviews: http://www.cs.su.oz.au/~nikki/m_r/Intro.html

Title
Review for Devil's Advocate, The (1997)
Starring: Keanu Reeves, Al Pacino, Charlize Theron, Jeffrey Jones,
Judith Ivey, Craig T. Nelson.
The Devil's Advocate's last 30 minutes or so are so much better than
the early sections of the movie that it's easy to forgive a lot of its
problems. I left the cinema with a real sense of enjoyment that
gradually fades as I remember the earlier pieces of the film.
First the trivial but distracting: Mr. Keanu Reeve's ache-saynt. It
wanders all over the fifty states of America. Because of the
storyline, his character, Kevin Lomax, had to be from the south so I
understand the need for the fake accent but it was distracting all the
same.
>From what I can tell by talking to other people, I'm in a minority
group who believes that Mr. Reeves can act. Now I'm not saying that
I'd pay money to see him play Hamlet but in the right role, I think he
is quite good.  Although not a great movie, I thought he was quite the
part in Chain Reaction and I think as the vain, cocky, pretty-boy
lawyer, he does a great job. He's less convincing as the anguished
husband but perhaps that's in character: as one who chooses his career
over his wife, time and time again, maybe deep down he's not all that
anguished.
Ms. Charlize Theron as Mary Ann gives a solid performance although
it's a pretty horrible role. I can see the attraction for an actor as
it allows the performer to run the gamut of emotions and really
stretch herself.  It's hard, however, to understand this person. If
she really is so lonely and bored, why doesn't she look for a job, try
to meet people, join a basketball team? As a result, Mary Ann's
progression through the movie is less sympathetic than it could have
been.
The other lead, Mr. Al Pacino as John Milton, was inspired
casting. This is the role Mr. Pacino was born to play. Schooled in the
tradition that if he's not hamming it up, he's not acting makes him
ideal for this role. His devilish grin, his wicked leer - he's having
the time of his life.
The main problem with this movie is the set-up. This is contrary to
most films. The majority of movies seem to have this great premise and
no idea how to end the story. The Devil's Advocate has this great
conclusion and has trouble working out how to set it up. It's too long
in getting to John Milton's big speech with too many little side
issues getting in the way, such as the story involving the Weaver
investigation. As well as being slow, there are large chunks of the
movie that just don't work. The cocktail party, for example, is saying
"look at me, I'm so clever" but the lines lack any zing and the whole
scene becomes a time waster. More frustrating is the scene where Eddie
Barzoon (Mr. Jeffrey Jones) is out jogging. John Milton delivers some
sort of speech during this event but I found it impossible to
concentrate on the monologue with all that was happening on the
screen.  Perhaps that was the intention of the film-makers but, if so,
it was a waste of two pages of the script.
Like all mainstream films, The Devil's Advocate has the male/female
double standard. We get lots of full frontal female nudity but no such
male scenes.  Also, as expected, God and Satan are male (you knew I
wasn't going to let that one pass).
Although outlandish and over the top, The Devil's Advocate poses some
interesting philosophical arguments, especially concerning the role of
God, the role of the Devil, free will and what is right. Of course, we
are only getting one side of the story here.  Be warned: although this
movie left me with a sense of enjoyment, it is a very gruesome,
violent film. It probably got its R rating for the nudity but the slit
throats and the bashings couldn't have helped.
Viewing The Devil's Advocate means sitting through a lot of tedium but
not going means you miss a great conclusion. Damned if you do and
damned if you don't!
Nicole Lesley             http://www.cs.usyd.edu.au/~nikki/        
Basser Department of Computer Science, University of Sydney
ph: (02) 9351 6098  rm: G90b    email: nikki@cs.usyd.edu.au        
Movie Reviews: http://www.cs.su.oz.au/~nikki/m_r/Intro.html

Title
Review for Elizabeth (1998)
Starring: Cate Blanchett, Geoffrey Rush, Christopher Eccleston,
Joseph Fiennes, Richard Attenborough.
Well, everything good you've heard about Elizabeth is true. It's a
visually stunning movie with the most incredible performances
from everyone involved. This is definitely a masterpiece with only
one or two minor quibbles. Most certainly something that must be
viewed on the big screen. 
Cate Blanchett, as everyone has noted, is magnificent in the role of
Elizabeth. She's fun, she's haughty, she's naive, she's strong at all
the right times, making an Elizabeth who's believable and
sympathetic while at the some time being something of a hero. 
And Geoffrey Rush is the best I've ever seen him, with perhaps the
exception of A Little Bit of Soul. His Walsingham is a wonderful
mentor for Elizabeth, with the ruthlessness necessary to get the job
done. Similarly, Christopher Eccleston and Joseph Fiennes play their
roles magnificently. I had a minor problem with Richard
Attenborough, mainly because I feel he plays the exact same role,
no matter what movie he's in. As I watched him in Elizabeth, I kept
having visions of the guy who owned Jurassic Park! 
The biggest problem I have with this film is a problem inherent
with almost all historical movies: what is truth? To tell a good
story, often facts need to be manipulated, or extra people added.
Douglas Adams once said that he never got his books from real life
because although real life provides interesting little incidents, it
rarely produces a beginning, a middle and an end. So, for Elizabeth,
choices need to be made as to what to show and what to leave out;
which bits of the life of Elizabeth are going to make up the movie;
what is the beginning, the middle and the end? Similarly, if
Elizabeth is our hero, who is our villain? 
Elizabeth makes Norfolk (Christopher Eccleston) and the Catholic
Church the villain. While not arguing with the atrocities committed
by the Catholic Church in that and many other eras, this movie
suggests very strongly that any evil our heros did, they were driven
to by villainy of others. My history of this period is not good enough
to know for certain, but I doubt that Elizabeth was quite as
blameless as shown. I imagine it would be possible to make a
movie of the life of Norfolk, making him a hero and Elizabeth the
villain if we make different choices about what to show. 
While on the topic of historical accuracy, one wonders whether
there were quite so many tall, willowy females in the court of
Queen Elizabeth. 
Also, at times, the music threatened to swallow us all. There were
moments in the film when a less strident approach would have
been more suited to the moment. Any time where I notice the
music in a way that distracts from whatever is happening on the
screen is a bad music moment for me - and there were half a
dozen such moments in Elizabeth. 
Be warned, however, this is not a Jane Austen period drama; this is
very gory stuff. The opening scene, for me, was the worst, more in
tone than gore. It begins with three people being burnt alive at the
stake. Very horrific. Later scenes of heads on sticks, slashed throats,
beatings, all contribute to a very dark mood for Elizabeth, matching
probably the mood of the times. If you can stomach the
gruesomeness of this move, I wholeheartedly recommend it. 

Title
Review for Music From Another Room (1998)
Starring: Jude Law, Gretchen Mol, Brenda Blethyn, Jennifer Tilly.
Once you've seen the first ten minutes of this movie (or even the
preview), you know exactly what's going to happen. This seems
to be the curse of the romantic-comedy. Of course, this doesn't
always have to be a bad thing - sometimes getting to a known
end can be heaps of fun - but a movie has to work a lot harder to
overcome this. 
First, if I know that Danny (Jude Law) and Anna (Gretchen Mol)
are going to end up happily ever after from the get-go, why will I
keep watching? Since it's at the very beginning, we're not at a
point yet where I really care about these characters. The only
possibility is that the journey is going to be novel in some way,
filled with interesting characters and strange events. 
Charlie Peters seems to have understood this point and filled
Music From Another Room with a cast of zany characters who
have eccentric hobbies/careers. Danny is a restorer of mosaics,
Anna's sister-in-law regularly draws a gun on the family at the
dinner table, Anna's father continually talks about the mating
habits of different animals, the wisdom dispensing Austrian
family that takes Danny in, the people at the night club, Anna's
mother with her magically reappearing and disappearing disease
- the film is filled with a plethora of quaint or just plain strange
characters. 
Unfortunately turning a room full of odd beings into an
interesting, amusing movie rather than into a room full of
lunatics is a fine line to tread and the director seems to be
wearing Doc Martens. To take just one point, what is the story
with the sister-in-law and the gun? Her gun wielding antics
start out mildly amusing but quickly become psychopathic: and
there's not much humour in that. 
Music From Another Room isn't a bad movie. In fact, there are
quite a few amusing moments and almost all of the
performances are good enough. It's just another predictable
romantic comedy with not much to recommend it, especially not
it's "I'm-so-hip" self-referential dialogue. Throughout the movie,
people make references to the fact that things are happening just
as if they were in a movie such as when Anna talks about the
typical romantic comedy where the interesting foreigner comes to
enlighten the up-tight female lead. Being a predictable, cliched
movie is bad enough but admitting it doesn't make it any better! 
Some sort of change of direction would have made this a more
interesting movie: perhaps have Danny, in trying to woo Anna,
fall in love with Nina (Jennifer Tilly) or have Anna realise that she
has been up-tight till now but now she needs to go off to
experience life, not settle down with Danny. Something, anything
to get Music From Another Room out of the predictability rut. 
Pleasant storyline, amusing moments, attractive people: clearly a
fine choice as a rainy afternoon video. Just be warned that you'll
have the song Truly, Madly, Deeply by Savage Garden on your
brain for the rest of the day. 

Title
Review for Buffalo '66 (1998)
Starring: Vincent Gallo, Christina Ricci, Angelica Huston, Ben
Gazzara.
What a load of self-indulgent twaddle! Very few things
depress me more than sitting through a rubbish movie that's
getting good reviews. Who are these people who like Buffalo
66? They deserve a cruel and unusual punishment for making
me believe that I could possibly enjoy that movie. Clearly, I'm
not fit to think up their punishment since the worst thing I
can think of at the moment, is making them sit through
Buffalo 66 and apparently, that's not much of a punishment
to them. 
Where to begin? How about a plot summary? Here goes:
everybody hates me, nobody loves me, I think I'll go sulk. If I
died that would show them. They'd all be sorry then. And I'm
such a wonderful person too. Most of all, it's important that I
let the people know that I have a large penis! Really, I'm not
kidding. 
You think I'm being facetious, but honestly, that's a pretty
accurate summary of Buffalo 66. It's the story of a man (at
least by appearance a man, more aptly a boy) who's life is
rotten and it's all his parents' fault. I think we're meant to
believe that he's a really nice guy (I'm guessing this because
we're told it over and over again; we never see any evidence
of his actually being nice). He's a nice guy who has just had a
bit of bad luck, particularly in his allocation of parents. 
His big complaint is that his parents are awful to him and
treat him terribly. It's hard to tell since they are such
caricatures. Sure, I'll admit that the flashback imply that his
parents were pretty evil but they never come across as real
people: they are nasty creatures built out of the imagination
of a person with a real chip on the shoulder. It's the sort of
picture you build up when you've been sent to your room for
doing something wrong. You lie there, remembering how
cruel the whole world has been to you, recalling every nasty
thing that anyone ever said to you and attributing deliberate
intent to everything. You vow revenge. Most of us get over it.
Vincent Gallo, however, made a movie out of it. 
On balance, he's not exactly nice to them either. Of course,
this isn't important; it's how people treat him that matters.
Again, it's the world of a six year old, who doesn't realise that
his parents are people too, and thinks only of them in terms
of himself. 
As well as this sulking six year old in Vincent Gallo's body,
Christina Ricci plays the role of someone kidnapped by Billy
Brown (Vincent Gallo) and forced to play his wife for the
benefit of his parents. I'm a big fan of Christina Ricci and will
admit that she acts quite well in this, but the role is so horrid.
What is wrong with this woman that she actually thinks Billy
Brown is a nice guy. A couple of times in the movie she states
something like, "I think you're the nicest guy and the best
looking guy I've ever met." At certain times, we get to see
flashback scenes of Billy's childhood that are meant to tell us
that he's had a horrible life; one can only imagine what
torture Layla (Christina Ricci) must have gone through to
actually think Billy is nice. He's awful to her the whole movie.
>From this I can only conclude that men are such prizes that
we've got to be glad when one of them just shows us a bit of
attention! Ugh! 
Add to this really irritating effects, such as the cutting from
one scene to another and the point of view scenes in the
family home, and you have a very painful 110 minutes. In
fact the only thing that makes this movie vaguely watchable
is the calibre of the people performing in it: Christina Ricci,
Angelica Huston, Mickey Rourke. These are all good actors. It
makes one wonder if the script was appreciably different
from the final product. This is the only excuse I can make for
these great people being in such a lousy film. 
I don't mind so much that I actually paid to see this film. I
mind more that the people responsible for such an onanistic
movie get paid obscene amounts of money. Surely there are
talented people out there. I know lots of really clever people.
Why, oh why, are such miserable excuses for movies being
made? 
