Authors
Sally Smith
Number of Reviews
2

Title
Review for Heart and Souls (1993)
Starring Robert Downey, Jr., Charles Grodin, Kyra Sedgwick, Elisabeth Shue, 
         Tom Sizemore, David Paymer, Alfre Woodard
Directed by Ron Underwood
Screenplay by  Gregory Hansen, Erik Hansen, Brent Maddock, S. S. Wilson
Director of Photography Michael Watkins, ASC
Rated PG-13 (apparently just for occasional language, not content)
     I write this review under much the same conditions as my last: not
being overly familiar with the work of anyone working on it except for
the cinematographer--but that was enough reason for me to attend.
     Thomas Reilly (Downey) is born at the same time a bus crashes, and
the souls of the passengers--single working mom Woodard, nebbish opera
singer wannabe Grodin, small-time hood (Sizemore) and sweet waitress
(Sedgwick)--become attached to him (literally--they can only travel a
few yards away). Little Thomas grows up having a wonderful time with
his constant companions who are invisible to anyone but him.
Unfortunately, by the time he's seven, his family is so worried about
the behavior his "imaginary" friends are leading him into that the
spirits decide he'd be better off without him, and make themselves
completely invisible.
     Flash forward about 25 years. Thomas is now a greedy superficial
San Francisco yuppie specializing in corporate bankruptcies.  The ghosts
aren't happy with the way he's running his life (although they do
approve of his latest girlfriend, Shue), but stay invisible until
they're informed that there was a mixup "upstairs" and that they
shouldn't have been here all these years.  They were supposed to use
Thomas to fulfill the dreams they didn't get to accomplish, and now
they only have a few days to do it.  Thomas, naturally, is less than
thrilled about their reappearance, but is eventually persuaded
(humorously) to help them out--hopefully helping himself in the
process.
     Downey shows off his gift for physical comedy and mimicry in a
number of very funny scenes; Grodin is less annoying in this film than
in anything else in recent memory; Woodard is the very definition of
Mom; Sedgewick, Shue, Sizemore, and Paymer acquit themselves nicely in
somewhat under-written roles.  The actors playing the ghosts do develop
a rapport that reflects the reluctant affection that develops between
four total strangers forced to live together for decades.
     Special effects range from cheesy to quite attractive, including
some infrequent and correctly-used (hallelujah!) morph shots, Mic
Rodgers' stunt work is very well-done, the production design for both
the Fifties and Nineties is dead on, as is (the always-excellent)
Jean-Pierre Dorleac's costume design.  The photography again did not
disappoint me--it's stylish, lovely, fluid, imaginative (especially in
some of the subjective camera shots), and incorporates the many special
effects quite naturally and matter-of-factly. However, it does all this
without overwhelming the quiet, intimate nature of what is basically a
small story about some ordinary people.
     HEART AND SOULS is an overwhelmingly charming, sweet,
heart-warming, and old-fashioned movie. Cynics should avoid it at all
costs. People who want several good laughs, a lot of smiles, and a
couple of poignant moments should rush to see it. It's probably the
best date movie of the summer.  I liked it a lot, I'll see it again, I
recommend it.

Title
Review for Point of No Return (1993)
Starring Bridget Fonda, Gabriel Byrne, Dermot Mulroney, Anne Bancroft,
         Harvey Keitel, and Miguel Ferrer
Directed by John Badham
Screenplay by Robert Getchell and Alexandra Seros (based on Luc 
              Besson's NIKITA)
Director of Photography Michael Watkins, ASC
Rated R for violence and language
     A lengthy disclaimer is in order here.  I never saw the French
film of which this is evidently a close remake.  While I have seen
several of director John Badham's movies, I have no great feelings
about them, either positive or negative. And I have never seen Bridget
Fonda in a film, nor do I recall seeing many of the other actors before
(I've seen Anne Bancroft, okay?). Nor am I a particularly big
aficionado of the action genre.
     That said, I will tell you that I was eagerly awaiting the release
of this film, simply because I am a great admirer of its director of
photography. I've been watching Michael's TV work for several years and
was anxious to see what he could do with a wide screen and a decent
budget.
     The plot: Bridget Fonda is Maggie, a drug addict who is given a
choice; either accept training as an assassin for an unnamed government
agency, or be executed for a murder she committed. Some choice. She's
trained in dirty work by Gabriel Byrne, and in the niceties of polite
society by Anne Bancroft, then sent out to complete her missions, which
are all quite nicely slam-bang (stunt coordinator Mic Rodgers did the
"Lethal Weapon" series). Things go well for a while, until Maggie falls
in love, develops a conscience, and decides she'd really rather not
kill people for a living.
     Fonda is very good at showing Maggie's transition from feral
street creature to human being with feelings. Byrne manages to be
somehow both cold-blooded and increasingly sympathetic, Bancroft is a
delight as the Miss Manners of the assassin set, Keitel is perfect in a
small but important role as Victor the Cleaner (he cleans up everything
and everyone after the other assassins), and Ferrer turns in another of
his patented Jack-Webb-with-PMS performances. Mulroney, alas, is more
than a little dumb as the love interest. Sharp-eyed viewers will spot
the director as a room service waiter; *really* sharp-eyed viewers will
spot the director of photography as one of the many guys with guns in
the final big shoot-out. Refreshingly, the computers in the movie
(mostly Macs) behave like *real* computers!
     What sets this film apart from others of the genre is that the
woman is the one with the heavy firepower. I'm reminded of the old
saying that Ginger Rogers did everything Fred Astaire did, only
backwards and wearing heels; well, here, Bridget Fonda does everything
Arnie, Sly et al do, only in a variety of tight, short dresses and
panty hose (I must admit that impressed *me*).  There is also a greater
emphasis on character development and emotional relationships than in
the average shoot'em-up.  There's actually less gratuitous violence
than I had been led to believe -- less, for example, than LETHAL WEAPON
3.  In other words, to get stereotypical and sexist here, it's a movie
with enough action for a guy, but enough story and emotion that his
girlfriend won't get bored either (my husband agrees with me on this).
     As to the reason I went in the first place, I was indeed well
pleased with the cinematography. It's lovely, stylish, atmospheric,
imaginative, and inventive (much of the opening sequence was shot in
Super 8 anamorphic, for example!), and I'm going to go see the movie
again just to *look* at it now that I won't be distracted by the plot.
It was ... well ... Really Neat.
     In conclusion, POINT OF NO RETURN offers some great action and
nice acting, good direction, effective use of music (score by Hans
Zimmer, many songs by Nina Simone), and awesome camera work. I can
recommend it.
