Authors
LARRY MCGILLICUDDY
Number of Reviews
11

Title
Review for High Art (1998)
When reviewing low budget films, critics often tend to be too 
forgiving. They sometimes forgive obvious technical flaws because 
it's an independent film. Well I don't care what kind of film it is. 
If it has technical flaws, then I can't ignore that. Don't get me 
wrong, I'm not saying a technically proficent film is automatically 
superior to a low budget effort. I wouldn't take the slick, bug 
budget FX laden Armageddon over the atrociously acted poorly filmed 
Clerks mind you. Because Clerks was damn funny and Armageddon was a 
mind numbing bore. But I would never call Clerks a great film, just a 
good one.
Anyways, High Art is a film from first time director Lisa Cholodenko. 
 Radha Mitchell stars as an art magazine editor who runs into 
upstairs neighbor Syd (Ally Sheedy), who is a high profile 
photographer a while back and then suddenly disappeared. The movie is 
about Syd's attempts to break free from her dangerous social life, 
Mitchell's attempts to showcase Syd photography once more, and how 
the two of them fall in love.
High Art has been praised by many critics and it's easy to see why. 
It features two very strong performances from Ally Sheedy and Radha 
Mitchell, and it's an indie film with a distinct personal feel to it. 
It's also at times erotic, heartbreaking, and even ocasionally 
humorous. But the film does have some technical problems and poor 
performances that detract fromt he quality and a fatal flaw in it's 
concluding scenes that prevents me from recommending it.
One of my main problems witht he film was the character of Greta. As 
played by Patricia Clarkson, she is one of the most annoying 
supporting characters in recent memory. Greta is a german actress who 
is Syd's lover. She is the dark side that Syd must break away from. 
Unfortunately, there is very little credibility in their relationship 
to begin with. I assume Clarkson's slurred speech and odd mannerisms 
were intentionally annoying. I still hated them.
Even worse than Clarkson are the numerous random supporting 
characters in the film. While Clarkson was extremely annoying, at 
least she was doing something. The rest of the supporting cast is 
filled with amateurs that would have trouble getting roles in a high 
school production. Most of them don't even have one dimension to 
speak of and they wander around the screen like zombies. Where is Tom 
Savini when you need him?
Then in the conclusion comes the final breaking point for me. There 
is a shot at a crucial emotional moment that instead of focusing on 
Radha Mitchell, which would seem obvious, focuses on one of the 
zombie supporting characters. I simply don't get it. Was Cholodenko 
trying to put us in Radha's shoes in that moment? Not a good time for 
an odd stylistic touch. Were we supposed to understand the pain of 
the random supporting guy  better than we would understand Radha 
Mitchell's? Whatever the reasoning, it's a gaping flaw that 
ultimately kills the film.
Don't get me wrong though. This is far from a terrible film. As I 
said, the two lead performances are wonderful. Mitchell displays a 
rare natural presence in front of the camera. I found her performance 
to be quite compelling. Ally Sheedy is quite credible as the drug 
addled, depressed Syd. Her performance isn't quite as compelling, but 
it's still very good. And the two of them develop a strong chemistry 
together. I would've preffered more of them and less of the annoying 
Greta and her band of zombies.
Larry McGillicuddy - The Cinemaniac
http://members.xoom.com/lmcgill/movpage.htm

Title
Review for She's Out of Control (1989)
The 1999 teen comedy She's All That was about a girl with no social 
life suddenly transformed into a potential prom queen. A full decade 
earlier, She's Out of Control was released. It was about a girl who, 
in the midst of puberty, is transformed into a beauty. The way both 
films approach this idea differs considerably, and is just one of 
many factors separating the success of both.
Tony Danza stars as a single father who goes away for vacation and 
when he comes back, his daughter has blossomed into womanhood, thanks 
to the help of his Henry Higgins inspired girlfriend played by 
Catherine Hicks. Danza is not pleased to see this, and spends the 
rest of the movie in screwball situations trying to prevent his 
daughter from having a social life of her own.
In She's All That, it wasn't entirely about her looks. The main idea 
was that she finally started to come out of her shell. Her father 
encourages her to have a social life. The fact that she looks more 
attractive doesn't even come into play with him. There is something 
really disturbing about the Danza's characters attitude about his 
daughter. It seems to be a innate fear of sexuality on behalf of the 
filmmakers. Or maybe they just thought it would be funny. In the case 
of the latter, it's even worse.
I'm insulted that these filmmakers would think Tony Danza in a 
neckbrace is funny. That very thought is as repulsive to me as 
anything in The Doom Generation. There is not one scene in this film 
that even approaches humor. It's not as if there are missed 
opportunities, the film can't even set up situations where a laugh 
would be possible. Danza's behavior makes him into a complete jerk, 
so the audience could barely care about his efforts. And the daughter 
is only seen from Danza's perspective, so there is no way we can warm 
up to her.
Basically what we are left with is Catherine Hicks almost approaching 
charm. That would account for the half star. Other than that, it's 
just watching an old guy ogling his younger daughter and trying to 
prevent any boys from getting near her. Todd Solondz should've 
directed this. His approach would've been much more interesting. As 
it is, She's Out of Control is the worst film of 1989, hands down.
Larry McGillicuddy - The Cinemaniac
http://members.xoom.com/lmcgill/movpage.htm

Title
Review for Deep End of the Ocean, The (1999)
Rating: ** (out of 4)
Directed by Ulu Grossbard
Starring Michelle Pfeiffer, Treat Williams, Jonathan Jackson, Ryan 
Merriman, John Kapelos, Whoopi Goldberg
The Deep End of the Ocean is a drama based on the bestselling book by 
Jacqueline Mitchard (sp?). I'm sure the book itself is fine, but it 
was probably not a good idea to transfer it to film. Many scenes, 
such as one where Michelle Pfeiffer breaks down in an emotional fit 
and bites her husband's hand, may have read well on paper, but on 
film all they do is provoke laughter from the audience.              
Pfeiffer is a mother of three whose younger son Ben is kidnapped 
while she was making reservations at her high school reunion. The 
first half of the film deals with the aftermath of this loss and how 
the family copes with it. Pfeiffer turns into an emotional recluse 
and the older son Vincent starts to    
rebel. The father, played by Treat Williams, tries his best to hold 
the family together. The film takes way too much time here, telling 
us very little. It doesn't favor comparably with an early 80s film 
called Without a Trace. Kate Nelligan's cold, distant performance as 
the mother in that film was far more interesting and dramatically 
effective than Michelle Pfeiffer's crying and shouting here.
Then the setting shifts to nine years later, where the family has 
moved to a suburban neighborhood in Chicago. Everyone except Vincent 
seems to have recovered from the incident and the family appears to 
have moved on with their lives. One day a young boy shows up at their 
door asking if they   
need their lawn mowed. He lookes remarkably like Ben, the kidnapped 
son. A fingerprint match confirms this and Ben is reunited with his 
family.
The film here tries to explore complex relationships within the 
family and with Ben's adoptive father, who he still calls dad. The 
filmmakers are far more successful here, but there are still problems.
 As Ben, young Ryan Merriman is not up to the challenge of playing 
such a complex role. Not enough is done with Ben's adoptive father, 
played with admirable honesty by John Kapelos. In particular, the 
final scene feels false because it was not preceded by a scene with 
Kapelos and Merriman, that wouldve been crucial to the plot 
development.
If there is one great thing in The Deep End of the Ocean, it is 
Jonathan Jackson's portrayal of the older Vincent. The films most 
touching moments come when it explores the relationship of the two 
brothers, and this is mostly due to the strength and depth of 
Jackson's performance. He is so good, we can predict a scene of 
personal revelation one hour before the screenplay decides it's time 
to tell us in the final scene, And the final scene works on it's own, 
but it needed a preceding scene with Kapelos and a followup scene 
with the parents. Many more wounds needed to be healed but 
unfortunately the screenwriter was too lazy to attempt that.
Larry McGillicuddy - The Cinemaniac
More reviews at http://members.xoom.com/lmcgill/movpage.htm

Title
Review for Varsity Blues (1999)
There aren't many things that can match the allure of Friday Night 
High School Football. Twenty two young men who have been made 
mythical heroes by their school pouring their guts out in front of 
the bright lights. Many of them playing for a future, most playing 
for pride. In small Texas towns like West Canaan, the allure is even 
greater. The town lives and dies by it's football teams. 1983's All 
the Right Moves, which instead focused on football in small 
Pennsylvania steel towns, did a good job of capturing this feeling. 
Varsity Blues captures this feeling too, but where it fails and All 
the Right Moves succeeded, is in it's basic human drama.
In the past 30 years, West Canaan head coach Bud Kilmer has won 22 
district titles. He plans on doing whatever he can to get that 23rd. 
Unfortunately, when the teams starting quarterback, a schoolboy 
legend, goes down with a season ending injury, that title appears to 
be slipping away. The coach must turn to backup quarterback Jonathan 
"Mox" Moxon. 
Mox doesn't really buy into the sleep, eat, breath football ideals of 
the town. He's working for a scholarship to Brown university. He's 
been playing football since he was young, not because he enjoyed it 
necessarily, but because of the pressure he faced from his father. 
But when he finally gets his chance to play, things begin to change. 
Suddenly Mox gets wrapped up in all the hype and glory.
Mox also begins a bitter war with Kilmer, who despite his success, is 
a mean-spirited sadist. Voight plays this character with snarling, 
colorful, over the top enthusiasm. Been there, done that. This 
particular section of the film I did not care for. Kilmer's character 
is way too one dimensional and the attempt to humanize him comes way 
too late. The family drama is also poorly played out. Mox's father is 
as one-dimensional as the coach and his mother is given absolutely 
nothing to do.
The film also attempts to document the wild behavior of the players, 
and the extent to which they can get away with anything. It goes way 
too far over the top here. In one scene, a player steals a cop car 
and rides around with naked girls in it. In another, the boys go to a 
strip bar, where they are shocked to discover their sex-ed teacher is 
a stripper. Neither of these scenes are funny, or beleivable.
Despite all of this, I did enjoy Varsity Blues. Van Der Beek is solid 
as Mox, able to show his character's admirable traits alongside his 
flaws, but careful not to overplay either (maybe he should give 
Voight lessons). Ron Lester has a very good role as Billy Bob, the 
massively overweight lineman who has been playing football since the 
pee wee level and wonders if any of it was actually enjoyable. Ali 
Larter also has a nice role as a cheerleader who comes on to Mox 
since she has to date the starting quarterback. One scene she finds 
some very creative use for whip cream in her attempt to win over Mox. 
Now that WAS funny, if still not beleivable. 
Brian Robbins does a surprisingly good job staging the football 
scenes. Everything is easy to follow. I particularly liked one 
segment where a breakdown in blocking leads to disaster. I also 
enjoyed the debate of philosophies (Kilmer's control the clock 
conservative style versus Mox's five wideout aerial assault ideas). 
And yes, the film does fall back on the predictable formula of the 
big game finale. And the final play of the game is set up much 
earlier in the film, so we know the screenwriters know their Syd 
Field. These complaints might matter one iota to me if the film 
wasn't so successful in executing it's formula here. The final game, 
and the final play, are both very exciting. I guess that's the allure 
of high school football.
Larry McGillicuddy - The Cinemaniac
http://members.xoom.com/lmcgill/movpage.htm

Title
Review for October Sky (1999)
Rating: **1/2 (out of 4) 
Directed by Joe Johnston 
Starring Jake Gyllenhaal, Chris Owen, Laura Dern, Chris Cooper, 
William Lee Scott, Chad Lindberg, Natalie Canerday 
October Sky is a very frustrating film. Parts of the film are 
enormously entertaining. But the script is filled with too many age 
old cliche's about small towns, father-son feuds, and underdog 
heroism. Yes, I've been pretty kind to films such as Varsity Blues, 
which contains the very same cliche's. Then again, Varsity Blues 
never aspires to be a great uplifting film. It just intended to be 
fun, and on it's own level it succeeded. A brain dead cliche isn't so 
bad when you're making a fun, trashy, sports picture, but when you 
try to tell an uplifting true story and aspire to be the next Stand 
By Me it's unforgivable. 
Homer Hickam is a young man who aspires to be more than a career coal 
miner. He wants to get out of his small town, but the only way people 
are usually able to do that is through a football scholarship, as 
Homer's brother does. As established early in the film, Homer is no 
great athelete, and of course his brother receives favorable 
treatment because of this. Homer is inspired by physicist Werner Von 
Braun, and decides he wants to build a rocket. The problem being that 
Homer has about as much mathematical knowledge as he does football 
skill. 
Homer and his friends recruit a scrawny, awkward, social outcast 
named Quentin to help them out. Together, they begin work on building 
a rocket that will fly. These scenes are by far the most entertaining 
in the film. The four friends are wellplayed by a fine cast of young 
actors, and Jake Gyllenhaal is nothing short of terrific in his wide-
eyed, determined portrayal of Homer. If the film had just focused on 
this aspect of the story, it would have been quite an acheivement. 
Unfortunately, the filmmakers bother us with a moronic father-son 
subplot. In Varsity Blues, it was equally moronic, but it took up 
very little screen time. In October Sky, it fills up just as much 
time, if not more than the rocket building scenes. Homer's father is 
a career coal miner, and he wants his son to join the business. He 
constantly belittles Homer's attempts to build a rocket. All of this 
nonsense has been done before, and better, and in less screen time. 
Here it takes up basically the entire second act. 
The cliche's start pouring in during the third act. Homer's 
inspirational teacher Miss Riley becomes ill. Homer's father is 
injured in a coal mining accident, and Homer must take his place in 
the mines. A ludicrous subplot about a coal miner's strike provides 
an unnecessary roadblock towards the end of the film. The other kids 
have subplots about abusive stepfathers and living in poverty. 
Why did the filmmakers have to do this? There was some great material 
here, so why did they feel the need to drown the audience with 
cliche's? I would have preferred a straightforward narrative dealing 
primarily with the rocket building and the friendships between the 
young boys. Teen romance subplots could have been expanded, and an 
examination of the relationship between Homer's parents would've been 
interesting. The film certainly has it's inspirational moments, but 
throws it all away in the name of utter predictability. 
Larry McGillicuddy - The Cinemaniac
Reviews at http://members.xoom.com/lmcgill/movpage.htm

Title
Review for At First Sight (1999)
Conflict is overrated. Too many screenwriters who have based their 
work on the numerous books that teach you how to write a screenplay 
step by step feel the need to inject conflict at every possible 
moment. At First Sight is a good example of this. There are so many 
things about this film that work so well, but at times the forced 
conflict is so embarrasingly mindless it made me cringe.
At First Sight is based on a story by Oliver Sacks about restored 
sight. In the film, Val Kilmer plays Virgil Adamson, a man who has 
been blind since he was 3. He works as a masseuse at a vacation 
resort. This is where he bumps into architect Amy Benic (Sorvino). 
These early scenes between them are nothing short of fantastic. 
Kilmer and Sorvino have a dynamic chemistry, and the film could've 
simply focused on their romance the entire running time and be 
successful. 
But I know that's not the only story Irwin Winkler wants to tell. 
This film is also about how a blind man copes with restored sight. 
There is nothing wrong with this, considering the early scenes here 
are also quite effective. Bruce Davison is a doctor who performs a 
surgery to help Virgil restore his sight. Virgil's first moments of 
sight are very frightening, since has has no idea what exactly he is 
looking at.
The moments of this story I enjoyed most dealt with Virgil attempting 
to make sense of what he is seeing. For example, he knows what an 
apple looks like, but he can't tell the difference between a real 
apple and a picture of an apple. Virgil is aided by visual therapist 
Phil Webster (Nathan Lane). Lane's performance is very good, but I 
wish there was more of his character here. I would've preferred more 
scenes of human interaction and therapy between Virgil and Phil than 
dull lectures from Bruce Davison's character.
But that's only a minor problem. The film's two biggest flaws are the 
introduction of two minor characters that didn't need to be in this 
story. Steven Webber plays Sorvino's ex-husband and boss. First of 
all, it's hard to beleive these two were ever married,and it's even 
harder to beleive that their breakup wouldve been amicable enough for 
her to still want to work for him. But conflict is necessary says 
these screenwriting books, and the screenplay makes the major mistake 
of presenting Webber's character as a threat to Virgil and Amy's 
romance. This guy is the most pathetic and pointless character since 
John Pankow in The Object of My Affection. Any scene he is in shakes 
the credibility of the entire film.
Another misconceived character comes in the form of Virgil's father. 
He left Virgil many years ago when he couldn't find a cure for his 
blindness. When he learns of Virgil's restored sight, he tries to 
arrange a meeting between them. I don't care about this. The father 
is a throwaway character who we only see in two scenes, but the film 
asks us to find the scene between them touching and sad. It's just a 
mindless way to inject more conflict for Virgil than was necessary.
Instead, why couldn't the film give a better subplot for Virgil's 
sister (very well played by Kelly McGillis)?. She has seemingly 
devoted her entire life to taking care of Virgil, so why not show 
scenes where she wonders about her future without Virgil? Now that 
he's with Amy, she no longer has anyone to come home to and take care 
of. Scenes like this would've been more touching than a lame father-
son reunion. The film does hint at this once, but it's quickly 
abandoned.
Yet once again this year, I enjoyed a film despite the appearance of 
several major flaws. If the allure of the friday night lights 
propelled Varsity Blues past it's flaws, then what works here is the 
powerful romance between Virgil and Amy. Mira Sorvino is a terrific 
actress, and this performance is among her best. She has a natural 
ability to show how much she cares for someone without even having to 
say a word. Val Kilmer abandons his usual brooding, egotistical style 
of performance and instead creates a character that he actually seems 
to care about. Virgil is sweet, funny, smart, and even infuriating. 
Kilmer is able to bring out all these traits perfectly, which is 
certainly more impressive than the simple technical task of looking 
like a blind person. Together, they have immense chemistry and are 
able to carry the entire film past even it's most gaping of flaws.

Title
Review for Major League (1989)
***1/2 (of 4)
Directed by David S. Ward
Starring Tom Berenger, Charlie Sheen, Rene Russo, Wesley Snipes, 
Corbin Bernsen, Margaret Whitton, James Gammon, Bob Uecker
I was a fan of the Atlanta Braves in the 1980's. To put it as kind as 
I can, they sucked. They constantly finished last and lost about 100 
games a year. So imagine the great feeling I had when the Braves 
turned things around in 1991 and won a thrilling pennant race. Major 
League tells a similar story, about the perennially losing Cleveland 
Indians, and a ragtag collection of misfits that finally takes them 
to the top. There is nothing new about that plot, but what makes 
Major League one of the better films in it's genre is how effectively 
it captures the feel of a town energized by it's team's resurgence to 
the top.
The Indians owner has just passed away and his ex-showgirl widow is 
now in charge. She hates Cleveland and wants to move the team to 
Miami, but can only do that if the attendance is low. So she gets 
together the worst collection of players available, figureing there 
is no way they could win. They include Jake Taylor (Berenger), a 
former all-star catcher with a bum knee; Rick Vaughn, an ex-con 
pitcher with a great arm but no accuracy; and Roger Dorn, a 
millionaire prettyboy who refuses to risk his body to make tough 
plays. Also on hand is Willie Mays Hayes (Snipes) who wasn't invited 
to camp but earns his way on the team after displaying his blazing 
speed. Unfortunately, he's a terrible hitter. Lou Brown (Gammon), 
who's coached in the minor leagues for 50 years is selected as the 
manager.
Anyone who has seen sports comedies before knows exactly what will 
happen. The team will play terrible at first, but will band together 
and slowly rise to the top. Then there will be the big game against 
their most feared rivals at the end. So while the basic plot may be 
routine, the execution is not.
Director David S. Ward pulls out all the stops in detailing the ways 
a town gets involved during an exciting pennant race. There is a 
loyal band of fans who chant the song "Wild Thing" whenever Rick 
Vaughn pitches. By the end of the season, the entire stadium is 
taking up the chant, and Wild Thing shirts. This is reminiscent of 
the Atlanta Braves tomahawk chop, if less controversial. The "Wild 
Thing" chant was even carried over into real life and applied to 
Phillies pitcher Mitch Williams. The pure energy and buzz in the 
stadium during the games is perfectly realistic. The games, the 
strategy, the players all seam real. This is a movie that gets every 
single detail about baseball right.
There are also some nice personal moments. Jake tries to get back 
together with his ex-girlfriend (Russo),  who then was an Olympic 
swimmer and sports enthusiast. Now she runs a large library 
collection and has settled down with a snobby, upper class, 
businessman. Jake tries to prove to her that he has matured from his 
former playboy days the last time he was a ballplayer. The chemistry 
between Berenger and Russo is very strong and their many scenes 
together are adorable. Berenger's entire performance is very strong. 
He effortlessly carries the movie as the teams clubhouse leader. 
Berenger is credible wether he is romantic, tough, or funny. Sheen, 
Snipes, and Gammon are also memorable in their respective roles. And 
Bob Uecker, as the Indians announcer, gets off some of the films best 
lines.
Major League rolls along smoothly to it's conclusion, and rarely 
makes a false step. It's obvious Ward cares about this film,. He has 
injected alot of heart into it. A few years later, a sequel came 
along that managed to use the exact same formula with much of the 
same cast. What that sequel was missing was energy and heart. It's 
easy to copy the formula, but it's not easy to create excitement and 
passion. Ward and his actors were able to do that for this film, and 
that's what makes Major League one of the best sports comedies I've 
seen.
Larry McGillicuddy - The Cinemaniac
http://members.xoom.com/lmcgill/movpage.htm

Title
Review for Simply Irresistible (1999)
Simply Irresistible tries really hard to recapture the feel of an old-
fashioned romantic fantasy. In fact, it tries too hard. The film 
wants to be soft, cuddly, and loveable, and succeeds only in being 
incredibly stupid. I'm usually kind to this sort of film, especially 
when there is a wonderfully charming lead performance such as Sarah 
Michelle Gellar delivers here. Unfortunately, her performance is 
comppletely wasted since the film does not provide her with a leading 
man that is a tenth as interesting as she is.
Gellar stars as Amanda, a chef at her small family restaraunt that is 
going out of business. One reason is that she can't cook very well at 
all. One day some guy gives her a crab (I'm not making this up), and 
all of a sudden crazy things begin to happen such as her food 
actually tasting great. People start flocking to her restaraunt and 
she has a hard time keeping up with all the customers.
Sean Patrick Flanery is an upper class businessman who is planning on 
opening his own restaraunt. He stops by Amanda's one day and is 
entranced by the food, eventhough his girlfriend breaks up with him 
at the same time. Amanda is instantly attracted to him and they begin 
to fall for one another. This is helped by the magic of the food, 
which creates a thick vanilla fog, and has them floating off the 
ground.
Flanery's character is one of the most confusing leading men in a 
romantic comedy in quite some time. At first he loves the fact that 
they are rolling around kissing in the vanilla fog. When they start 
to float, it's too much for him. He claims that he wants to be in 
control of his own destiny, and refuses to be with her alone again. 
Whenever she tries to get near him, he shouts at her and calls her a 
witch, like he's in Salem or something. What the hell is this guy's 
problem? Who wouldn't want to roll around and kiss Sarah Michelle 
Gellar in thick vanilla fog? Who wouldn't want to be holding her as 
the two of you float off the ground? It doesn't help that Flanery has 
absolutely zero charisma. His character annoyed me so much at times I 
had to look away from the screen.
Surprisingly, the only other interesting performance comes from 
Patricia Clarkson, as Flanery's assistant. I very much disliked her 
annoyingly mannered performance in High Art. But here she strips away 
all the extra baggage and allows her natural personality to come 
through. I found her to be rather charming in a classy, sophisticated 
way. Clarkson and Gellar do their best to make this featherweight 
film palatable, but they receive very little help. 
The film does have some nice photography. They sure got the look of a 
old-fashioned romance right. But the most important thing in any 
romance is chemistry, and despite Gellar's best efforts, there is 
none to speak of. Other than some nice photography and two fine 
performances, Simply Irresistible offers nothing for even the least 
discriminating of viewers.
Larry McGillicuddy - The Cinemaniac
http://members.xoom.com/lmcgill/movpage.htm

Title
Review for Lucas (1986)
**** (out of 4)
Written and Directed by David Seltzer
Starring Corey Haim, Kerri Green, Charlie Sheen, Winona Ryder, Thomas 
Hodges, Courtney Thorne-Smith, Ciro Popitti, Jeremy Piven
You may not have heard of Lucas, or if you have, you might not think 
much of it. Probably because it stars Corey Haim, or maybe because 
it's about a little geek who collects insects, or maybe because it 
doesn't feature slick one-liners or the chart topping soundtrack 
albums that were almost a requirement for teen films in the 80's. 
However, you have been missing out on a true masterpeice, the best 
film of 1986, and the best film about adolescent life ever made.
Corey Haim stars as Lucas Bligh, a tiny 14 year old with scruffy hair,
 thick glasses, and an interest in insects and other outdoor life. 
One day he stops by the tennis courts and sees what must be an angel 
to him. Her name is Maggie, a 16 year old who certainly is a beauty, 
with lovely red hair and a sweet, innocent complexion. Maggie seems 
to be a little disturbed by this little kid watching her, but somehow 
he interests her, and soon they are talking and getting to know one 
another.
They gradually become good friends, and spend the summer together 
doing various things, such as studying insects (namely Locusts, who 
come out of hiding once every 17 years), playing tennis, and 
listening to a symphony orchestra through a manhole cover. Lucas is 
obviously in love with Maggie, and while she is charmed by him, it's 
clear that she would never consider him anything more than a very 
good friend.
This is not clear to Lucas, however. He still beleives that Maggie is 
his soulmate, and he dreads the impending start of school because he 
knows what's about to happen. We soon find out why in a painful scene 
where Lucas is humiliated by the jocks during a pep rally. They throw 
him on stage, right in front of his beloved Maggie. Surprisingly, he 
turns the tables on the jocks with some clowning around, but he takes 
it too far, and is embarassed in front of the entire school.
The next scene is brilliant. Maggie follows Lucas outside of the pep 
rally. She tries to talk to him as if nothing happened. He rails back 
against her, in a cruel unfair fashion. In lesser movies this 
would've turned into a confrontation between the two characters. But 
Maggie is written smarter than that. She understands what Lucas is 
feeling and knows exactly what to say to console him.
Next we are introduced to another great character named Cappie 
(Charlie Sheen). He is a jock with a typical cheerleader girlfriend. 
What's interesting about him is that he sticks up for Lucas and 
protects him from the other jocks. Of course anyone with a brain can 
tell what's gonna happen next. Cappie will cause conflict in Maggie 
and Lucas' relationship.
This begins in classic scene in the school laundry room when Cappie 
and Maggie are alone. She's been assigned to show him how to operate 
the washer/dryer so he can clean his shirt. Maggie is charmed by 
Cappie's tender undertsanding demeanor, not to mention his shirtless 
body. This scene is so delicate and sweet, but Cappie still has a 
girlfriend, preventing either one from acting on their desires. 
Desperately trying to puncture the tension, Cappie begins to kick 
basketballs around the room.
It's not long before Cappie does break up with his girlfriend (in the 
films only subpar scene). Lucas finally figures out what's going on 
when he tries to pick Maggie up for the dance. This causes him to 
take severe actions to prove himself to Maggie and himself, such as 
try out for the football team.
The last third of the film revolves around this attempt. While the 
idea seems cliched, the way it is executed is not. There are many 
surprises during the last half hour which lead to an ending so 
emotionally involving it should make the most heartless of cynics get 
choked up. Dave Grusin's memorable score, played at the perfect 
moments, certainly helps.
Lucas is filled with great performances. Forget everything you know 
about Corey Haim. Back in 1986 he had talent, and that is proven here 
as he delivers a perfect fully 3-dimensional performance filled with 
anger, humor, and pain. Kerri Green is very appealing as Maggie, 
showing us why she cares about Lucas so much and why he is so 
attracted to her. Sheen's Cappie is almost too good to be true, but 
Sheen makes him beleivable, especially when he explains the reason 
why he protects Lucas. There are other wonderful minor characters 
such as Ciro Popitti's Ben, a friend of Lucas, whose diminutive 
stature does not mean he will take crap from the jocks. Also turning 
up in a few key scenes is Winona Ryder as Rina, the girl who admires 
Lucas from afar.
When people talk about the great teen angst films of the 80s, you 
hear John Hughes this and John Hughes that. Lucas seems to be lost 
among the crowd of his so-called classics. But hopefully, like with 
Heathers and Say Anything,  Lucas can begin to find it's own loyal 
following and help people realize there were more to the 80s than 
Anthony Michael Hall and Molly Ringwald. It deserves more than that, 
but I don't want to be greedy.

Title
Review for She's All That (1999)
***1/2 (of 4)
Directed by Robert Iscove
Starring Freddie Prinze Jr., Rachael Leigh Cook, Jodi Lyn O'Keefe, 
Anna Paquin, Kieran Culkin, Elden Henson, Paul Walker, Kevin Pollak, 
Dule Hill, Usher Raymond, Matthew Lillard, Clea Duval, Lil' Kim
High school comedies have been pretty rare this decade. While the 
horror film saw itself revived back to the glory days of the early 
80s (beyond that, actually), teen comedies have been absent for most 
of the 90's. Sure, there was a Dazed and Confused here and a Clueless 
there, but after that, what are we left with? National Lampoon's 
Senior Trip? Can't Hardly Wait came along last year, and was a 
deliberate attempt to recapture the 80s spirit, when films like Say 
Anything, Sixteen Candles, and Fast Times at Ridgemont High were 
opening seemingly every weekend. The problem with Can't Hardly Wait 
was that it tried too hard. It remembered those great 80s films so 
much that the line between homage and ripoff was stretched very thin. 
There were some fine individual moments and it was certainly 
energetic, but in the end it failed. And considering it's weak box 
office performance, it seemed like the genre was dead. Well, She's 
All That is perhaps the very film that can revive this genre. The 
sold out theater I saw 
t in was very receptive towards the movie and so was I (albeit for 
different reasons).
Freddie Prinze Jr. is Zack Siler, a guy who is living on top of the 
world. He is senior class president, an honor student, pretty much 
runs the school, and has a knockout girlfriend (O'Keefe) to boot. 
Early in the film, everything falls apart. His girlfriend dumps him 
for Brock Hudson, star of MTV's The Real World. In an attempt to 
protect his legacy, he bets his friend (Paul Walker) that he can turn 
any girl in the school into the prom queen. The girl Walker picks is 
Laney Boggs, a social nothing who wears glasses, eccentric clothes 
(to say the least), and paints dark and disturbing works in art class.
One would think Laney would love the chance to get to know Zack. One 
thing I enjoyed about the film, is that she is initially reluctant to 
spend time with him. She is rightfully suspicious about his 
motivations, but he convinces her that he wants to learn about art. 
This may not have been just a line. She takes him to an art show and 
puts him on the spot. He goes up on stage, and in a wonderful moment 
of spontaneity improvises an act involving a hacky sack. Zach gets a 
real rush out of the moment. He's never experienced the thrill of a 
live performance before. Outside of the theater, he tells Laney she 
has beautiful eyes and should not wear contacts. This is a key scene, 
because this is the first time we understand that Zach's interest 
here is more than just winning a bet, and it happens before her 
transformation. That being said, the big transformation scene is 
every bit as wonderful as it should be.
At it's heart, She's All That is just a traditional romantic comedy. 
On a broader scale, it deals with themes such as responsibility, 
choices, and the high school social structure. Zach is afraid to 
decide what college to go to, and he uses his father's agressiveness 
as an excuse. Laney hides her true feelings in her bizaare paintings 
and uses her father and brother, both of whom she practically takes 
care of, as an excuse for not having a social life. John Hughes 
usually attacked parents, and presented them as one-dimensional 
subhumans who had no ability to understand what their children were 
going through. She's All That takes a different route. It says 
someone must make their own choices, and take responsibility for 
themselves, no matter what problems their parents might present. 
The social structure in high school is the most painful, inhumane, 
cruel thing for a teenager to go through. Both Zach and Laney begin 
to understand this. They also learn that it's possible to survive 
this structure without actually becoming part of it. Laney has a line 
later in the film - "I think the right person is up there" - that 
pretty much sums up this theme.
Freddie Prinze Jr.'s performance is really strong here, as opposed to 
his bland, wooden performance in I Know What You Did Last Summer. At 
the beginning of the film, he is the typical all-american egotistical 
jock, proud of his legendary existence. To Prinze's credit, Zach is 
never too obnoxious. This is because Prinze never overacts. Instead, 
he relies on his natural charisma and allows the material to speak 
for itself. It's a gamble that pays off because later in the film it 
allows him to be quite charming. As Laney, Rachael Leigh Cook is 
quite a revelation. Like Janeane Garofalo in The Truth About Cats and 
Dogs, she is beleivable as someone who could be perceived as an ugly 
duckling by the majority, eventhough the rest of us know better. She 
has one particular scene, when she learns of the bet, where she 
delivers a line of pure uninhibited rage perfectly. There is more to 
anger than just shouting and Cook understands that. Together, they 
have a fabulous chemistry, and every scene between them is absolute
y delightful.
If She's All That has a flaw, it is in the annoying portrayal of two 
supporting characters. I very much enjoyed Jodi Lyn O' Keefe's 
performance in Halloween: H20 (though I didn't enjoy the film), but 
here she seems to be on a mission to steal every single scene she is 
in. Instead of just playing her one-dimensional character as a bitchy 
snob, O'Keefe wildly overacts with a repetitive line delivery and 
bizaare facial expressions. Look at Jordanna Brewster's performance 
in The Faculty for a much better portrayal of a similar character. 
Then there is Matthew Lillard as Brock Hudson, the Real World star. 
His performance is fine on it's own I suppose, but it really belongs 
in a different movie. I think this subplot would've worked better if 
O'Keefe's character got together with one of Zach's friends.
However, other minor characters are simply wonderful. I admired how 
the film gives each of them a chance to shine. Kevin Pollak, as 
Laney's dad, is addicted to watching Jeapordy. The fact that he never 
knows the right answer doesn't prevent him from giving a hilariously 
wrong one anyways. Paul Walker's performance is interesting, because 
he is able to disguise his true intentions several times throughout 
the film. Keiran Culkin is amusing as Laney's younger brother, and 
the friendship that develops between him and Zach is actually 
touching. Elden Henson, as Laney's childhood friend, and Anna Paquin, 
as Zach's sister, also have some very nice moments.
Lee Fleming's script is witty and smart. He doesn't rely on tired 
cliche's to wrap the film up.  A key confrontation is left off screen,
 and instead just revealed through dialogue. This allows the incident 
to be funny, instead of horrifically out of place, as it would've 
seemed if shown on screen. Iscove does a fine job throughout. The 
film is never boring, and a big dance scene at the prom is quite an 
exhilarating moment, thanks to some wonderful choreography combined 
with lively music. She's All That isn't very original on it's surface.
 It's another retelling of the Pygmalion story. But it's execution 
that matters the most, and Iscove, Fleming, and the actors execute 
the material just right.
Larry McGillicuddy - The Cinemaniac
http://members.xoom.com/lmcgill/movpage.htm

Title
Review for Cruel Intentions (1999)
Rating: ***1/2 (out of 4)
Directed by Roger Kumble
Starring Ryan Phillippe, Sarah Michelle Gellar, Reese Witherspoon, 
Selma Blair, Joshua Jackson, Sean Patrick  Thomas, Eric Mabius, 
Christine Baranski, Louise Fletcher, Swoosie Kurtz
"The movies are so rarely great art, that if we can't
appreciate great trash, there is little reason for us to go"
- Pauline Kael
I don't entirely agree with Ms. Kael's pessimistic view, but it is 
the proper frame of mind when viewing something like Roger Kumble's 
Cruel Intentions. The film is a modern day version of Dangerous 
Liasons with upper class high school kids filling in for the main 
characters. While it's certainly no great peice of cinema, it's 
enormously entertaining.
Sebastian (Ryan Phillippe) and Kathryn (Sarah Michelle Gellar) are 
stepsiblings who control the masses at their high school with their 
seductive wickedness. One day Sebastian reads a magazine article by 
the school headmaster's daughter Annette (Reese Witherspoon) 
proclaiming how she is a virgin and plans to wait until marriage. 
Katherine bets him that he can't seduce her. If she wins, she gets 
his speedster. If he wins, he gets to have his way with her. Thus 
begins the sleazy games of sexual manipulation.
Kathryn tries to get revenge against a new student named Cecile, who 
stole her boyfriend away over summer break. She promises Cecile's 
momthat she will look after her goody two shoes daughter and keep her 
out of trouble. What she really does is attempt to turn her into a 
tramp and send incriminating evidence of it to her mother. Meanwhile, 
Sebastian begins to make his moves on Annette, but soon learns that 
she will not be a simple conquest. As played by Reese Witherspoon, 
she is more than resourceful and intelligent, and mere pick up lines 
or false gestures won't do the trick.
What I particularly liked was how the filmmakers didn't try to hide 
the film's trashy nature. Director Roger Kumble is a talented 
craftsman and he is smart enough not to underestimate his audience. 
Many films similar to Cruel Intentions have been made, but they were 
made without any real effort. The material here is executed so 
expertly it rises to a level of sophisticated sleaze.
Ryan Phillippe is a fine actor who brings the right amount of 
sexuality and vulnerability to his role. We must be able to beleive 
he could seduce all these women, and we also must buy the scenes in 
the 2nd half of the film where he begins to fall for Annette. 
Phillippe is able to pull both of these off perfectly. Even better is 
Reese Witherspoon, perhaps the most talented young actress working in 
Hollywood. She
balances innocent charm with sensuality. Another actress could be 
annoying in this role, but Reese is perfect. She makes it beleivable 
that her character would fall under Sebastian's spell without 
allowing her character to look like a moron in the process. And Sarah 
Michelle Gellar has a great time playing the evil wicked queen of her 
school who tries defend her innocent reputation while
manipulating the student body at the same time. 
The technical credits are also superb. Special kudos to the art 
direction team for their view of the large, stylish homes in which 
these spoiled kids wage their battle of conquest. The films moves 
along at a brisk pace thanks to timely editing and a first-rate music 
score. I'm not sure I like the ending very much, but it works fine on 
it's own terms. I won't deny that the final shot is just perfect.
Larry McGillicuddy - The Cinemaniac
More reviews at http://members.xoom.com/lmcgill/movpage.htm
