Authors
Ricardo A Lafaurie Jr.
Number of Reviews
2

Title
Review for Prince of Egypt, The (1998)
This is my first review that I post to this newsgroup, and I kind of
feel like I have to say something negative about this film.  No one
else seems to care that it takes certain liberties that should not be
taken with a historical story.  However, even if one thinks of it as
fiction, "The Prince of Egypt" remains shallow.  But I'll begin from
the beginning.  The biggest difference between the original, Biblical
story and this version is that Moses has some semblance of divinity in
the Bible, whereas the animated version gives the impression of a
reluctant hero.  Maybe it's just me, but if I knew I had God on my
side, I'd have a little bit more confidence.  There are other
differences as well, such as a lack of important female characters and
the passing over of the original Pharoah's death like it's nothing but
a thing.  Most of all, though, the story's focus has shifted.  Rather
than being a story about father-son, man-ethnicity, man-God, "The
Prince of Egypt" is almost solely about the brother-brother
relationship between Rameses and Moses.  I was originally excited
about this story element until I saw the movie, where it came off as
maudlin.  Rameses and Moses squabble like children and then, in the
interests of peace, Moses saves Rameses' butt, even though Moses was
the one who started it... *yawn* I didn't care anymore by the time
Moses ran off for murdering an overseer (which, of course, never
happened in the original story - Moses was exiled).  But enough about
the differences.  Let's talk about the movie itself.  It features a
Moses who, in the interests of making the character more human, lacks
any divinity whatsoever, which isn't convincing at all to anyone who
knows who God is.  It features a cookie-cutter "I-wanna-please-dada"
Rameses, who at least is given dignity by the voicework of Ralph
Fiennes (from Schindler's List, among other things).  The film also
features an extremely annoying character by way of the "new-improved"
Miriam, voiced by the ever-antsy Sandra Bullock, even though the most
irritating thing about her is her tendency to burst into song for no
apparent reason (here Bullock is replaced by a singing voice).
Speaking of which, it contains *very* annoying music.  It contains
shallow writing.  It features extraordinary animation, which is one
good thing I can say about this film.  Most of all, it contains an
attempt to commercialize, homogenize, and mass-market a story about a
Manifestation of God.  I am not Christian, but I got the impression of
blasphemy.  The writers and producers took a butcher knife and
chop-chopped into the story.

Title
Review for She's All That (1999)
I have a little motto in life.  If the preview for a movie shows up on
MTV, then it's a bad movie.  Unfortunately, I didn't have cable so I
ended up wasting money and time on the clunker "She's All That".  But
why is it a clunker, you ask?  Isn't it just good family fun?  Read on
and see.
The story has Zach Siler (Freddie Prinze, Jr. - a VERY disappointing
role for him) presented as the coolest guy in school.  A smart jock
who has it all, including Taylor Vaughan (Jodi Lyn O'Keefe), the
heartthrob of the school.  That is, until she dumps him for Real World
alumnus Brock Hudson (Matthew Lilard, his usual mugging self).
Knocked from heaven's skies into an all-time low, Major Tom (ahem, I
mean Zach) makes a bet with two-faced pal Dean Sampson (Paul Walker)
that he can transform arty, nerdy Laney Boggs (Rachael Leigh Cook -
whom I found attractive for some damn reason) into the prom queen.
The wager is not important (in my opinion).  Anyway, you get the idea
- it's Pygmalion time.  Boy changes girl and then falls in love with
girl, lots of roadblocks tossed in, and all that tripe.
But I think this movie should not be seen by impressionable teens.
Why?  The number one reason is that the message of this movie is
terrible, terrible, terrible!  Laney does some token resistance before
allowing Mr. Siler to make her over completely, and then everyone
stands behind her, a.k.a. "Inner beauty can only take you so far" (my
quote of the week, from a Maidenform ad).  That and the fact that
Taylor (whom is undeniably the bad girl) trashed Laney in front of the
school at a party, a.k.a. "Victimology works".
There's some other reasons.  This movie is racist!  Yes, it's set in
Beverly Hills, but there are Asians and Latinos in Beverly Hills!
There's even some black people who don't act like white people!  The
characters are shallow as hell, they can be defined by simple phrases,
and even nouns.  Zach's the jock with a heart, Taylor is the bitch,
Laney is the wallflower with a secret (her mother died when she was
young - pity her), and Brock Hudson is a freak.  And there's also what
could be the stupidest dance sequence in history.  At the prom, the
students perform what appears to be a moving Macarena to Fatboy Slim's
inescapable and irritating "Rockafeller Skank".  I think I had a
seizure in the movie.
"She's All That" is not all that.  It's a bad, bad, bad movie. Don't
watch it.  Don't recommend it for any teenage relatives you might
have.  And do NOT do that Rockafeller dance.  [ 0 ]
