Authors
MosseHood
Number of Reviews
2

Title
Review for Jawbreaker (1999)
   Ok, ladies and gents: when you buy tickets for this movie, you know
it's going to be bad. Does anybody really have to be a rocket
scientist to figure that out?
   So why does every reviewer insist on bashing this movie? Sure, it's
bad, it's ridiculous, and it's tasteless. But has everyone forgotten
the most important thing about movies: fun?
   Jawbreaker may not reach enough status to be a cult classic, but
it's one of those movies where you can sit down and laugh at
it-whether you're laughing with the movie or at it.
   Rose McGowan is Courtney, the most snotty, uncaring, popular girl
in school with gorgeous black hair and a killer wardrobe and fashion
tips (you can NEVER eat at lunch). One the morning of their best
friend's 17th birthday, Courtney and her friends "Foxy" (Julie Benz)
and Julie (Rebecca Gayheart) decide to play a little birthday prank on
sweet Liz-in the process, she chokes to death on a jawbreaker used to
keep her from screaming.
   Cue the mayhem; while trying to make it look like a rape in her own
bedroom, complete school loser Fern Mayo (Judy Evans Greer) overhears
and sees some things she shouldn't. So in turn for her keeping quiet,
Courtney makes her popular. Julie can't take this and leaves the
group.
   And the "battle of the babes" (as described in the commercials)
erupts: Julie vs the popular 3, Fern vs Courtney & Foxy, Julie & Fern
vs Foxy & Courtney, and so on...
   Rebecca Gayheart will suffer the most from this diaster; after an
unmemorable role in Scream 2, and a horribly acted role in the
terrible Urban Legend, her career seems to be declining year by
year. She has charisma and some talent, but she has wasted it in teen
movies that take her no where. Rose McGowan, in a rare screen role (as
opposed to straight to video release) is good as her usual snappy,
vixen self, and Greer and Benz, who were probably hoping to make a
career jumpstart, fail.
   Pam Grier, although wasting her talent as well, is actually a
perfect cast as the very silly, all leather wearing tough as nails
detective.
   All in all, the movie was fun at some points, with funny tiffs and
battles between the "babes," but the one good thing you'll get from
this film is fashion tips.  Grade: C

Title
Review for Rushmore (1998)
   I know it already opened in December, but I finally got around to seeing
Rushmore last weekend, and it was one of those rare oppritunites that I got to
leave the theatre feeling proud about paying the expensive ticket price. As the
final scene closed out in happy slow-mo fashion, I felt happy to have been
priveleged enough to watch such a good display of filmmaking.
  Jason Schwartzman, his face oddly intriguing behind those large braces and
glasses, steals the show as Max Fischer, the most well known Rushmore Academy
student who gets terrible grades, but compensates for it by organizing most of
the school's clubs and organizations (i.e. the fencing team and writing and
producing school plays) and often pulling outrageous stunts, one that
eventually earns him an expulsion.
   This stunt, building an aquarium on the school's baseball diamond, is a plot
to steal the heart of widowed elementary teacher Rosemary Cross (Olivia
Williams). He funds this aquarium with the help of millionare Herman Blume (a
very Oscarworthy Bill Murray), who eventually finds himself falling in love
with Miss Cross.
   Rosemary and Herman begin dating-and the fun begins; Herman and Max go at it
head to head in a battle for Miss Cross. Herman manages to destroy Max's bike,
while Max cuts Herman's brakes, and it goes on like this. But eventually Max
realizes he is too young for Miss Cross, and he can't stand in the way of two
people in love.
   The Academy of Arts & Sciences really messed up this year; they completely
overlooked Rushmore (and, if you ask me, it wasn't an accident). It maybe
wasn't Best Picture material, but it certainly deserved a screenplay nod
(instead of Elizabeth), and Bill Murray's absense from the ballot is a complete
snub.
   The entire mood of the film is one reason it is so good; at one point it's
fun, and the next scene can turn serious and dramatic. The cinematography gives
the movie an important feeling, as well. 
   I hope Rushmore can overcome its' Oscar snubs, and be enjoyed by intelligent
film goers. Grade: A
