Authors
Regis M. Donovan
Number of Reviews
3

Title
Review for Blues Brothers, The (1980)
Review of "The Blues Brothers" (1980) by Regis M. Donovan
"The Blues Brothers" has it all: music, romance, drama, stunts,
thrills, adventure, nuns, beer, whips, smashing bottles, bar fights, a
car chase through a shopping mall, hordes of police and military,
Aretha Franklin, a mission from God, and about a zillion cars crashing
into everything.  It's a no-holds-barred funhouse ride.
The plot is just enough to hold together the outstanding musical
numbers.  Jake (just relased from Joliet prison) and Elwood Blues are
informed by "the penguin" (Sister Mary Stigmata) that the orphanage
where they were raised is going to be closed for nonpayment of taxes.
Inspired by James Brown and many leaping flipping celebrants at a
gospel service, the brothers decide to put together their old band,
make enough money to pay the tax bill, and keep the world safe for
nuns wielding rulers.  While collecting the sometimes reluctant band
members, Jake and Elwood manage to incur the wrath of the police, the
American Nazi Party, a country & western band, and one very
destructive mystery woman.  Hijinks ensue.
The plot is not the thing that makes this movie great, however.  It's
the music, and the sheer fun the film has.  The Blues Brothers' Band -
with some help from Aretha Franklin, Ray Charles, and Cab Calloway -
fill the film with classic performances.
"The Blues Brothers" clocks in at 133 minutes of silliness.

Title
Review for Manchurian Candidate, The (1962)
We are introduced to the members of a Korean War US Army unit,
including the remarkably unpopular Sgt. Raymond Shaw (Laurence
Harvey).  Then, Shaw's patrol is ambushed in Korean territory, loaded
onto what appear to be Soviet helicopters, and flown off into the
darkness.  Coming back after 3 days missing in action, Shaw is hailed
as a hero for saving his patrol; he receives the Medal of Honor.  When
he returns to the US, he is met by a celebration organized by his
manipulative machavellian mother as a publicity stunt for her husband,
the buffoon-like McCarthy-caricature Senator John Iselin.
This is the beginning of "The Manchurian Candidate", a political
thriller that doubles, in places, as a political satire.  Directed by
John Frankenheimer and starring Harvey, Frank Sinatra, Angela
Lansbury, and James Gregory.
After they return to the US, members of the patrol, including the
commander, Ben Marco (Sinatra), begin to have similar dreams: the
entire unit sits in what shifts between a women's horticulture
lesson to uniformed Soviet and Chinese officers and civilians
discussing brainwashing.  Marco eventually begins to suspect that
these are repressed memories, not dreams.
Marco -- when not falling in love, marrying, or having bizarre
conversations with Janet Leigh -- gradually remembers more of the
brainwashing as he investigates the mystery and discovers that Shaw
has been trained as a killer: triggered by his operators, never
remembering what he has done, unable to stop himself from carrying out
the orders he's been given.
The film wallows in paranoia, with Shaw being manipulated from all
sides, Iselin Red-baiting with drunken bombastic McCarthy-style rants
at his wife's instruction while she schemes, Shaw working to unravel
the mystery...  all while the plot builds to a crescendo of intrigue.
Harvey gives an admirable performance as Shaw, manipulated from all
sides; Sinatra is good as Marco.  And Angela Lansbury is outstanding
as the smothering, scheming puppet-master mother, pulling strings in
everyone around her -- a role that garnered her a Best Supporting
Actress nomination.
Released during the heyday of the Cold War (the same year as the Cuban
Missile Crisis, in fact) and unavailable for the next 25 years, the
film is a bit dated; in spite of this, the film is still a solid,
entertaining experience.
Rating: 8 out of 10 Queens of Diamonds

Title
Review for Man Who Would Be King, The (1975)
Review of "The Man Who Would Be King" (1975), by Regis M. Donovan
John Huston's adaptation of Rudyard Kipling's "The Man Who Would Be
King" is a classic swashbuckler about two former British soldiers who
decide, in true colonial imperialistic style, to take their guns,
march into the untouched wilds, and carve out a place among the
savages so they can live as kings.
The two errant adventurers, Danny Dravot (Sean Connery) and Peachy
Carnehan (Michael Caine), head into the unknowns of Kafiristan where
they find a kingdom untouched by the modern world and ruled long ago
by Alexander the Great.  After the help of some incredible
coincidences and a few Masonic symbols, the two manage to convince the
priestly rulers that Dravot is a god.
Of course, hubris like Dravot's must be followed by a fall, and
eventually things collapse into fighting, heroic endings, and British
stiff upper lips.
Originally conceived as a vehicle for Clark Gable and Humphrey Bogart,
Huston provides an adventure that received 4 Academy Award nominations
including one for best adapted screenplay.  Connery and Caine
admirably head a marvelous cast including Christopher Plummer (as
Rudyard Kipling) and Saeed Jaffrey.
