Authors
J.K. Salisbury
Number of Reviews
10

Title
Review for Mask of Zorro, The (1998)
Recently, over on the Official Star Wars website, a teaser poster was shown,
spoofing the makers of Godzilla, saying "Plot Does Matter"  This statement has
seemingly been ignored for the most part, by summer movie makers.  To me, this
means that you have a sensible, cohesive plot, it doesn't have to be the focus
of the movie (i.e. in action movies, something to hold the  scenes together
whether they be action( Lethal Weapon 4) or comedy (There's Something About
Mary), or even, heaven forbid, the main focus of the movie (Truman Show, X-
Files).  Plots this summer have been as absent as Steven Seagal at the Oscar
podium, so I have to admire and applaud a movie, that teases action, and
delivers, surprisingly, more plot than expected.
The previews for Mask of Zorro, led me to believe that this would be an
action- packed, excitement extravangaza, with the pairing of Banderas, and
Hopkins, showing promise.  What was delivered, was a bit different.  Yes, the
action scenes are there, and they work magnificently, the sword fighting is
well choregraphed, Banderas shows a true talent combination of agility,
comedy, and emotion, while his chemistry with Sir Hopkins, worked quite well.
 You believed that they were teacher/mentor, with each respecting, yet
needing the other. The chemistry between Banderas, and Jones works as well,
staging the most sensual swordfighting scene that I've ever witnessed, (not
that I've seen many, but this one was quite intense), and most of all,
everyone here, seemed to be having fun.  Sometimes you can tell, if actors
are enjoying what they're doing, or just sleepwalking through to get a
paycheck, the good guys, with their agendas, the bad guys, as the foils (you
can almost see Stuart Wilson twisting his moustache in a Snidely Whiplash
manner)
My misgivings about this movie, regard the apparent identity crisis existing.
The story of Zorro is fairly well known, and here, we are given an
interesting twist regarding them.  But we are then deluged with plot.  The
makers of this movie, in my opinion, tried to cram too much plot in here. 
The focus of Zorro is to fight for the people who cannot for themselves, and
the movie establishes that.  But then it becomes a bit convoluted in creating
reasons for each character to fight on.
I believe that the opportunity to make an fun, swashbuckling, action movie,
existed here, and, when they focus on that fact, it's exactly what this movie
is, it is fun, I do recommend it, I just think they could've either decided to
focus solely on the plot, developing, etc, or use a lighter plot, to hold and
transition the action scenes.  I applaud the effort of the plot, showing that
someone in Hollywood still cares, but I just feel it could've been a little
more effectively executed.  Take this one in at a matinee
See more of my Reel Ramblings at
http://www.angelfire.com/ks/nearside/comingatt.html
-----== Posted via Deja News, The Leader in Internet Discussion ==-----
http://www.dejanews.com/rg_mkgrp.xp   Create Your Own Free Member Forum

Title
Review for There's Something About Mary (1998)
Picture this.  Whenever we are about to get into a pool, of which, the
temperature may be questionable, what do we do.  Well, most of us, will stick
one foot in, to test, then the other foot a little further, then we either
ease in slowly, or just jump right in, subjecting our body to a great shock,
but with knowledge that we'll either a) Adapt, or b) Go running for the shore
cursing. Remember this analogy, I'll come back to it
I was never a fan of the Farrelly brothers movies, albeit only two, I just
didn't find their brand of humor fulfilling.  Each movie had scenes which made
me laugh, their first, Dumb and Dumber had one or two (The town is that way)
and Kingpin, their second, had a few more (We don't have a cow, we have a
bull), was it growing on me, not sure really, was curious as to their next
effort, to see how the progression went.
There's Something About Mary is that third installment, and the film works for
me.  I laughed, quite hard at times.  This was, in my eyes, a successful
progression for the brothers.  In Dumb and Dumber, they tested the water, some
laughed, some were disgusted (vote me in category two) In Kingpin, they put
their foot in a bit more, being a little more daring, a little smarter, but
still missing something, maybe a cohesive plot to hold it together. Now, with
this movie, they have taken the plunge straight into the water, and
successfully stay afloat.  Nothing is taboo here, ethnic groups, bodily
functions, voyeurism, handicapped, noone is spared here, most of the jokes
work, some don't, but those that don't in no way detract from the movie.
The opening scene is funnier than the previews which sort of spoil it a bit
(Note to other studios, Fox got this one right, it was a promotional genius
move, they teased, but never revealed, they showed some humor, but never
tipped their hand, they piqued your interest just enough to get you in the
theater, and then they unleashed, see..it can be done), but it still has to
be seen, then the movie lags, as it sets up the premise of the movie, but by
the final third, the movie is in full gear, and I was laughing, almost
rolling, at times, I had fun here, that's all I ask of a movie sometimes.
This is not a perfect movie, but then, the characters in it aren't perfect, so
it fits.  Each has their own issues, and they are dealt with in the smile, and
laugh at life, but still take things seriously, attitude.  These are real
people, that exist just on the other side of that line of reality that we all
sometimes walk.  These are characters that we are afraid to admit exist, but
make up the ecletic melting pot which is America.
Another sign that I use for good movies, is my after movie reaction,  are you
smiling, crying, showing some emotion, talking about it in general..or is it
the cinematic equivalent of Chinese food, and an hour later, you forget what
you saw.  Basically, did it leave an impression, or not.  Well, the length of
time it takes me from leaving the theater, to writing the review, is usually
a good reverse gauge, the faster I get it posted, the more of an impression
it left on me (because I want to get the thoughts down while they are
fresh)..I am less than 2 hours out of theater seeing this one, and I am still
smiling.  I had fun, I was bouncing, floating, laughing again remembering
scenes. (Another note, to Mr's Bay, Devlin and Emmerich, this movie clocks in
at just around 2hrs and 10 minutes, only about 30 mins short of Armageddon,
and about the same as Godzilla, yet, I didn't even notice, nor check the time
at any point, because I have was having a great time, see guys, a movie can
be long, and effective still, Size Does Matter, but so does quality)
I commented the other day, that it had been a long while since I had truly
laughed at movie, In & Out, last year, although not this much, and The
Birdcage two years ago, are the only ones that I can remember rivaling the
merriment of this movie, but be forewarned, this movie is not for all.        It is
very dark, and the humor is quite crude, and possibly offensive, so take that
into consideration, but if you sat through the first two movies by these
guys, than this one won't shock you, but rather take their craft one step
farther, and come into their own, as makers of honest, dark, real, comedies.
See this one, if you have a strong stomach, and an open mind
-----== Posted via Deja News, The Leader in Internet Discussion ==-----
http://www.dejanews.com/rg_mkgrp.xp   Create Your Own Free Member Forum

Title
Review for Snake Eyes (1998)
Asking a movie critic to name his favorite movie is paramount, to me, to
asking a chef his favorite food.  It is hard to pick one, when there are so
many types out there, and there are favorites in each one.  Now, asking a
favorite type is a different story.  I like to watch all kinds of movies, but
if I have a preference, I'd have to say that mystery/suspense would be the
section of the video store that I'd wander towards first.  So you can see my
intrigue in Brian DePalma's Snake Eyes, a pseudo-mystery suspense thriller
(or so the previews and buzz would make you think) from the man who knows how
to make them (Blow- Out, Body Double, Dressed To Kill).When I go into movies
like this, I cannot help but have a comparisons to my favorite movie from
this genre 1995's The Usual Suspects, a masterpiece in intrigue, suspense and
surprise. Unfortunately, it is unfair even to mention that movie, with this
one, because the similarities begin, and end, with the genre.
The tagline for Snake Eyes say "Believe everything, except your eyes" or
something like that.  Well, I got news for the makers and marketers of this
one.  I didn't believe my eyes, my ears, or any other part of my body that was
in the theater while this movie was on.  I felt cheapened, cheated, used, and
manipulated.  This movie was nothing that it pretended or advertised to be.
Let me elaborate a bit before I get off on a Dennis Miller-esque rant.
The story concerns an assassination at an Atlantic City boxing match during a
hurricane.  Nicholas Cage plays a detective who begins to find out that all
may not be what it seems, and everyone has an angle, and a story.  A
potentially riveting whodunit, and whyfor.  Now, my problem comes from the
fact that, for a movie that professes mystery, intrigue and suspense...all is
revealed, and known about 45-50 minutes into the movie. This leaves another
half of the movie as a will-he find out in time, save the girl, fall in love,
cat and mouse chase movie.  Even that isn't very interesting to watch either.
 Because, in my eyes, you have to have an effectively suspenseful reason for
all this to be occurring.  You don't, and so you just sit in the theater and
wait for the inevitable, hoping that there's another secret out there.        You
hope that he doesn't go the obvious, cop-out route.  But alas, he does There
are no red herrings, no mysterious people from the shadows, no shocking
revelations left. All the cards are on the table, all the suspects and facts
are in full light, all that is left, is the obvious.  When will the bad guy
catch the good guy, and how long before the obvious hero, heroine rescue and
kiss.
It saddens me to see a premise wasted like this,  The idea was good, I was
intrigued about the story, and with DePalma at the helm, I was hooked. 
Giving credit where credit is due, DePalma makes a nice looking movie, he can
use the camera to create tension with the best of them, using flashbacks, and
split screens to tell the same story from various perspectives.  I loved the
manic non-stop action of the opening sequence, and, the "over-the-wall" cam,
used to go above hotel rooms as if the camera was sliding on the roof,
oblivious of walls.  I have no problem with how this movie was made, and how
it looks The problem is, he simply runs out of story and gives up..  The
performances?  Gary Sinise is good, as usual, but that's it.  Cage seems to
have found the sleazy stereotype cop handbook, and lives every chapter.  Even
normally reliable supporting characters such as Anthony Heard (as a powerful
tycoon) and Stan Shaw (as the boxer), fall flat, once the rabbit is out of
the hat.  Also, can someone tell me what purpose that hurricane held?  A big
deal was made in the pre-release info, yet it only seemed to me to exist as a
backdrop.  I felt no sense of urgency, or panic amongst the people (there
were people just mingling around the casino, cavorting in hotel rooms, yet, a
storm is about to wipe them out??) I'm confused.
Like I've said, I know that DePalma knows how to make this movie, however
here, he played it like that hyper kid with a secret who just cannot wait to
tell someone.  Finally, he ends up just blurting it all out, and ruining his
leverage.  DePalma had a good idea, I liked where the plot went, I just wish
it would've built up some suspense getting there, and had an ending that
didn't look like he just threw up his hands and said "How about this?" This
movie just doesn't miss the boat, it misses the whole ocean.  Wait for cable,
or even a TV- movie of the week for this one.  On a ratings scale Snake Eyes,
doesn't even score that..($1/2)

-----== Posted via Deja News, The Leader in Internet Discussion ==-----
http://www.dejanews.com/rg_mkgrp.xp   Create Your Own Free Member Forum

Title
Review for Ever After (1998)
Whether you realize it or not, you set certain expectations when you enter a
movie theater. These could be developed from seeing a preview, hearing rumors
or gossip, seeing a poster, or maybe just from hearing the name. I am quite
guilty of this as well, and it sometimes unfairly influences my opinion on a
movie. This usually means that a movie doesn't live up to what I thought I was
going to see. But every so often, something wonderful happens. I have certain
expectations set forth, and when I see the movie, I am completely and
pleasantly surprised. The latter is the case with Ever After, a pleasantly fun
and wonderful retelling of the tale of Cinderella (Grimm, not Disney, so no
pumpkins, sorry).
The story, along with Romeo and Juliet, is probably the most well known love
story of our time. Hence, there is no need for me to outline the plot,
because it follows the tale pretty much to the letter. Nor will I really
spend much time analyzing points and aspects of this movie, because plain and
simply, the surprising charm of this movie, is that it is fun. This is the
most fun I've had in a theater in quite a long time. This differed from how
much I laughed at There's Something About Mary, for the simple of fact that I
didn't feel bad about laughing here. This movie will make you smile, make you
laugh, make you cheer, make you do everything that a fairy tale should. The
story has been told, and retold, but this is the most energetic retelling yet
(Disney's was more romantic, but this one has more humor and fun). The
characters are real, believable. Angelica Huston makes you want to boo her
every appearance on screen (then again she, like Michael Douglas, can do that
in her sleep, but she does it oh so well), Drew makes you want to cheer, or
sigh, as you do for a heroine. The prince (played with confident charming
effectiveness by newcomer Dougray Scott) makes you cheer, and makes the women
envious, and even swoon at times. All of the characters work in the context
of the tale. The king and queen are powerful, yet real, and even the
character who becomes the cupid of the two fate-crossed lovers (won't ruin
the surprise) turns in a wonderfully watchable, comic performance.
You have noticed me mentioning comedy a lot, because therein was where the
surprise lay for me. I didn't expect to laugh as much as I did. It isn't just
slapstick, physical humor either (although that exists) but some rather deep,
intelligent smart humor that I didn't expect. The humor came from all angles,
not even in excess, but rather to keep the movie from getting to serious about
itself. Most of all, this movie never forgot it was a fairy tale. Whenever the
storyline seemed to be getting mushy, intense, or emotional, here came the
humor, or the one-liner, to bring the smile back.
This movie will have the reverse effect of Saving Private Ryan, from this
aspect. When you leave Private Ryan, you feel, as one friend of mine put it,
like you're leaving a funeral. It was depressing, about a depressing and
serious topic. But when Ever After is over, your face will hurt from smiling,
and laughing so much. It makes you (to be cliché) "feel-good". Sure, there
are flaws, Drew's accent slips, historically, they may make some mistakes,
but you know what?. Who cares, it is fun, you can take kids, you can go as
adults and not be ashamed, and you can leave with a smile, and energy in your
heart. My recommendation, give this movie a chance, as soon as possible, you
won't regret it.
See more of my Reel Ramblings at
http://www.angelfire.com/ks/nearside/comingatt.html
-----== Posted via Deja News, The Leader in Internet Discussion ==-----
http://www.dejanews.com/rg_mkgrp.xp   Create Your Own Free Member Forum

Title
Review for Truman Show, The (1998)
I sat in the theater, watching The Truman Show, and I was entertained. It was
smart, very original, a bit thought provoking, sensible, smooth and fun. But
then, a scene..which caused me to sit forward, hands in front of my mouth, in
almost deer-in-headlights astonishment. Suddenly the slight incoherency of
the early parts of this movie made sense, it reminded me of looking at a
Monet..you look at it up close, and it looks nice, but when you step back,
and look at the big picture..the view is truly amazing. This is another
review that was a bit hard to write, not because I wasn't sure what to write,
or if I liked, or disliked it, but rather, I had..have so many thoughts
running through my head regarding this movie, that I could probably create my
own forum from it. It is that kind of movie..makes you tilt your head, like
that RCA dog. Unfortunately, trends have shown that summer movies tend to be
the cinematic equivalent of Chinese food, quickly filling, then forgotten.
However another one of my gauges for a good movie, is if you are talking
about after you leave the theater..does it get inside you, stay with you. The
last few movies to do that for me were Good Will Hunting, Sleepers, and my
favorite..(and still underrated and underappreciated)..Usual Suspects. I have
had so many thoughts regarding all of the different levels that this movie is
on, the in-jokes, the commentary, the emotion, the undertones..so much
happening here, that it very easily could've spun out of control. But Peter
Weir corralled his movie, just as he has Carrey's trademark manic antics, and
keeps the movie flowing evenly. Carrey is effective in his role, by far his
best yet (of course, that isn't really saying too much, kind of like trying
pick a GOOD piece of liver)..but he is good. He is not stifled however, Weir
obviously knows the talent of Carrey, and lets him loose, a few times, for
his comic nature. The difference in that this time, is that it looks natural,
for the first time in a Jim Carrey movie, I felt like I was seeing the real
him..not a character. He was funny, he was sensitive, emotional, running a
gamut of emotions, every one looking sincere. Ed Harris, playing the director
of the show, is magnificent as well (although, if I had to flaw the movie a
tiny bit..he wasn't on screen enough..but then again, when I look back at the
big picture, I can see why). Harris has always had that aura, of gentleness,
with a glint of a dark side hiding in those eyes. He is paternally spooky in
this role, almost seemingly torn between a fatherly bond to Truman, who he's
watched over since birth (a couple of scenes support this emotion)..but also,
he's pure Hollywood, scripting, planning, plotting, and controlling every act
of Truman's life, except Truman himself..then reacting to Truman's actions,
with a calm, controlling manner. As for the other performances, none really
stand out, because of the fact that they are actors, playing actors..and you
never see anything more than the character they are scripted to me. A slight
exception to this is newcomer Natascha McElhone, who plays an unplanned, real
love interest to Truman, but this situation, like every other crisis that
arises..is quickly explained away, and quelled. We see her as a real person
as well. This movie is both intriguing, and dark, funny, but not..and most
disturbing of all, real, and honest. This movie feeds on the public's
fascination with reality based media, showing us how a world reacts to
Truman, just being himself. This is a commentary on what the media has become
today, and what they could be in the future, another step towards an
Orwellian society..more to come probably..
Note to Paramount Marketing Department: One of my criticisms of this movie,
before I had seen it, rested with the studios campaign to market it as a
Carrey- esque comedy, when it is actually far from that..shame on Paramount.
Take a chance, give us some credit, and allow us to like the movie for what
it is..don't deceive the viewers, they line your pockets..be honest, as the
movie is. Do not lure the audience in on the precluse of seeing Ace 3, or
something..and then give them this, granted, there are a few people who will
be pleasantly surprised (example, as I was leaving the theater, someone
stated "That was not what I expected at all...I liked it!) and glad they were
drawn in by the deception, but ultimately, you will taint the films chances,
by not delivering what was expected. Granted, it is good to tease, and not
show all your cards..but there is a great difference between surprise, and
outright deception
See more of my Reel Ramblings at
http://www.angelfire.com/ks/nearside/comingatt.html
-----== Posted via Deja News, The Leader in Internet Discussion ==-----
http://www.dejanews.com/rg_mkgrp.xp   Create Your Own Free Member Forum

Title
Review for Disturbing Behavior (1998)
I should learn to be a bit more leary, and a bit less curious when it comes
to my cinematic choices.  When I was looking through the paper, to see the
movie times for Disturbing Behavior, a disturbing fact came to light.  The
running time of the movie was a paltry 84 minutes.  Barely longer than an
episode of the X-Files.  Knowing the basic plot for this movie, I was a bit
curious as to how they could develop characters, and a plot, and then give
sufficient supporting story, and an effective conclusion.  But being open
minded, and full of wonder, I proceeded ahead.        I should've heeded the signs.
While this is not the worst movie that I've seen this summer (Godzilla and
Armageddon are still "Kings of the Summer" in that category)..this movie does
have it's problems.  It was directed by David Nutter, heretofore, an X-Files
episode director, and the plot rings of a decent, but not totally compelling
episode of the show.  The recipe ingredients start with a mysteriously zombie
like group of "perfect teens" in a small town. Add in the token outsider,
token love interest/rebel/pretty face, a token chilly bad guy,token
mysterious figure, introduced only to fit the conclusion together and a
cliché-filled predictable story. (the sight of feet walking, to build
suspense and mystery only works, when the result is a shock, it never is
here, yet the filmmakers feel the need to drill this premise into the ground,
after a while, I begin saying, to myself, who it was, trying to gain some fun
from this),  blend in some hip, pop culture references (the best of these
being the visualization of Pink Floyd's rebellious cry from Another Brick In
The Wall), Sprinkle in a hip, alternative filled soundtrack and teenage eye
candy, to draw in the adolescent viewers (the obvious desired demographic
here) and In a nutshell, that's the movie.  You see everything that's coming,
you are compelled to watch, trudging through a slow, tension building
development, given hints of deeper meanings, which are never delved on any
further, or even explained, and then, like a TV series, given a quick,
predictable, clean, conclusion, with a tease to "Tune in next week".
It is too bad that this movie doesn't work.  The premise was truly
interesting.  The 1975 cult classic Stepford Wives, was ripe for retouching,
with the right 90s flair.  Mind control, desired perfection, in the right
hands, this could've been a chilling social commentary on parental, and peer
pressure for perfection.  Instead, this is a rushed, forced, predictable
mess.  The movie starts with promise, in an introspective, interesting and
compelling opening scene, the newcomer Marsden, is given a social "tour" of
the school by Gavin (The Man Without A Face's Nick Stahl).  This scene shows
the movie's potential, a struggle to make the perfect class, and the pool of
"others" from whom there is to choose.        The pace and presentation of the
movie are compelling, and intruiging enough to keep you watching (admittedly,
I was not bored, and did keep watching with interest, I liked about the first
10-20 minutes of this).  But once the hand is tipped, like that *snap*, it's
gone. All wrapped up in a nice, sensible, predictable, very sloppily and
hastily delivered finale.  The performances are faceless, nameless even. 
Marsden and Katie Dawson, both adolescent eye candy, are sure to raise the
hormone levels of their respective age-groups.        However, they serve as no
more than puppeteered window dressing.        Bruce Greenwood (an Atom Egoyan
favorite) serves only to create tension, and an evil, chilling presence (want
a better view of this aspect of him, see The Sweet Hereafter).        William
Sadler is usually a watchably maniacally character actor, here, he also seems
only to be filling a position, and never really flexes his known ability
although he, and Stahl do give the movie at least some watchability.  Each
character has a purpose, but is underdeveloped, we don't understand them, and
really don't care.
I felt very cheated by this movie.  The ads showed so much promise, the
beginning teased and hinted of so much more, and then, wham, bam, nothing.  I
sat and stared at the screen, along with a few others, in disbelief of what
had just been done to us.  We all wanted more.        David Nutter must be an
effective television director, to get this chance to make this movie. 
Someone needs to tell him that his chances, and possibilities, increase
proportionally, as the size of the viewing screen does.  Wait for this one on
late night cable. ________________________________________________ See more
of my reviews at http://www.angelfire.com/ks/nearside/comingatt.html
-----== Posted via Deja News, The Leader in Internet Discussion ==-----
http://www.dejanews.com/rg_mkgrp.xp   Create Your Own Free Member Forum

Title
Review for Return to Paradise (1998)
Cast: Anne Heche, Vince Vaughn, Joaquin Phoenix, David Conrad, Jada Pinkett
Smith
Buried somewhere, deep in the recesses of your local multi-plex, lies one of
the true gems of the summer, and of the year so far.   This is surely the most
powerful, and emotional movies I've seen, if not one of the best this year
(Sorry Mr Spielberg, but this movie didn't go for the obvious emotion, but
rather, it let the story tell itself.  It allowed the truth and power of the
story to provide the emotion)
Return To Paradise (based upon the story 1997 story Force Majeure) tells the
tale of an American, (Joaquin Phoenix, River's very talented little brother)
imprisoned in Malaysia on drug charges.   His two friends (Vince Vaughn and
David Conrad), who partied with him there, and then left, are his only hope of
survival.  Buoyed by an American attorney (Anne Heche), the men are given the
choice of returning to Malaysia to commute the American's death sentence, in
exchange for prison time, or having their friend die, and living with it on
their consciences.
I have often complained about the pacing of movies this year.  Whether they
be a bit too slow to develop (my only complaint on H20 ) developing too fast
and spoiling the movie (as in Snake Eyes) or never developing at all (as in a
recent video viewing of the Coen brothers disaster, The Big Lebowski).        As
Return to Paradise plodded along, I began to feel victim to this again.  The
story started slow, developed slowly, and I was afraid that I was in for
another slight letdown.  Although intrigued and entranced to the screen, I
still was waving my hand in the saying "Alright already, get to it".  But
then, something magical happened.  The last 20 minutes of this movie are the
most emotional, and powerful, that I have seen in recent memory.  All of a
sudden, the previous hour and a half plus, made perfect sense.        It developed
the characters, let you know them, reeled you into the plot.  In doing so,
making you care, without even realizing it.
You go through the moral dilemmas of each character.  Vaughn, who is
partially responsible for Phoenix's imprisonment, fights it, and you fight it
with him. Conrad, the calm one, with so much to lose, yet never hesitating,
showing the true power of friendship.  Heche, the impassioned voice, fighting
the ultimate uphill battle, against the friends, and foreign governments. 
But most of all, Phoenix, his life torn apart, his world destroyed, and you
are there with him. From his partying, happy-go-lucky, save the world nature,
directly to the haunting, disturbing visions of his new leaf.  In a foreign
prison, no freedoms, his body rotting away, but his soul, and faith remaining
strong.
This is a look into the various aspects of human nature, in each character,
you see, and relate, to the different stages of how people deal with crisis.
Denial, rejection, desperation, acceptance, all portrayed so eloquently here.
The performances are nothing short of magnificent, and are the main reason
that you care about each person.  Because you know them, you relate to them. 
Heche and Vaughn both give their best performances by far (which says a lot
considering how wonderful Vaughn was in one of my favorite movies, Swingers),
Pinkett (as a nosy, persistent reporter, whose purpose seemed like a
pointless side story, until it all came together), and Conrad give fine
supporting nods as well.  (Ever notice that a good movie, and good
performances around you, can raise the bar?..these two rise to the occasion).
 But the standout here is Phoenix.  If the Academy can remember this movie
come springtime, the least that must be done is to recognize this performance
(and maybe make up for missing Kevin Bacon's masterful prison turn in Murder
in the First).        He has shown flashes of brilliance before (and is making big
brother up in heaven very proud I'm sure) in U-Turn (one of the few watchable
things there) and To Die For (the only watchable thing).  But here, he clears
the bar, and then some. The emotion, the strength, without dialog, you know
exactly what he's saying, what he's feeling..you are in that cell with him. 
The best supporting nod I have seen this year.
When you work on a puzzle, the end result is sometimes unclear, until the
last piece fits in.  But when it does, everything comes together, into focus,
the final picture is truly amazing.  That is what happens here.  Meandering
along, slowly, yet deliberately, creating the powerful stage, where the final
act unfolds.  Then drawing the curtain back suddenly, and grabbing us by the
heart, and staying there.  I thought that the summer movie season may be
dead, and hopeless.  However, with this movie, my faith has been restored. 
Find this one wherever you can, and see it  ($$$$1/2)
Want To See More of My Reviews? Visit
http://www.angelfire.com/ks/nearside/comingatt.html
-----== Posted via Deja News, The Leader in Internet Discussion ==-----
http://www.dejanews.com/rg_mkgrp.xp   Create Your Own Free Member Forum

Title
Review for Avengers, The (1998)
Cast: Ralph Fiennes, Uma Thurman, Sean Connery
Previews: Virus, Pleasantville, Practical Magic, and that travesty of
cinematic justice known as Psycho:The Remake
Ever since I was old enough to appreciate them, the movie preview or
"trailer" as it is known, has always held a fascination with me.  They tease,
they taunt, they tempt, and they try to appeal to something in each
moviegoer, to make them come back to the theater to see it.  Sometimes (like
here) the trailers, are the best part of the movies.  I often get angry when
I miss them, or there aren't enough, or any, trailers attached to a movie.  I
have often stated here, some of the faults that I believe are made in the
trailers, and even the entire marketing campaign of a movie (maybe at some
point, I'll get around to writing my opinion on that in a seperate paper, so
I don't have to keep ranting incessantly in my reviews about them).  Since I
first saw the trailer for The Avengers (last winter, or early Spring, I was
hyped.        Between this, and The Mask of Zorro, my anticipation for summer
action movies was thoroughly piqued, quite early.  The preview is appealing,
action packed, spoofingly humorous, and generally well made.  It is just too
bad that that is all there is to this movie.  All the best parts are in that
preview, and what's left, is a mess
It seems that the makers of this movie, took the trailer, admired it, and
then realized they needed a movie to go along with it, so they pasted some
other scenes in (very sloppily, and inconsistently) and sent it out into the
world. This movie deserved so much better.  My expectations (which lowered
substantially by the refusal to prescreen, and rumoured lack of support from
Connery and Thurman) were still not met.  Now, I do have to say that this is
still not the worst movie of the summer, that title is deeply entrenched in
Big Apple devastation style, by both Godzilla, and Armageddon (with the
lizard winning by one big green nose).        It was nice to look at, had some good
effects. I did like the use and manipulation of the weather as the baddie, (a
stab at El Nino maybe?) but saving those things, I cannot recommend this
movie to others.
The performances, were cardboard, as was most of the movie.  I know it was a
spoof, or take off, of the old British series, for which I was not a fan, so
I cannot fairly compare.  But still, I cannot imagine the series being this
staid and dry.        Fiennes, and Thurman (both Oscar nominees) sleepwalk through
most of this movie, delivering lines with articulate perfection, but still
seeming like they're reading off cue cards, or conspicuously placed scripts. 
Connery (an Oscar winner, and cinematic icon) overacts, and seems not to
believe some of the lines he's reading.  I couldnt wait to see Connery play
the bad guy with his rogueish attitude that he's given his other action
roles.        I am still waiting.  The only truly watchable performance, is the
evil Marcel Marceauian act pulled off by British cross-dressing comedian
Eddie Izzard, who utters only one line, but exudes badness with that look. 
Maybe he should've been the bad guy here instead of Connery.
The Avengers had so much leeway, and room to play, but it could just never
get started.  There were inconsistent scene transitions, pointless plot
details introduced, then dismissed.  There were just too many unforgivable
inconsistencies here to forgive, and yet, like the proverbial traffic
accident, you couldnt really take your eyes off it.  So much potential, so
poor of an execution.  Wait for this one on cable.  The summer movies are
limping home now..is it fall yet, I want Pleasantville, Apt Pupil, and What
Dreams May Come.  Please  ($$)
Want to see more of my reel ramblings?..visit the Nearside at
http://www.angelfire.com/ks/nearside
-----== Posted via Deja News, The Leader in Internet Discussion ==-----
http://www.dejanews.com/rg_mkgrp.xp   Create Your Own Free Member Forum

Title
Review for Saving Private Ryan (1998)
War is hell.  A point that very few, from whatever side of the fence you
reside, will disagree with.  A seemingly pointless, senseless loss of life,
all to attain an objective that they do not understand, or even believe in. 
Anyone who doubts or disputes any of those statements, should sit through a
viewing of Saving Private Ryan.  If you can, and still hold your belief that
war isn't a tragedy, for which the payoff sometimes doesn't seem worth        the
journey, then, I pity you.
Spielberg's vision of war, the most unabashed, undaunting, uninhibited that
I've seen in a while (albeit, not being a fan, nor frequent viewer of war
movies, I can't compare this fairly against them).  The much-talked about
opening scenes, difficult to express in words because of the intensely
emotional vision painted, are worthy of the talk.  They are graphic, tragic,
maybe a bit over the top, but if that is the way that war really was, then I
have an even stronger found respect for those who went through it.  Being a a
veteran of war (albeit comparing my experiences to these, would be like
comparing my one year of Little League, to that of the New York Yankees, by
saying.."Yeah, I played baseball") I can understand and respect some of the
ideals, sentiments,a nd thoughts expressed.  We often wondered (as the
characters do) what's the purpose, is it worth it, questions, that have been
asked through time, and may never have an answer, but this movie tries.
It is brutally honest, straightforward, it is drawn out at times, overly
emotional and lingering at others.  It pulls no punches, reaches into your
soul and brings you there, makes you feel it.  The sounds are all around you,
the visions are exquisite (kudos to cinematographer Jarusz Kaminski, this
movie looks amazing, with some memorable shots), the horror of it all, right
in your lap.
The story involves a team of soldiers, sent to retrieve the lone surviving
brother, of 4, who is somewhere in France during the Normandy invasion of
1944.  Granted, you know what's going to happen, but you just don't know how,
and that is where this movie succeeds.        You are stuck, on the journey, like
it, or not, and the only resolution, is to complete the mission.
The performances, are thoroughly effective as well.  Hanks, is, well, he's
Tom Hanks, he can do epics in his sleep, and he turns another effectively
emotional, but not overly mind blowing (see Forrest Gump) performance. The
remainder of the group, Tom Sizemore, in the best performance yet of his
career, as the loyal grizzled sidekick.  Edward Burns, the talented actor-
director (see Brothers McMullen) as a the required tough Brooklyn-ite (do all
war movies need the token New Yorker) pulls off the doubting Thomas role with
a street tough sentiment.  Of course the hunk-o-the-moment Matt Damon, who
really isn't given much to do, but has an effective presence, and some well-
placed cameos from Ted Danson, and Paul Giamatti (on a role since Howard
Stern phone-whipped him in Private Parts) keep the movie flowing.  But the
kudos in this one, goto a trio of unknowns, Jeremy Davies (The Locusts) as
the reluctant interpreter, Giovanni Ribisi, as the emotional medic, and Barry
Pepper as the sniper, with God on his side.  These three young stars make a
presence, and add to the emotional intensity of this movie, by being
seemingly the most real of the group.
Clocking in at just under three hours, you tend to lose yourself a bit, but
that's the way war was, it was long, it was tiring, and it wasn't pretty or
simple.  This movie is not for the weak of heart, or stomach.  It will
effective reach inside you, leave a bit of itself in you afterwards.  Is it
the best movie of the summer, probably not, as some will say..I won't jump on
the Oscar bandwagon yet, too early.  But in a summer full of brainless,
plotless, emotionless wastes of celluloid, this one stands out as an
effective, if not educational and emotional, way to spend an afternoon.  I
would suggest this one be viewed on the big-screen, in all it's epic glamour.
See more of my Reel Ramblings at
http://www.angelfire.com/ks/nearside/comingatt.html
-----== Posted via Deja News, The Leader in Internet Discussion ==-----
http://www.dejanews.com/rg_mkgrp.xp   Create Your Own Free Member Forum

Title
Review for 54 (1998)
Cast: Ryan Phillippe, Salma Hayek, Mike Myers,
Previews: Ronin, Rounders, A Civil Action
The late 70's and early 80s was a period of decadence.        Also, the end of
innocence as we now know it.  It was our last dance, our chance to be wild,
crazy, uninhibited, before the specter of AIDS unknowingly came down upon us.
I was a child of this decade, I lived through the hostage crisis, fuel
shortages, and yes...even disco.  Recently, Hollywood has grasped to relive
this era, via the movies.  Films like Boogie Nights, The Wedding Singer and
The Last Days of Disco have tried to recreate the attitude and essence, of a
time that some don't want to remember.        Some people are not proud of their
actions then, responding to questions with the response of..."Yeah, I lived
through it" and nothing more. In the annals of these dark decadent days, lies
the legend of Studio 54.  Steve Rubell's non-stop party, the place where the
rich, and average, stripped away their social titles, and just had fun,
ignorant of the consequences.
This was a legend that was ripe for a good retelling, it had sex, scandal,
reckless abandon, stars, drugs, and a complete and total lack of basic
morality.  Why then, is this telling of the story so boring.  You would think
that a movie about the one place on earth where nothing was taboo,   and the
people who inhabited it, would be a story of never-ending energy.  But alas,
this movie falls flat, very flat.  The reason..the characters, and the script.
I didn't care what happened to the characters, because I didn't care about
them.  The director tried to cram so many stories down your throat, that he
never bothered to develop any of them, so that we could care.
Also, the music, the one thing that most people of that era remember, is the
music.  The lemming-like infectiousness of such songs as YMCA, Hot Stuff, and
Don't Leave Me This Way, made disco memorable, if not despised, by most back
then.  But 54 fails miserably to cash in on the current retro trend.  The
Wedding Singer, Grosse Pointe Blank, and Romy and Michelle's HS Reunion
succeeded in this facet.
It is hard to judge the performances, because the script is do devoid of any
cohesiveness.  Ryan Phillippe, (I Know What You Did Last Summer's pretty
blond stud-o-the-moment) has nowhere near the acting ability to carry this
film (He should contact Mark Wahlberg, for "80s Movie-Acting Lessons
101")..you, my son, are definitely no John Travolta. He seems more concerned
with flexing his ab's, and grooming his blond locks, then actually acting.
Salma Hayek is radiant, and oozes sexuality, but she, along with husband
Breckin Meyer are given too many stories, and not enough smart dialog to make
us care. The biggest waste in this movie is Neve Campbell, not because of her
performance, as much as her purpose in the movie.  She has about 15 minutes
of screen time, and seems to serve only two purposes really.  One, to draw
hormonal teens, Scream fans, and Party- of-Fivers in, and Two, to be the
obligatory love interest.  Short of those, I fail to see the relevance of he
character here at all.        Also, an underplayed, undeveloped appearance, by the
very talented Heather Matarazzo (Welcome To The Dollhouse), who steals every
scene with Phillippe, and maybe, if more of the focus was here, we would've
cared more.
The true star, and shining moment of this movie, is Myers. He played his part
perfect, made you forget you were watching Wayne, or Austin Powers.  It made
me wish he was given a better script or story to flex his dramatic muscle
with. His portrayal of Rubell, in his pallid, sickly, yet relaxed exuberance,
was very well done, and for those who knew, or met Rubell, may bring back
some haunting images. His presence onscreen, is the only time the movie is
even mildly interesting.
Boogie Nights set the standard for movies aiming to show the decadence of
this era, and succeeded because it never tried to be too much, and made us
care, and empathize with each character.  That is this movie's greatest
failure.  A pointed analogy occurs near the climax of this movie, which was a
bit cheesy, but did make it's point.  Indeed, the party is truly over, wait
for cable, and hustle, bump and busstop, in the privacy of your own home.($$)

-----== Posted via Deja News, The Leader in Internet Discussion ==-----
http://www.dejanews.com/rg_mkgrp.xp   Create Your Own Free Member Forum
