Authors
J. Marty
Number of Reviews
2

Title
Review for Star Wars: Episode I - The Phantom Menace (1999)
     To paraphrase the Book of Psalms: "Lucas, Lucas, why have you forsaken
us?"
     That could well be said of George Lucas' latest attempt at cinema, THE
PHANTOM MENACE. After a 22-year break, ol' Georgie Porgie returns once again to
direct a STAR WARS film. Unfortunately, the Force seems to be no longer with
him. The 1977 debut film A NEW HOPE was easily a celluloid masterpiece and has
earned its rightful place in Hollywood immortality. But in 1999, like a pale
shadow of the original, came THE PHANTOM MENACE. If A NEW HOPE was filet
mignon, then THE PHANTOM MENACE is just a little above Hamburger Helper.
     And now, breakdown:
PLOT: One of the greatest things about A NEW HOPE was its devilishly basic
story: an evil Empire, led by the merciless warlord Darth Vader, kidnaps
Princess Leia Organa of Alderaan, and it's up to a farm boy, a smuggler, a
Wookiee, a Jedi Knight, and two droids to rescue her and also defeat a massive
planet-destroying superweapon, the Death Star! THE PHANTOM MENACE, on the other
hand, has a plot that goes something like this: Two Jedi Knights arrive as Old
Republic ambassadors to a blockade by the greedy Trade Federation of the planet
Naboo, ruled by the 14-year-old Queen Amidala who is trying to appeal to the
Republican Senate on Coruscant which is filled with corruption, etc. 
     What?! This is the movie's single greatest flaw - the fact that Lucas,
disregarding the time-honored aphorism that less is more, has crammed every
last inkling of plot he can into what is supposed to be a simple space opera
for kids from 4 to 94. Whatever happened to the gee-whiz, tried-and-true sci-fi
formula that was employed - and worked to maximum effect - in 1977? If it ain't
broke, George, then don't fix it. Unfortunately, he did.
CHARACTERS: Many of the characters in this movie are so bland that you actually
don't care when bad things happen to them. The most likable character by far is
Qui-Gon Jinn (Liam Neeson), a courageous yet earnest Jedi Knight who leads his
companions into battle and is also responsible for the discovery of young
Jedi-to-be Anakin Skywalker (Jake Lloyd). A classic hero, Qui-Gon radiates
charisma, personality, and good humor - much more than could be said for any of
the other characters.
     Obi-Wan Kenobi, the wise old Jedi in the original films, is here portrayed
by Ewan McGregor as a whiny Gen-Xer who questions everything. Though he is more
level-headed in some ways than his master Qui-Gon, I couldn't help thinking
that Ewan really needed to loosen up in his performance as the young Jedi. His
brooding demeanor really brought the role down. 
     Could somebody please tell me why Queen Amidala (Natalie Portman) the
mother of the dynamic duo of Luke Skywalker and Princess Leia, seems more like
a department store mannequin than a monarch? She's actually kind of creepy,
with a makeup job like Marcel Marceau and an accent like Nikita Krushchev. That
flat, emotionless voice got so boring after a while that I kept hoping she'd
burp or get the hiccups or something - anything to break up the monotony. Her
costumes were ridiculous and she could have gotten rich donating the whole lot
to museums. And to top it all off, she is even more grim than the somber
Obi-Wan and waits until the film is 75 percent over before finally cracking a
real smile.
     And then there's the boy. Granted, Anakin Skywalker is a tough role to do
and you can't usually expect an Oscar-caliber performance out of a 10-year-old.
But Jake Lloyd's take on the child hero was a little too cute. At some points,
it was so syrupy that you could have drowned a thousand flapjacks in it. Are we
to believe that a child shrewd enough to speak alien languages and build
machines all by his lonesome would respond to a joyful situation with an
insipid "Yippee!"? And I know this movie was pure fantasy, but Lucas threatened
to stretch our credulity to the breaking point by having Anakin win (let alone
survive) a treacherous pod race and by also having him blow up a gigantic space
station without ever having been in such a battle before (if I could have done
that at his age, my fame would have been celebrated by the carving of my face
on Mount Rushmore). Overall, I find the idea of the little rugrat one day
becoming the notorious supervillain Darth Vader a little hard to swallow. Maybe
he just has a little more growing up to do.
     Mesa no liked Jar Jar Binks (Ahmed Best). A member of the amphibious
Gungan species native to Naboo's swamps and lakes, Jar Jar spends the entire
movie clowning around and speaking even worse English than Yoda (Frank Oz). His
antics, while gut-bustingly hilarious, become so prevalent that they distract
the audience from everything else that is going on in the movie (and there's a
lot going on, believe me). I realize that Jar Jar was supposed to be a
substitute for Chewbacca the Wookiee in the earlier films, but the correlation
isn't quite as accurate as Lucas intended. Chewie may have been comical at
times, but at least he had authentic human qualities (such as loyalty to Han
Solo or anger at Lando Calrissian's apparent betrayal of Han). Jar Jar, on the
other hand, is just a clueless buffoon. Other than bringing the Gungans and the
humans of Naboo together in a grand alliance against the Trade Federation (a
feat which must really be attributed to Queen Amidala), Jar Jar does nothing
except do his best Bob Marley imitation, hoping that that alone will suffice as
comic relief.
OTHER STUFF: The inconsistencies between THE PHANTOM MENACE and the original
films are legion. Why is it that practically every alien species in TPM speaks
English while Yoda and Admiral Ackbar were the only Anglophone characters in
the originals? How come the Jedi Knighs in TPM all know tae kwon do when
martial arts were never used by Luke and the gang? And what on God's green
earth was Lucas thinking when he decided that the Force should be the
by-product of Jedi cooties rather than a mysterious energy field?
     The special effects also bugged me. Sure, they were spectacular. But that
was precisely the problem. The STAR WARS movies have always been remembered for
their uncompromising realism in creating the look and feel of science fiction,
so making the effects too fanciful somehow takes the edge off Lucas'
distinctive atmosphere. Besides, too much striving to keep up with technology
only tends to date the films. Young people who saw THE PHANTOM MENACE and who
grew up after the 1970s and '80s will eventually see the original films and
dismiss them as outdated, pre-CGI schlock. Not only that, but later generations
will likewise look at this film and find the effects to be a product of their
time.
FINAL THOUGHTS: As a self-confessed STAR WARS geek, I am overjoyed to see the
greatest fantasy phenomenon in movie history return to the big screen. But as a
film historian and movie purist, I can only evaluate THE PHANTOM MENACE
according to its superior predecessors. No matter how good a STAR WARS film is
nowadays, it's invariably going to be compared to the 1977-1983 trilogy, which
will always be the first and foremost in moviegoers' hearts. Alas, THE PHANTOM
MENACE, which is supposed to be a prequel and a mere prelude to the grandeur to
come, has the crippling aura of "remake" about it. When something has been done
right the first time, sometimes it is best to just leave it alone.      

Title
Review for Batman Returns (1992)
     Every summer, Hollywood makes like the Millennium Falcon and goes into
hyperdrive. Movies of the sci fi/fantasy/action genre come through the pike in
droves. Inevitably (and unfortunately), one of these movies is almost certainly
what I like to call an "Achilles" movie.
     Everyone with a high school diploma knows who Achilles was. In Homer's
"Iliad," he was the Greek warrior who was indestructible except for his heel.
Though formidable, he could be downed as soon as someone exploited his weak
spot (the proverbial heel).
     Tim Burton's BATMAN RETURNS is a great movie that just happens to have
multiple Achilles' heels. I saw this movie in the theater with my family on
Friday, July 10, 1992. I was eleven years old, and the movie just blew me away.
It was one of the most spectacular experiences I had ever had. I didn't know at
the time that the movie version contrasted sharply with the DC Comics slant on
Batman, and I didn't care. I thought the movie was so much fun that I was
drawing cartoons of the movie's characters and quoting the lines months after
the movie left theaters.
     Now, eight years later, my view of this masterpiece has changed. It is
still extraordinary good. But, as befits an "Achilles" movie, it has many minor
flaws that, taken collectively, tarnish the film's luster considerably.
     Let's break this movie down:
PLOT (spoiler-free): This movie takes place at Christmastime (which is bizarre,
considering that it was released at the height of the summer solstice). Unlike
in the Bruce Willis movie DIE HARD, however, Christmas actually plays an
important role in RETURNS. Batman (Michael Keaton) is back, and this time he's
gotta contend with three menacing foes: The Penguin (Danny DeVito), an aquatic
bird-man who wants to be the mayor of Gotham City (that'll be the day);
Catwoman (Michelle Pfeiffer), a whip-cracking vigilante who is Batman's first
major female opponent; and Max Shreck (the excellent Christopher Walken), a
smarmy industrialist whose 18-century hairdo makes him look just like the James
Bond villain from A VIEW TO A KILL (whom Walken also played; keep branching
out, Chris). Good ol' Max, currently enjoying his status as "Gotham's own Santa
Claus," plots to use his influence to get The Penguin elected mayor. Once that
is accomplished, Shreck will make the helpless populace of Gotham bow before
him by...no, I can't spoil it for you. It's just too campy and hilarious! Let's
just say it's something similar to what Montgomery Burns (Homer's boss on "The
Simpsons" would do). Meanwhile, Catwoman has a vendetta against Shreck because
he...nope, once again you'll just have to find out by watching the movie. So
she sets out to ruin him, only to have Batman on her tail. So she pays a visit
to The Penguin and his nefarious Red Triangle Circus Gang (yeah, I know, it
sounds cheesy, but wait 'til you see these guys!) and now The Penguin has to
juggle his two agendas: getting elected and getting Batman framed for murder
(and then murdered himself).  The entire plot is now in place, and the rest of
the movie is filled with a tangled labyrinth of loyalties and betrayals that
most people under the age of 12 won't be able to understand (though the
subplots do keep the narrative interesting!).
     No doubt about it, the plot of RETURNS is intriguing. Unfortunately, it is
burdened by too many anomalies and flaws in logic. (Now we'll get to a few of
the "heels" I was talking about) How could anyone, after being a recluse for
three decades, become a seasoned politician after "rescuing" a baby and hooking
up with some rich twit? How come the villain's henchmen always know where he is
going to be, even when he doesn't tell them? And why, at the movie's climax,
does The Penguin nearly drown and then magically arise from the water a few
minutes later? (He must've been holding his breath really long.)
     Another problem with the plot is that it's much too complex, what with the
entire cast of characters fighting amongst themselves to see who can steal the
movie. Batman and his alter ego Bruce Wayne almost become bit players in their
own movie as a cat, a bird, and an old man with white hair all upstage him. A
little more digging around inside Batman's head would have improved RETURNS
considerably. Unfortunately, Keaton just plays the character as a mindless,
Rambo-style action Jackson who lashes out at the bad guys mercilessly. He even
kills some of the members of the aforementioned circus gang along the way. This
is a hero? Burton desperately tries to soften up the Caped Crusader toward the
end, but it's a lukewarm effort. Batman ultimately seems to be only a little
more moral than the villains - which brings us to...
CHARACTERS: Danny DeVito, why did you do it? Say it ain't so! Oh wait, I can't
blame you; I can only blame the filmmakers who shoehorned you into this role.
Burton and his team took the wonderful character of The Penguin and perverted
him, changing him from a suave, handsome schemer into Jabba the Hutt in a
tuxedo. DeVito appears in whiteface and black lipstick, with seal-like flippers
for hands and a gut that is so large it's surprising he doesn't have a
coronary. Plus, our dastardly villain has a penchant for drooling, eating raw
fish, biting people in the face, and making off-color jokes. It's horrible!
Burton apparently didn't take into account the simple fact that a good villain
isn't just evil; he has to be appealing to the audience. Besides, I think it
was a mistake to cast DeVito simply because of his short frame and girth. Many
other great actors (Marlon Brando, for instance) could have played The Penguin
with just the right mixture of savagery and gloomy introspection, nailing the
frightening yet sympathetic performance DeVito was obviously aiming for. In all
fairness, DeVito's Penguin is delightfully witty and over-the-top at moments -
a pale shadow of Burgess Meredith's take on the character.    
     I cannot say enough good things about Michelle's Catwoman performance,
however. Easily the best player in the movie, she takes on a multifaceted
character eagerly and ultimately succeeds. Anger, sadness, humor, sex appeal,
raw physical power - you'll find all that and more in Pfeiffer's take on the
movie's only major female character. Yet the characterization gets murky at
times. You begin to wonder what actually drives Catwoman. Is she really out for
revenge, or does she just enjoy being bad? And, like Batman, Catwoman is not a
killer. (Watch the movie's end to see what I mean.) And did we really need to
see her drinking milk straight from the carton or eating a live canary (a stunt
obviously inspired by The Penguin's taste for raw fish)? Overall, though, she
comes out on top and is the second-best Bat-villain of all (Jack Nicholson's
Joker being number one, of course).
     Finally, we have the Shreckmeister. He's a great character, a stock
villain for the audience to boo and hiss at. Unfortunately, he comes to
dominate the movie a little too much. And that's not good, because for all his
posturing he really isn't meaty enough to be the main bad guy. He's kind of
pathetic, too. He gets kidnapped by The Penguin (twice!) and roughed up by both
The Bat and The Cat. Interestingly, in the first draft of the movie's script he
was supposed to be The Penguin's long-lost brother; that's a fascinating
concept and it should have been played up in the shooting script. Not only
would it have given Walken a "raison d'etre" for being in the film, but it
would have also fleshed out Max Shreck and made him less of a stereotype.
Still, Walken is tons of fun to watch.
     The rest of the cast is pretty much filler. Alfred Pennyworth (Michael
Gough), Bruce Wayne's amiable butler and a welcome bringer of light to all the
chaos in Gotham, sadly gets little screen time. Commissioner James Gordon (Pat
Hingle) continues to be the bumbling old fossil he was in the 1989 film. Cristi
Conaway plays a girl who dies because of Batman's incompetence, while Paul
Reubens and Diane Salinger are The Penguin's heartless parents. I must admit I
had a blast watching the antics of the Red Triangle Gang, though! Vincent
Schiavelli, John Strong, Rick Zumwalt, Travis McKenna, and other talented
performers (some of them real-life circus people) add a wickedly funny
dimension to the movie with their freakish costumes and in-your-face attitudes.
The scene where they surprise a crowd of Gothamites by boisterously leaping out
of a giant Christmas present is simply priceless, and will have you laughing
and quaking with fear at the same time.
OTHER STUFF: There were a lot of things in this movie I liked. The music was
stirring and exhilirating thanks to the master composer Danny Elfman. The sets
were impressive (wait 'til you see the smiling cat head!) and the special
effects were much better than in the 1989 original. The costumes were likewise
a joy to behold. Batman is a true dark angel in his black armor, and Catwoman's
costume is simultaneously beautiful and dangerous. The Penguin sports his
familiar top hat and monocle, though in many scenes he opts for a rather
subdued look that didn't do anything for me. And, just as in the original,
Burton fiddles around with the space-time continuum until Gotham City is a
mélange of radically different eras, folkways, and sensibilities. In what other
movie could you see people in 1940s fashions using computers and CD-ROMs?
FINAL THOUGHTS: I still enjoy BATMAN RETURNS as much as I did on that magical
day in July. I've only seen it a few times since then, but a lot of the glamor
and imagery remains ingrained in my consciousness. Sadly, though, I really
can't give the same glowing evaluation of it now as I did when I was younger.
It's a splendid work of art, but, like Achilles, a few heels keep it from being
outstanding. Still, it is an exciting action/adventure movie in its own right
and even tops its 1989 predecessor at some points. Can't wait to see it again! 
