Authors
Thomas Hilton
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Man on the Moon (1999)
Several years ago Milos Forman glorified the despicable Larry Flynt in
a move that was both phony and inaccurate. Now here we go again! Not
nearly as contemptible as Flynt, Andy Kaufman was a non-star and
manipulater and in many ways himself contemptible. But with Forman, who
cares about facts when he has a movie and agenda to get across?
Andy Kaufman made occasional guest appearances on Saturday Night Live
in the Seventies; he was not a guest host. A few of his routines were
mildly amusing such as the Mighty Mouse lip synch or the Elvis
impersonation coming out of the Latka character. He then went on to a
small role on the "Taxi" TV series as Latka - a one-note semi-joke
built into a character, and that was contrived. After that he did
appearances elsewhere.
Perhaps the most infamous of those appearances was on ABC's "Fridays"
in 1981. That show was a very good Saturday Night Live clone that was
unfortunately killed for Ted Koppell's program; that clearly was
cost-cutting by ABC. Kaufman guest hosted and did all he could to screw
things up by blowing lines, ad libbing in inappropriate places and
generally making a jerk of himself. The cast looked embarrassed and
producer Jack Burns (formerly part of a comedy team) attacked him on
air. There was subsequently a running deal about Kaufman apologizing on
air and coming back, ad nauseam.
There may be some question if the cast of "Fridays" was in on this, but
Burns pulled his punches and clearly WAS in on it. And I have that on
video. All Kaufman was doing was deliberately and with great
calculation jerking around the audience and viewers with this phony act
of chaos. AND THAT WAS KAUFMAN'S SPECIALITY.
He played mind games on audiences again and again, and the second most
notorious piece of his schtick was boasting about beating women in
wrestling - and then doing so. He once took on an extremely athletic
Playboy centerfold named Susan Smith - and Andy needed a quick count
from the ref to get a win. More mind games. When he took on a
professional male wrestler he got pile-driven head first into the mat -
and then walked around whining with a collar on for an allegedly
damaged neck. By then Kaufman had zero credibility.
His playing with the audience's head ended with a rare form of lung
cancer that killed him; he didn't smoke. The jerking around of the
audience may have been an "in" joke to some - those who knew it was an
act - but even at that level it had worn very thin. For other viewers
it was cheap manipulation; style over substance. Kaufman was usually
booed, and when smacked in the face by the wrestler who allegedly
"injured" him on late night TV people cheered.
But now Forman has tried to make him some sort of inspired hero ahead
of his time, in the Lenny Bruce mold. But he and Bruce were minor even
in their own times.
Clearly Jim Carrey feels an affinity to Kaufman as they both have the
same birthday. But Carrey, who often mugs and overacts painfully, is
far more talented and accomplished already than Kaufman ever was.
Perhaps people need to find idols and icons.
The movie itself features all of Kaufman's "comedy" bits well
impersonated by Carrey. It jumps from one to another and is itself
style over substance. I never did figure out why Kaufman did what he
did. Were the mind games that he thought of a form of comedy and
entertainment - or a substitute for creativity and talent? He may have
thought them creative; most people at the time did NOT. Why did he feel
the need to play with people's heads at all? The question was never
answered for me.
If you were that minority of people from two decades ago who liked
Kaufman you will love this movie. If you are gullible enough to believe
the Forman version of facts and think Kaufman's stylistic antics were
truly creative, well, you'll like the film too - and I'll bet they
could also be sold the Brooklyn Bridge.
* Sent from RemarQ http://www.remarq.com The Internet's Discussion Network *
The fastest and easiest way to search and participate in Usenet - Free!
