Authors
Deepak Singh
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Crash (1996)
Plot Summary: James Ballard (played by James Spader) and his partner Catherine 
(played by Deborah Unger) have numerous sexual liaisons with each other and 
with other people.  Driving home one night, James is involved in a car 
accident with Dr. Helen Remington (played by Holly Hunter).  Both have 
sustained major injuries and they are drawn together by the activities of 
Vaughan (played by Elias Koteas), a photographer who delights in capturing the 
essence, both spiritually and sexually, of renowned car crashes by re-enacting 
them or staging them.  But how long can this deadly lifestyle last?
Watching CRASH was quite a cinematic experience.  As far as I know, it was 
shown in only one Melbourne cinema (the Lumiere) and the theatre I saw it in 
could probably house a hundred people maximum.  Reading press clippings about 
mass walkouts in Cannes and banishment from movie screens in South Australia 
and Western Australia added to the intrigue.  The movie itself contains very 
extreme and disturbing scenes but largely insulated by its incendiary world, 
has a surrealistic look and feel.  Yet, I came out of CRASH feeling rather 
uneasy and too dissatisfied for my liking.
The main reason for this is that too much of CRASH is images.  While they are 
filmed beautifully and expertly, the large absence of a plot structure fails 
to deliver on the power these images could have provoked.  While the high 
prevalence of sex scenes may cater for the horndogs of the audience, there 
isn't enough meat in the story to justify their multitude and to satisfy the 
more cerebral among us.
The strength of CRASH was the effective portrayal of the dark and forbidding 
world the characters inhabit.  Most scenes take place at night with the 
daytime scenes clouded with atmospheric grime from factors such as the heavy 
traffic, among the few external intrusions in this insular lifestyle.  Music 
plays a subtly important role here, its occasional infusion is used for the 
more critical scenes. 
CRASH is quite a mixed bag.  It's images and cinematography are second-to-none 
and cast a uniquely nightmarish and decadent light on one of society's more 
ordinary pastimes.  However, the rather thin plot provides no support to 
effectively convey the power of these images.  This especially renders many of 
the sex scenes superfluous and redundant.  While director David Cronenberg has 
the elements to weave a truly compelling and unique tale, the combined effort 
doesn't quite gel together properly.
A copy of this review will appear at my movie review page at
        http://www.labyrinth.net.au/~dvsin/Movies
