Authors
P Douglas Reeder
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Johnny Mnemonic (1995)
In summary: fairly good cyberpunk action adventure.
     Keanu Reeves (playing Johnny) does a fine job on a character
without any great depth.  Jane (sorry, I can't remember the actress's
name) is fine as a romantic interest, which is how the character in the
movie is written, but is not unduly plausible as a bodyguard.  Ice-T,
playing the head of the Lo-Teks (which are aren't that low of tech) is
fine, mostly because he doesn't have that many lines.  He has the right
visual appearance to carry the character.
     Costuming and sets are well done, convincing, and (where
appropriate) tasteful.  (The sets look properly futuristic, though we
all know that the future is going to look a lot like the present, only
with better computer graphics.  The cyberspace sequences are
esthetically pleasing and not overdone, i.e. don't take up an excessive
amount of screen time.  Perhaps the most convincing scene is Johhny
wearing data gloves and a VR headset, making motions that seem very
plausible to manipulate things in cyberspace.
     The screenplay is a good adaptation of the short story, and uses
all the short story elements well, adding some elements that fit well,
such as a degenerative nerve disease.  There is some gore, but not
overly much, especially for a current action-adventure movie.  No sex,
and not more than a flash of nudity., and only one kiss, not too
steamy.  This is good, because it wouldn't work, not without radically
changing the characters.  As it is, Jane is too sentimental to be
convincing as a bodyguard.
     The movie doesn't get any deeper than the action-adventure level,
though I can't think of any particularly obvious way it could.  I
suppose the main characters could have been a bit deeper.  The
supporting characters are well done, having personality.  Johnny's most
revealing scene is where he says he wants his shirts pressed like they
are at the Imperial Hotel in Tokyo.  How deep!  Jane, we have no idea
why she is what she is now or how she got there.  Okay, that's
definitely a missed opportunity.
