Authors
Raul Cairo
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Malcolm X (1992)
     It is difficult to insult or even to belittle a director such as
Spike Lee.  It is also very difficult to talk negatively about what is
the best film Spike has directed to date; however, Spike's latest
attempt into the art of cinema is something less than is to be desired.  
     Spike is bringing to life the story of a man who was everything 
he wanted to be, but realized somewhere along his life that he did not
know who he truly was.  After seeing MALCOM X I felt like I had just
ran a marathon rather than coming out from seeing a movie.  The longest
3 hours and 22 minutes of my life occurred while I watched MALCOM X.  I
truly, truly, deep in my heart feel that this movie could have been
great, just as long as this movie would be shorter.  
     The only big major flaw that this movie suffers from is that 
Spike Lee concentrated too long on Malcom's life before he started to
preach the Muslim faith.  Everyone knows the hard hitting speechs of
Malcom and this movie should have concentrated just on his faith, his
going into the Muslim faith and following the words of Elijah
Muhhoamid, and then later being turned away.  
     To me personally the important aspects of the movie was everything
that happened to Malcom after he comes out of jail, and it is there
that the movie should have begun.  
     I don't wish to knock the directing, or even the acting.  Denzel 
Washington gives the performance of his life, in what could be the most 
important role of his life, bringing the spirit of Malcom X back to
life.  And Spike Lee has definitely poured his heart and soul into this
project, however the one mistake he made was to drag out this life
story, as well as drag out this film.  But if one thing you can
definitely realize with this film is that Spike Lee has such an
admiration for this guy, that he was capable enough to go to the limits
in making this film and for that I do commend him.  In short, on a scale
of 1 to 10 I would have to give it a 6 for the fabulous directing, and 
for Washington's perfect portrayal of the civil rights activist.  But
this is fair warning if you are easily bored or even twitchy while you
watch a film, you should really think twice before you go and see this
film.
