Authors
Boyd Petrie
Number of Reviews
35

Title
Review for Titanic (1997)
Titanic (1997)
Rated PG-13 for disaster related peril and violence, nudity, sensuality, and some language.
----------  Out of 4 stars: **** (4 Stars)
Starring: Leonardo DiCaprio, Kate Winslet, Billy Zane, Kathy Bates, Gloria Stuart, Danny Nucci, Bernard Hill,
David Warner, Bill Paxton, Frances Fisher, Jonathan Hyde.
First off, I have been waiting for TITANIC to be released into theaters ever since I first heard they were
making it.  Hearing James Cameron would direct, I was a little worried that he would turn it into an action
film.  I felt that the maiden voyage of the R.M.S. Titanic had more going for it than action, and it deserved
more respect (not that I'm saying the action genre isn't respectful... or maybe I am).  Upon seeing the first
previews of the film (over a year ago), I realized that Cameron had created something that has to be seen.  It
wasn't going to be an action film, but a romantic love story revolving around the Titanic's disastrous voyage.
And then, come July, and I heard the worst news of the year--TITANIC was being pushed to December.  I was
incredibly disappointed, but the film's trailers still loomed in my mind.  December 19 was approaching fast,
but it seemed to take forever.
And then it hit theaters.  I bought tickets the night before, just to make sure I had them.  The film's title
appeared in big, bold letters against an oceanic background.  I let out a small cheer for myself and the film.
For over three hours, I sat in my seat, spellbound.  There really are no words to describe it.  This is an
experience one must see to believe.  The trailers make it look like an action-packed, visual-effects filled
story that had a romance story as a subplot.  Instead, the sinking of the Titanic is the subplot, while the
romance becomes the film's center.  On exiting the theater (and wiping away the tears), I overheard comments
from an audience member who thought it was going to be a disaster film filled with peril and death.  This was
a rather tasteless remark, and I wanted to turn to him and ask him if he had ever seen any of the previews.
However, he was partially right... it is filled with death and peril.  But only for the final hour or so.
TITANIC begins deep under the ocean (over two and half miles below the surface).  The dark blue surrounds the
camera's view, and then a light in the background appears.  Several small submarines move in the darkness
(reminiscent of Cameron's THE ABYSS) and the light shines upon a "ghost ship coming out of the darkness."
What's so remarkable about this scene is that these shots are actual footage of the real Titanic.  Cameron
shot this footage, taking shots from inside the ship with small vessels attached to cables.  The head of these
excursions into the Titanic is led by Brock Lovett (Bill Paxton), an explorer hoping to find a valuable
diamond which was believed to be aboard the ship.  Instead of finding the diamond, they find a safe full of
drawings and other rotted paper.  One of these drawings is of a nude woman, who happens to be wearing the
diamond, appropriately called The Heart of the Sea.
Showing the picture on the TV, Lovett receives a phone call from Rose Calvert (Gloria Stuart), who claims to
be the woman in the picture.  She is flown in, where she begins to tell a story about a woman, Rose DeWitt
Butaker (Kate Winslet).  Rose is a 17 year old girl being forced to marry a man she does not love.  This man
is Cal Hockley (Billy Zane), a rich eccentric with more love for his money than Rose.  Calvert's story begins
with these two arriving at the farewell of the R.M.S. Titanic, nicknamed "The Unsinkable."  The first class
members board with pets and luggage, while third class members need to be checked for lice and other diseases
before boarding.  A poor artist, Jack Dawson (Leonardo DiCaprio), wins a ticket for third class during a poker
game.  His friend, Fabrizio De Rossi (Danny Nucci), also boards in order to escape to America.  Shortly after
the ship leaves the dock, Jack spots Rose standing on the first class level.  Rose is so miserable with her
engagement that she runs to the edge of the boat to commit suicide.  Jack stops her, and the two begin a
friendship which later turns into a passionate affair.
As all this is going on, the ship itself is being pushed to its limits.  Considered to be the fastest and
largest moveable manmade object, one passenger, Bruce Ismay (Jonathan Hyde), wants Captain E.J. Smith (Bernard
Hill) to break the speed record.  Against fair warnings, the Captain complies and pushes the ship to full
power.  This, of course, leads to the demise of the Titanic.  The sinking of the Titanic is by far the most
exhilarating moments I have ever seen on screen.  The awesome grandeur of this sequence is perfect film
making.  Sure, there may be a couple moments where the special effects waver, but that is not important to the
story or to Cameron.  The incredible suspense that amounts is more than any other film this year, surpassing
the terrific CONTACT's transportation moment.  I thought I had seen everything, from the White House
exploding, to the destruction of an entire city.  But I had never seen anything like this.  The energy this
scene creates alone would power any other film.  But TITANIC has much more to offer than any other film.  It
combines humor, romance, action, suspense, and sex into one incredible motion picture that defies explanation.
Of course, TITANIC's central aspect is the love story between Jack and Rose, and the crush it has on Cal.  The
romantic story isn't original, but this is not a bad thing.  Cameron re-invents the story to fit the time
period and its characters.  Everything fits perfectly, with nothing ever seeming contrived or awkward.  Jack's
immediate interest in Rose, and Rose likewise, is completely understandable.  She is suffering emotionally,
and Jack is there to support her.  Themes from Romeo and Juliet are included, such as Rose being an
upper-classman, and Jack being lower class.   But the emotional connection between Rose and Jack is almost
palpable, and this fuels the film's first two hours.  We watch the trials of Jack and Rose, and as they
overcome them, the ship comes closer to destiny.  With a ship as large as the Titanic was, it was destined to
crash.  And of course, the ship isn't stocked with enough lifeboats to accommodate the 2,200 passengers.  In
the end, over 700 people survive, while the rest drown, freeze, or commit suicide.  
The resolution of the film, after the ship's gone under, is just as powerful as anything else in the movie.
It ends rather surprisingly, with a touching symbolic conclusion.  Most films end predictably, or
inappropriately, but TITANIC ends just on the right note.  In fact, the symbolism of the final scene is so
perfect, that many people will contemplate over the meaning for months.  The film does end rather
depressingly, and unexpectedly, but when you think about it, it couldn't have ended any other way.  All the
questions are answered, and we are left with a weak smile due to the intense situation we were just put
through.  The Titanic sinking is an emotional roller coaster, with many more realistic deaths than any
INDEPENDENCE DAY.  The death scenes are so realistic, that you find yourself caring for every single
passenger.  Cameron never compromises the integrity of his film, and the deaths of the passengers is never
overemphasized.  He doesn't linger on each death, but takes it as it comes to show us the realism without
trying to force emotions out of the audience.   But emotions do show, and almost anyone will find themselves
wiping away a few tears.
TITANIC's technical effects are the most impressive of any film this year.  The production design, by Peter
Lamont, is so meticulous in the small details, that we never realize the impact it has on the overall
production.  Everything, from the silverware to the enormous furnaces and engines, is perfectly in place.  The
cinematography, by Russell Carpenter, is incredibly rich.  The detail in each shot is quite exquisite, and the
visuals are very impressive without seeming too much like artificial visuals to make us gawk.  What we gawk at
is the realism.  The pistons that spin the propellers are huge, but the visual impact is even stronger.  Since
TITANIC is a period piece, the costumes, by Deborah Lynn Scott, had to be perfect.  And they are.  Nothing
seems like it doesn't belong in the early 20th century.  And then, there are the special effects.  Combining
the power of Industrial Light & Magic with Cameron's Digital Domain (as well as a couple other companies),
TITANIC contains the most impressive special effects this year, and ever.  Most special effects come across as
effects, and nothing more.  TITANIC uses special effects to enhance the realism of the story, not the other
way around.  The ship is brought to the screen via visual effects, models, and a near full-scale model.
Watching people fall from the ship is incredible, and the death scenes were too realistic for some people in
the audience.  When the ship splits in half and lands back on the water, a gasp is heard from almost everyone
in the audience.
Cameron, as a storyteller, is among the best ever.  His technique is perfect for these kinds of expensive
motion pictures.  But Cameron always makes good movies, no matter what kind of a budget he may have.  Perhaps
the biggest downfall of TITANIC is its enormous budget.  Somewhere around $200 million, TITANIC easily
surpasses WATERWORLD as the most expensive film to date.  But while watching TITANIC, you can see where the
money went.  And you also don't care what it cost.  You want to thank Cameron for giving us a film like this
one.  Cameron had major control over the production of this film, taking the directing and screenwriting into
his own hands.  He also co-edited and co-produced.  Cameron's screenplays are typically well written, with
smart dialogue, funny humor, and great action.  But TITANIC contains an emotional element last seen in
TERMINATOR 2: JUDGMENT DAY, and elevates it even more.  This is a beautifully written screenplay, with
terrific humor and very dramatic situations.  Thankfully, Cameron opted to focus the story on the adventures
of two fictional characters, instead of many different ones.  We get to know them, and care for them.  By the
time the ship begins to sink, we actually care that the people on the ship live, instead of watching the
mayhem swallow faceless victims up.  
TITANIC's cast is among the best this year.  Leonardo DiCaprio is not one of my favorite actors (he was in
last year's horrible WILLIAM SHAKESPEARE'S ROMEO + JULIET), but here, he sheds the cocky image (more than
likely a result of Cameron's control over his actors).  DiCaprio gives his best performance to date, never
seeming like an actor portraying a character.  However, it is Kate Winslet's performance that steals the show.
Her impressive resume of work has made her one of my favorite actresses, and this just adds to it.  Winslet
portrays all the confusion and love and hate that any other actress couldn't do as effectively.  The scenes
with her and DiCaprio are emotionally charged, and the connection between the two reminds us of what good
chemistry can do for a film.  Billy Zane has proven to be a reliable actor, but again, he tops himself as the
villain of the film.  Zane adds just enough love and warmth to the role in the beginning, but as Winslet
begins falling in love with DiCaprio, he sheds that image until the final moments of the film.  He shows an
evil and jealous side to his personality, but it's never artificial.  Gloria Stuart gives a remarkable
performance in a role that marks her return during a long dry spell (her last film was in 1986).  Stuart's
Rose is old, but she still has the spirit of when she was 17.  Her face glows with love.  Bill Paxton also
does a very good job, though his character is mainly there in order to begin the story.  Kathy Bates gives yet
another terrific turn as the real-life Mrs. Molly Brown.  This ensemble cast is quite good, but it is DiCaprio
and Winslet who shine on screen.
TITANIC is rated PG-13 for disaster related peril and violence, nudity, sensuality, and brief language.  The
nudity is not inappropriate, as it is done tastefully.  Winslet appears topless, but Cameron never exploits
the nudity.  If we do manage to see her topless, it is not because Cameron wanted to, but because the camera
happened to be there.  TITANIC is a grand epic motion picture which is sure to sweep the Oscars.  This is the
first film since SCHINDLER'S LIST that I have wanted to win Best Picture, and has a good chance at doing it.
Let's face it, James Cameron deserves some recognition for all his hard work.  In fact, this is the first film
since the 1993 epic that I have wanted to sweep the Oscars (which is unfortunate because I want CONTACT to win
a few too).  TITANIC is by far the best film of the year.  TITANIC will be remembered as an instant classic,
going down in history as the most expensive film ever made, but also as one of the best films ever made.
Reviewed by Respect (respect@aros.net)
http://www.aros.net/~respect/movies.html

Title
Review for Se7en (1995)
Se7en (1995)
Rated R for graphic portrayals of grizzly and unusual murders, and harsh language.
----------  Out of 4 stars: **** (4 Stars)
Starring: Morgan Freeman, Brad Pitt, Gwyneth Paltrow.
"I have never seen a film like SE7EN before in my life.  I don't think I will see one like it again.  SE7EN is
not just a film--it is a work of art."  My high school drama teacher considers SE7EN the best film he has ever
seen.  This statement from one of my favorite teachers sparked my interest in this film.  I had heard other
critics give it great reviews, and then others gave it lesser reviews.  However, since my teacher has great
taste in film, I decided to see what all the hype was about.  My expectations were set very high for this
film, and not only did it reach those expectations, but it far exceeded them.  SE7EN is definitely one of the
best films ever made.
SE7EN is directed by David Fincher, the creator of ALIEN 3, and the new film THE GAME.  When first released,
SE7EN became an enormous box-office hit because it finally did something most audiences had never seen for a
long time: it dazzled us with spectacular visuals, and enthralled us with a frightening story.  Not only did
it gain popularity with audiences, but it sparked controversy over many of the graphic murders portrayed.  If
you don't know by now, SE7EN centers its plot around a killer who bides by the Seven Deadly Sins.  Sure, this
is a very original idea, but we have all seen serial killer movies before.  However, we have never seen one
done so thoroughly or emotionally involving.  Fincher knows exactly how to play with his audience and their
emotions.  He creates interesting characters that we grow to like, and then he spins the film around and makes
us sick to our stomach.
Perhaps what makes SE7EN work isn't necessarily the plot or the characters, but the visual accuity of Fincher.
The title sequence has earned praise for the fast editing, symbolism, and foreshadowing involved.  But this is
just the start.  The film opens with a couple moving to New York to begin a new life.  Detective Mills (Brad
Pitt) and his wife Tracy (Gwyneth Paltrow) move into a good-sized apartment, and Mills goes to work alongside
veteran and retiring Detective Somerset (Morgan Freeman).  Somerset doesn't exactly take a liking to his new,
impatient partner, but he likes Mills' wife.  They are sent to a murder scene to investigate the brutal and
torturous killing of an extremely obese man.  The man was tied with barbed wire to a chair and forced to eat
himself to death.  The grizzly murder is just the start of an ensuing game of cat-and-mouse, with an
undetermined killer as the mouse.  Clues around the obese man's home reveals the word Gluttony, the first of
seven murders.
As these two detectives investigate the murder, more show up: Sloth, Greed, Lust, Pride.  One man was forced
to cut a pound of his own flesh off, and another man was tied to a bed and barely kept alive for one year.  It
soon becomes apparent that the killer might be trying to give a sermon of some kind, and as the two detectives
get closer to the killer, they find their own lives getting mixed into the mess.  As they get closer to
solving the case and catching the killer, the "preacher's" message begins to appear directed more towards
Mills and Somerset.  Mills' family life is deteriorating, and Somerset gets closer to Tracy, who reveals
secrets to him that she hasn't even told her husband.  All of this leads up to the inevitable, but shocking
conclusion which answers all the questions we have been asking, and gives us something to think about on the
way out of the theater.  Revealing the ending would be a mistake, and all I will say is that the killer shows
up at the police station to turn himself in.  Why would he turn himself in without finishing his goal?  Has he
already done Wrath and Envy?  These questions are answered, but the answers may not be exactly what we
expected, or wanted.
As I have mentioned above, SE7EN is mostly a film about mood and atmosphere.  It rains most of the time, and
the sets are dark and dreary.  The victims' places are usually lit with dim lights, and shadows are cast all
around the place.  Many places are only lit by the detectives' flashlights which bounce around the room,
illuminating key pieces to the plot of which Fincher wants you to see.  As with THE GAME, Fincher is capable
of shifting your attention from one thing to another by his camera angles and lighting effects.  This is one
of those films in which you may only want to see on the big screen, or the letterbox version on video.  The
big screen holds so many small details which become fuzzy and sometimes unextinguishable on the transition to
the small screen.  However, if you are able to get ahold of a copy of a letterbox version of SE7EN, I suggest
watching it on a big-screen TV, to get the maximum effect.  As my drama teacher said about SE7EN, "You can
pause this film at any point, take a picture of it, and hang it on the wall."  Like TWELVE MONKEYS, SE7EN
mixes a fiercely frustrating story with creepy visuals and grotesque murders.
SE7EN does have some minor flaws, although they are hardly noticeable unless you scrutinize over the ending.
The first hour and a half, we never know who the killer is, and then he reveals himself in the final thirty
minutes.  This is extremely well done, because it doesn't rely on the action ending that so many films as this
one would use.  However, a couple plot holes arise from his appearance, but it's almost pointless to point
them out.  Besides, Fincher's direction and the star power of Pitt, Freeman, and the mysterious killer (who
most of us should recognize nowadays) give the ending enough speed and power to leap over the holes with the
greatest of ease.  Now that I think about it, I don't even know why I brought this up.
Choosing the correct actors for SE7EN was crucial for the film to work.  Brad Pitt will probably draw female
viewers, and Gwyneth Paltrow will draw male viewers.  However, Pitt gives a stunning and inspired performance,
proving that he isn't just another pretty face.  Freeman, on the other hand, steals the film as the veteran
detective.  His poetic dialogue is given an added touch by Freeman's almost monotonous tone which fits the
style of SE7EN.  Pitt's talkative character gives Freeman the perfect opposite to work with.  Paltrow is a key
to the plot, but for most of the film, she remains off screen.  The mysterious killer, who gave an uncredited
performance, is played by an actor who most people know today.  However, taking Roger Ebert's lead, I will not
reveal his name in my review.  Pitt and Freeman are the central characters and they fit in with the
atmospheric setting Fincher applies to his sets.  Freeman almost blends into the background, while Pitt stands
out like a sore thumb.  My guess is that this is symbolic because of Pitt's kick-ass style and Freeman's
withdrawn but intelligent character.
SE7EN is rated R for graphic afterviews of grizzly and gruesome murders, and harsh language.  Fincher has
given us a nearly perfect film, and he will most likely become a big Hollywood director.  On seeing SE7EN, I
almost forgot that it was a commercial film.  The depth and layers of the story is usually seen in independent
features, but the graphic killings can be too shocking for some viewers.  However, despite the graphic nature
of this film, most people will look back at this film and remember the ending.  Like THE USUAL SUSPECTS, the
ending shocks everyone, and usually creates repeat viewings.  SE7EN is one of the best films ever made, and
will be remembered for a long time to come.
Reviewed by Respect (respect@aros.net)
http://www.aros.net/~respect/movies.html

Title
Review for Jackal, The (1997)
Starring: Bruce Willis, Richard Gere, Sidney Poitier, Diane Venora, and Mathilda May.
Oh how I wish I could have seen Kevin Jarre and Chuck Pfarrer work out
the screenplay for THE JACKAL.  They must have read the novel, or even
worse, just watched the previous film version, and then thought,
"Let's focus most of the film on THE JACKAL!"  I haven't read the
book, but I know that it must have been better than this.  THE JACKAL,
which ripped its premise from a 1973 production of THE DAY OF THE
JACKAL, is a film which wants to try something new, to show us the
criminal's mind work as he sets up for his next target.  However, we
have seen it before, and done much better (IN THE LINE OF FIRE).
Unfortunately, the film focuses so much attention on The Jackal (Bruce
Willis) that we begin to care for him more than the good guys.  I must
admit that I did like one of the heros, but she is left with a smaller
part than all the male characters in the film.
THE JACKAL opens promisingly, with a title sequence similar to that of
SEVEN.  In the background, we see some historical war scenes composed
of poorly edited television broadcasts.  The music, by Carter Burwell
(FARGO, and others), is moody and well done.  But once actors start
appearing on screen, THE JACKAL doesn't just slow to crawl... it comes
to a halt.  A glimmer of hope shines when Sidney Poitier arrives, but
left with a small scrap of a role, that glimmer is snuffed out.
Opening with a scene which is quickly forgotten, Valentina Koslova
(Diane Venora, HEAT) and FBI Deputy Director Carter Preston (Poitier)
try to arrest a Russian terrorist (I assume, as they never quite tell
us).  The Russian terrorist ends up dead, and as cliched as it might
be, his brother wants revenge.
The brother hires The Jackal to show America something they would
never forget.  The Jackal is assigned, with a $70 million price tag,
to assassinate a high-ranking U.S. Government official.  Who is it
exactly?  We aren't sure, and we don't find out until late in the
film.  This is supposedly added for suspenseful purposes, but instead,
with the recent discoveries surrounding the certain official nowadays,
we wish The Jackal would succeed and kill the official.  But listening
to the audience's reaction, I guess most people will find this movie
entertaining and fun.  Well, it is fun, for a little while, and only
at the end.  So why has this big name cast signed on for this film?
I'm not quite sure, with the exception of Bruce Willis who must have
thought it would be fun to portray a bad guy.  Luckily, Willis has so
much fun that we begin to get involved in the film--but only with his
character.
THE JACKAL follows two different story lines, trying to draw an
indistinct line between them.  We are forced into watching a
cat-and-mouse game, except from both sides.  We see The Jackal setting
up his project, and we also see Carter Preston trying to find The
Jackal.  My question is, how did Mr. Preston know The Jackal was
planning something?  Maybe they explained it to us, but if they did, I
was probably trying to make sense of what occured just prior to that
scene.  Here is a movie which plays out with all the information
exposed to the audience (with the exception of who is being targeted),
while the characters are left in the dark for most of the film.
Despite this, and ironically so, THE JACKAL remains one step ahead of
us, making us think back, trying to clear up holes and messy dialogue
from previous scenes.  A lot of the dialogue is spoken with Russian or
other accents, and we can't quite tell what is being said.  Many of
these lines come from Richard Gere, who has an extremely distracting
Irish accent.  His lines come across as a slur of words, and the
audience is left struggling to make sense of it.  Gere does manage to
get most of his lines across well, but some of the important ones are
said so quietly, we can't distinguish them.  Thankfully, Gere doesn't
show up until the movie's setup has been completed (but we are still
confused).
As the antagonist, Bruce Willis shows a terrific side to his acting
talent.  We have seen him play good guys in the DIE HARD series and
TWELVE MONKEYS, but we have never quite seen him as sadistic as this.
I found his performance to be hugely entertaining, and whenever the
movie went back to the chase side, I was disappointed.  Now, I'm not
saying I like rooting for the bad guys, but when there are no good
guys to cheer for, who else is there?  Furthermore, The Jackal
reminded me of Val Kilmer's character in THE SAINT (which was actually
worse than this film).  His character kept changing appearances,
showing Willis' wide range of acting skill.  As mentioned previously,
I wish they could have found a better target for the film, because I
had no emotional connection to the target themselves.  Another reason
for this is the physical resemblance of the two officials (in the film
and in real life).  Willis' suave style gives a lot of depth to his
good character, and therefore gives the most respectable performance.
The only hero I was actually rooting for was Major Koslova (Venora).
Her no-nonsense attitude is something most of the male figures needed
in the film.  Remarkably, the acting isn't the worst thing in the
film.  The plot is, which is rather disgraceful to the premise.
Setting up a premise with this much hope is one thing, but to shoot it
down in the next hour and fourty-five minutes is another.  I can't
recall another film in which I have actually noticed most of the plot
holes while watching the movie.  Usually I will discover them while
thinking about it afterwards (and usually I will forgive the film for
these if it was entertaining enough), but these were too obvious to
not notice, and the film wasn't very entertaining.  How did The Jackal
get the gun off of the boat?  How did the protagonist find Declan
Mulqueen (Gere)?  Despite all these questions, the more obvious
questions relate to the characters themselves.  Who was the Russian
terrorist?  Who was his brother?  What purpose did the homosexual have
in the movie?  Who were those hijackers?  All questions, with little
answers.
Director Michael Caton-Jones has given us a very slow-paced action
film, with little depth to pull us in.  Jones admirably left a lot of
blood out of the film, which so many action films like to show us.
Normally I like to see the violence, but I have realized, with this
film, that a lot of it isn't necessary to witness.  That isn't saying
there isn't blood and gore, but it is a heck of a lot less than say,
STARSHIP TROOPERS or THE PEACEMAKER.  Unfortunately, Jones never finds
the right tone or pace for the film to move along.  We are left
wanting more... of anything, in fact.  More violence could have even
helped.  More action would have been nice.  Even though this is a
suspense/action film, put more coherent action scenes in.  It's hard
to believe that this is the director who gave us that beautifully
orchestrated sword fight in ROB ROY.
THE JACKAL is rated R for strong violence and language.  In fact, the
language was extremely disturbing from the very start.  Normally
language doesn't disturb me in a film, but THE JACKAL's constant use
of it in the first ten minutes caught me off guard.  Perhaps the
reason I was disturbed is because I didn't know who the guy was, or
what he had done wrong.  Overall, I would say that THE JACKAL fails in
most areas.  It does have a few elements of fun, but mostly because of
Willis.  Not many actors can portray evil while portraying a sensitive
side.  However, I still tend to wonder why he hesitated in killing the
woman.  Sensitive?  Oh yeah, kinda gets you right there, doesn't it?
Reviewed by Respect (respect@aros.net)
http://www.aros.net/~respect/movies.html

Title
Review for Deep Impact (1998)
Deep Impact (1998)
Rated PG-13 for disaster related elements and brief language
----------  Out of 4 stars: *1/2 (1.5 Stars)
Starring: Tea Leoni, Robert Duvall, Vanessa Redgrave, Elijah Wood, Morgan
Freeman.
---------------------------------------
Warning: Spoilers are included in this review... but it doesn't really make much
of a difference.
DEEP IMPACT begins the official summer movie season, and it also brings back
memories of 1997.  Remember when DANTE'S PEAK came out in February?  A few
months later, VOLCANO was released.  The first film was smart, exhilirating, and
one of the best disaster films I had ever seen.  The latter film was an
incohesive mess that defied logic and wasted talent.  Well, it's deja vu all
over again as two disaster films go head to head in competition.  This time,
unfortunately, the first comet flick is so bad that people may shy away from
ARMAGEDDON, the upcoming comet-disaster to be released the beginning of July.
Of course, the general reaction of the audience was oppposed to mine, and so I
am in the minority, as I was when I stood on the side of DANTE'S PEAK.  But
while watching DEEP IMPACT, I began to wonder how anyone in their right mind
could actually like this film.  Apparently many did, and it utterly baffles me.
To be completely honest, I haven't had this little fun watching a disaster film
in my entire life.  VOLCANO had implausibilities up the wazoo, but it was still
rather fun to watch.  DEEP IMPACT doesn't just have implausibilities, it also
contains cheap human drama, incredibly horrible special effects, and a poorly
constructed plot.  The only thing that gives it a half star above my bottom
ranking is a slightly entertaining final fifteen minutes and some good actors
making the most of their characters.
DEEP IMPACT begins in an unnamed year (the year varies; advanced technology sets
it in the future, but FIRE IN THE SKY is showing on a local movie theater,
pushing it back to 1993).  A line of students is outside at night, peering
through telescopes at the dark sky above.  Among these are Leo Biederman (Elijah
Wood) and Sarah Hotchner (Leelee Sobieski).  Leo unknowingly discovers a comet,
and his teacher sends a photo of the unknown object to an astronomer, who then
is able to determine the correct path of this distant comet in about a few
seconds.  He races off to mail the information, but is killed in a reckless car
accident.  A year passes, and nothing is heard about it again.
We are then introduced to Jenny Lerner (Téa Leoni), a reporter for MSNBC.  She
gets handed a job to investigate a possible cover-up in the government involving
Senator Alan Rittenhouse (James Cromwell).  She talks to a woman who mentions
that Rittenhouse was having an affair with a girl named Ellie.  After talking
with Rittenhouse, and unsatisfied with the information she gets, she decides to
use the Internet for help.  Luckily, she knows exactly how to spell the certain
"Ellie" that she is looking for (they spell it ELE in the film... that girl is
pretty darn smart for guessing how it was spelled).  Before she can use the
information, the government decides to push her car off the road.  They take her
in to meet the President of the United States, President Beck (Morgan Freeman).
Beck recommends that Jenny keep the information secret for 48 hours so they can
confirm it and then hold a press conference.  Naturally, she wants to be
compensated, and they offer her a front row seat and the chance for the first
question.
And so, yada yada yada, they reveal the comet to the public and their plans:
send a massive spacecraft out to destroy it before it can arrive.  They announce
a plan called "ARK," which is their only hope for survival.  A computer will
select 800,000 people at random.  These people are the ones who will go into a
large cave underground so that the impact of the comet won't kill off the entire
human race.  After two years, the dust will settle (actually, it would take
much, much longer--approximately ninety years, from what I understand) and the
humans could come back to the surface and start over.  The rest of the plot is
your standard disaster film procedures, but there is one subplot worth
mentioning.  Jenny and her father, Jason (Maximilian Schell), have a very
touching relationship that forms out of the impending doom.  The final moment
involving the two characters is heartfelt and emotional.  It's a shame that
nothing else is heartfelt.  Now, of course, we all know that the comet does
impact the surface.  The title alone suggests it, and the previews actually show
it!  By doing this, absoltuely no tension can be drawn from any attempt to stop
the comet because we all know that it won't work.
Director Mimi Leder came from her successful tries at direction with episodes of
the hit television show "ER."  Her major film debut was THE PEACEMAKER, a
pathetic and heartless action film.  Well, this time Leder outdid herself,
creating a film worse than that one.  Suggestion to Ms. Leder: Please, stay away
from the big screen, or at least the action genre.  Much of the blame can be
placed on Leder directly, because the pace is disastrously off.  Throughout the
film we are given subtitles that tell us how much time has passed (it goes from
months to weeks to hours).  It literally feels like this lapsed time is taking
place in real-time--it's that boring.  Of course, Leder isn't all to blame for
it.  Screenwriters Michael Tolkin and Bruce Joel Rubin have crafted a simplistic
story that only gets worse with time.  What starts out promising soon turns
deadly (for the audience anyway).  Chock full of cheesy one liners ("You know,
you are going to have more sex than anyone else in school!") and stupid
characters, you might think we were back in the 70s again.  Only one of the
subplots is remotely interesting, while the rest are forgettable and boring.
And the main plot is so outrageous that you can't figure out if this film is
supposed to be an action, drama, or sci-fi.
To put it simply: the special effects of this film are a hit and miss
situation.  That's right, 80% miss, and 20% hit.  Scenes above the Earth are
well done, and the orbiting ship is majestic.  But the comet is a huge mistake,
making it more laughable than frightening.  The concept of even trying to land
on a comet is preposterous enough, but that's forgiveable.  What isn't
forgiveable is actually having humans walk on the surface.  Give me a break,
will ya?  And of course, the much hyped collision of comet and Earth.  Well, it
is far from spectacular, and it makes INDEPENDENCE DAY look brilliant.  The
water rushing towards the land is effective, but once it hits the continent, the
effects turn ridiculous.  CGI water is used, and it looks so bad that I heard
more laughs from the audience than shrieks.  In fact, I may even recommend the
film for those who want to see how bad effects can actually get these days.
Just when we think visual effects can't be improved, along comes a film to show
that they really can and should be.
One thing has struck a wrong note with me concerning Mimi Leder's direction,
which also influences the actors.  Leder loves to show the actors' faces before
and during moments of terror.  This reminded me of another action director,
Renny Harlin (DIE HARD 2, CLIFFHANGER).  But Harlin succeeds because he shows
the faces of the victims in realistic situations.  Leder likes to flaunt
people's fears via their faces, but instead of coming off as sympathetic, Leder
seems more of a Sadist.  One moment has an astronaut flying off into space.
This should be enough to warrant a response from the audience, but Leder wants
to go farther and shows us the person's face while drifting into space.  This is
one of the cheapest ways to ellicit an emotional response from an audience, and
I, for one, am not going to be fooled.  On another note, Leder's film only picks
up its pace during the last fifteen minutes when the comet actually impacts.
The pace does pick up, and some very emotional moments are shown.  Then again,
when you watch people cry for their loved ones, it's obvious it will be
emotional.  It's mostly just a big trick to rope viewers into "feeling" for the
characters, but it didn't work for me.
But anyway, the actors do as much as they can with what they are given.  Téa
Leoni (BAD BOYS, TV's "The Naked Truth") is the best of the film, and she is
given the meatiest role.  Her character is made stronger by Leoni's presence,
and we grow to care for her.  Robert Duvall is energetic and fun to watch, but
his character is turned into shreds by the plot.  Elijah Wood also comes off
rather successfully, but he still hasn't had many good roles (Wood, stick to
drama!  You are too talented for this stuff).  Vanessa Redgrave is barely
acknowledgeable, and her performance is only enhanced by her strong presence on
screen.  Maximilian Schell is distracting, but he does provide some nice humor.
Morgan Freeman has been infinitely better than this, and gives one of his most
shallow performances to date (which is quite remarkable for him).  Leelee
Sobieski could have been better, but I think she just suffered from a poorly
written character.  A special note should go to Ron Eldard and Denise Crosby.
Eldard is good in his role, but is limited by the plot.  Crosby is special to me
personally because she was Tasha Yar from TV's "Star Trek: The Next
Generation."  Seeing her was one of the highlights of the film.  Overall, a very
talented cast virtually wasted.
DEEP IMPACT is rated PG-13 for disaster related elements and brief language.
This is one of the worst films of the year, and if it is any omen of things to
come, this summer could be one of the worst ever.  Luckily, THE X-FILES MOVIE is
coming up, and hopefully ARMAGEDDON will be more successful.  It's a shame that
this film will do so successfully because it just isn't worth much.  Costing
nearly $75 million, with special effects done by the illustrious ILM (which is a
huge shocker), and with a score composed by Oscar-winner James Horner (TITANIC),
one might have expected this to be more fun to witness and experience.  Well,
it's not.  When the comet does hit the Earth, you almost wish it could just take
this film along with it.

Title
Review for Event Horizon (1997)
Event Horizon (1997)
Rated R for violence, terror, language, and brief nudity
Starring Sam Neill, Laurence Fishburne, Kathleen Quinlan
***1/2 of ****
Laurence Fishburne was in last year's "Othello."  Kathleen Quinlan was
in this year's "Breakdown," and Sam Neill was in "Jurassic Park."
Now, all these respected actors come together in a film that got
dumped on by many critics, and won't make much money at the box
office.  The only way the film could make more money is by word of
mouth, which is exactly what it might do.  Last year, a film came out
which was very scary the first half, and then turned into a comic
suspense thriller.  That film was "Scream."  By word of mouth, that
film became the highest grossing horror film ever.  Hopefully, that
word of mouth will spread onto Event Horizon, the new sci-fi/horror
film from director Paul Anderson.
Whatever occurs at the box office or with critics, Event Horizon will
be the scariest film that I have seen since "Nightmare on Elm Street"
(Actually, "Arachnophobia" scared me more than any film ever made).
The film is so scary that it will have you on the edge of your seat,
waiting for another surprise.  And don't worry, there are many "jump"
moments in this film.  Event Horizon begins with the overused computer
narration which types the summary onto the screen.  We learn that a
ship disappeared in 2040, and seven years later, she has returned.
The Event Horizon was rumored to have been destroyed in space,
becoming the worst space disaster ever.  Now that she has reappeared,
a crew is brought in to salvage what is left of the crew and ship.
This crew consists of Captain Miller (Fishburne), Dr. Weir (Neill),
who designed and built the ship, Starck (Joely Richardson), Peters
(Kathleen Quinlan), and four other crew members.  In fact, this film
only has about nine actors who show up on screen.  This crew sets off
into deep space; their destination: Neptune.  When they arrive, about
57 days later, they find the ship void of human life.  What happened
to the crew, and where did the ship go?  All these questions are
shoved into Dr. Weir's face because he designed it.  Blood is found on
the wall, and a recording is heard in Latin.  The ship's log isn't
much help either, because the part they need to see is jumbled and
blurry.  However, soon, the crew begins experiencing strange
occurances, and Justin (Jack Noseworthy, also from "Breakdown") is
sucked into the "heart" of the ship.
This "heart", as explained by Weir, is what made the ship vanish for
seven years.  It folds space and allows the ship to pass through a
black hole, instantaneously travelling to somewhere far, far away.
Justin, however, tries to commit suicide (in a very graphic and bloody
way), and Captain Miller wants to know what happened to him.  Dr. Weir
isn't able to answer any of the questions, and the film quickly turns
into a horror film.  Explaining any more of this film would ruin all
the suspense, and believe me, there is a lot of it present in Event
Horizon.  And one of the best things about the film is that while most
of the "jumps" come from the skilled filmmakers who know how to time
the music and silence, most of the scariness comes from the plot and
story.  Unfortunately, the only downside to the film is the number of
cliches that are used, and how many other films it steals from (Alien
and Hellraiser are the most notable).  Well, the ending of the film
sucks too.
On the plus side, while the film is riddled with cliches, the
filmmakers have put new twists to them, making them seem original
again.  The hero-outruns-the-fireball cliche is one of the best
because while it uses the cliche, it also uses the story to make it
seem possible.  Basically, Event Horizon is a sci-fi haunted house
film.  Nothing is as it seems, and this is the frightening aspect of
the story.  What is real?  And what is just part of the imagination?
Is the ship alive?  Or is the mind playing tricks as a result of the
isolation of the crew?  The outcome is more terrifying than what is
expected, and this provides an utterly frightening experience.  This
is one of those films that you will see once, and then tell all your
friends about, and then take them to see it just so you can laugh at
how scared they are.  
The filmmaking is probably the best part of the film itself.  Director
Paul Anderson knows exactly how to scare you.  He uses great sets with
shadows and dark corners.  Sounds seem to come from nowhere, and
things appear and disappear constantly.  Composer Michael Kamen uses
music to great effect here, making the music fade into silence, and
then playing a very loud chord just when something on screen happens
(many of film's "jump" moments are caused by this).  Cinematographer
Adrian Biddle uses all the common camera angles for horror films, but
somehow they all seem to make the film more scary.  The special
effects are very well done, especially some of the computer generated
ones.  All of the effects are well done, and some are quite amazing.
The effects are done by Cinesite, an ILM rival, and with this film,
they prove that they can hold their own against bigger companies.
The acting is well done (with the exception of Noseworthy).  Fishburne
gives a terrific performance, if not a bit recycled itself.  Still, he
has a great presence on screen, and his scenes are some of the best.
Sam Neill steals the film with a great performance as the designer of
Event Horizon.  His performance is the key to the film, and he handles
it extremely well.  Kathleen Quinlan gives a nice and almost low-key
performance, but her character isn't given much to do.  Joely
Richardson is very good, although she doesn't get much to do either.
Noseworthy is usually good throughout the film, but sometimes he just
got on my nerves.  The rest of the cast supports very well, but again,
they aren't given much to do.  It's mainly Fishburne and Neill's film.
Event Horizon is rated R for graphic violence and gore, some nudity,
and language, with quite a bit of terror.  This film is definitely not
for the faint of heart, and the atmosphere itself could scare some
people.  Even the most proud people will show signs of fear during
this film.  All of the technical elements are put together extremely
well, providing one of the scariest films to come along in a long
time.  Not many films give me nightmares at night, but Event Horizon
did just that.  I will say it again, just in case you didn't get what
I am trying to tell you: Event Horizon is an EXTREMELY scary film.

Title
Review for Wag the Dog (1997)
Starring: Dustin Hoffman, Robert De Niro, Anne Heche, Kirsten Dunst,
Willie Nelson, Denis Leary.
Sitting in the theater, waiting for WAG THE DOG to begin, I was struck
by the number of politically-themed films are about to be released
into theaters.  The previews showed numerous films about politics,
whether it ranged from John Travolta as the President to a AS GOOD AS
IT GETS-Jack Nicholson-type politician.  Why is Hollywood suddenly so
interested in politics?  Because of the controversy, and the obvious
interest of moviegoers.  However, of the two previews I saw, neither
of them looked very interesting.  In one, Travolta plays the
President, with grey hair and all, but he still looks too young for
the role.  The other preview showed a rude President who bashes people
whenever he feels like it (but not on purpose, of course).  Neither of
these films will be as good or as entertaining as WAG THE DOG.
To begin, what exactly does wag the dog mean?  It may sound a little
ridiculous, but it actually gives the film a connection to the
audience.  The opening scene explains to us: "Why does a dog wag its
tail?  Because the dog is smarter than the tail.  If the tail was
smarter, then it would wag the dog."  Throughout the film, director
Barry Levinson and writers David Mamet and Hilary Henkin continually
portray your average American as the dog.  The government is the tail.
WAG THE DOG contains a fair amount of ridiculous events, but none so
far as going beyond belief.  What it does is it plays with the
audience's thoughts of government procedure.  Many people have thought
that the government is lying (more than likely, everyone), telling us
stories to explain things otherwise unexplainable.  WAG THE DOG takes
that a step further, showing us what could possibly happen.
WAG THE DOG begins very quickly, with White House aide Winifred Ames
(Anne Heche) leading spin doctor Conrad Brean (Robert De Niro) down a
series of underground tunnels.  Why do they need Brean?  Because the
President was caught with is pants down.  The President is being
accused of offering himself to a "Firefly Girl," and an underage one
at that.  This may or may not be true, but it doesn't matter, because
once the story hits the television, it becomes fact.  Brean figures
that they need to find something to draw the attention away from the
sexual harassment deal; perhaps, by starting a war with Albania.
Start a war?  Well, not really.
Brean decides that he needs someone to produce his war, and where
better to find someone to do that than in the one place that
specializes in fabricating fictional events--Hollywood.  Brean comes
across Stanley Motss (Dustin Hoffman), a Hollywood producer whose lack
of acknowledgment for his films has discouraged him from continuing to
produce them.  At first, Motss is apprehensive about getting involved
with the scheme, thinking it's too immense for anyone to pull it off.
However, after seeing Brean's connection to the White House, and
realizing the enjoyment of pulling off such a radical event, Motss
accepts to produce the war.  "We can't tell anyone... it's a pageant,"
Brean remarks.
Most of the fun of WAG THE DOG is derived from the actual production
of war-based paraphernalia.  There's the short video of a young
Albanian girl (played by Kirsten Dunst) running through a destroyed
village.  This was produced using special effects ("The same method
was used in the last Schwarzenegger film.").  There's also the
hilarious production of the musical theme, written by Willie Nelson.
In probably the funniest scene in the film, Nelson makes up a song
about the President and little girls sitting in his lap.  However, the
opposing candidate for the President's chair (Craig T. Nelson) knocks
down rumors of war, and because he said it on television, it must be
true.  Brean and Ames both declare defeat, but Motss thinks the war
just needs a second act.  "We need a hero!" he exclaims.  That hero is
Schumacher (Woody Harrelson), a fictionalized member of the
fictionalized 3-0-3 squadron, who was left behind enemy lines.  This
sparks attention from America, and the President's numbers sky-rocket
when they learn he is being brought home.
For a film such as WAG THE DOG to work, everything must fit together
properly.  And at the top of it must be a good screenplay.  WAG THE
DOG's is among the best of the year, with some of the sharpest
dialogue of the year.  Based on the novel "American Hero," by Larry
Beinhart, it took David Mamet (arguably the best dialogue writer ever)
and Hilary Henkin to adapt it for the screen.  The screenplay is so
witty that a lot of the humor may just go over the heads of viewers.
Some of it went over my head, but I laughed anyway.  However, most of
the humor is very sharp and, directed at politics, makes it extremely
funny.  Heck, if you can't laugh at politics...  The premise of WAG
THE DOG is among the very best of satire, and probably the best of the
year.  It seems like a ridiculous idea (the government messing with
the media), but watching WAG THE DOG, a sudden fear overwhelms you:
it's just plausible enough to really happen.  The film points fingers
at everyday Americans as being too gullible.  Anything we see on TV
must be true, but WAG THE DOG shows it as being falsified by the
government in order to ensure the President's success.
This is Dustin Hoffman's second film this year about using the media
to gain attention for someone, but in WAG THE DOG, he gives the best
performance I have seen him give since TOOTSIE.  Hoffman has so much
enthusiasm in the film that it vastly contrasts the uptight De Niro.
De Niro also gives a very good performance, but much more subdued than
he normally is.  De Niro and Hoffman play well of each other, and to
add to that, there's a load of big-name stars in small roles.  Anne
Heche is wonderful as Winifred Ames, a colorful and vibrant character
whose hard outside persona hides a vulnerable side.  In smaller roles
are Kirsten Dunst (whom I would have gladly liked to see more of) as
the actress hired to play an Albanian, Wood Harrelson as "The Old
Shoe" hero (his psycho performance is entertaining, but very limited),
James Belushi, William H. Macy as an NSA official, Michael Belson as
the President (only seen from behind and out of focus shots), Jay
Leno, Craig T. Nelson, Denis Leary, and Willie Nelson.  All of these
performances are good, and the film shows that big-name stars will
take small roles just to be in it.
WAG THE DOG is rated R for language.  Director Barry Levinson has
produced a remarkably funny film on a remarkably small budget.  The
direction is tight and crisp, but never reveals itself.  The music by
Mark Knopfler was a little annoying at first, but quickly it took
ahold of my attention and gave the film an added bonus.  It's really a
catchy soundtrack.  However, there are some minor flaws in the film.
The cinematography occasionally draws attention to itself with strange
camera movements, and the ending is a little depressing.  I question
whether or not the screenplay ended correctly, but it ends with a
satirical approach to dark humor, and it ends up being funny anyway.
Overall, WAG THE DOG is probably the best bet for a comedy right now,
and definitely in the line-up for Oscar contenders.
Reviewed by Respect (respect@aros.net)
http://www.aros.net/~respect/movies.html

Title
Review for Man in the Iron Mask, The (1998)
The Man in the Iron Mask (1998)
Rated PG-13 for sequences of violence and some sensuality/nudity.
----------  Out of 4 stars: ** (2 Stars)
Starring: Leonardo DiCaprio, John Malkovich, Gabriel Byrne, Gerard
Depardieu, Jeremy Irons, Peter Sarsgaard, Anne Parillaud, and Judity
Godreche.
Fresh off his incredibly successful turn as Jack Dawson in James
Cameron's TITANIC, Leonardo DiCaprio has immensely increased his
popularity to the point of becoming possibly the most famous actor of
his generation.  There is no doubt that both Kate Winslet and DiCaprio
will be able to carry films by themselves, however DiCaprio already had
popularity from his Oscar-nominated turn in the fantastic WHAT'S EATING
GILBERT GRAPE?  It's almost ironic that his film opens thirteen weeks
after TITANIC did.  And, more than likely, it will unseat the Cameron
flick for the top of the box office.  Unfortunately, it will not remain
there.
THE MAN IN THE IRON MASK is one of those gorgeous films that contains
beautiful imagery, colorful costumes, and terrific actors.  However,
what it lacks is good writing.  Watching this film, I saw a story hidden
below the surface of the film that was just waiting to be uncovered.
This film never does it.  It remains a superficially obsessed mess that
cares more about viewers paying to see it than letting viewers become
involved.   This kind of Hollywood thinking has destroyed many films in
that past that could have amounted to great things.  I'm not saying
Hollywood is bad, as I love it.  It's the directors and writers and
producers who think that audiences want more.  Someone should tell them
that we actually prefer less.  And that's The Man in the Iron Mask's
biggest problem: too much of everything, but too little of what we
really want.
THE MAN IN THE IRON MASK begins well enough, proudly displaying its
gorgeous scenery and vibrant costumes.  Surprisingly, the film begins
its quick descent into mediocrity at the appearance of DiCaprio as King
Louis XIV.  Louis is a pompous, arrogant, and young king, and yet he has
a following, mostly from the upper class society.  The lower class is
extremely poor, not even able to afford something to eat (and what there
is to eat is rotten).  They riot and cry for help, but Louis is more
worried with how many women he can sleep with at once, or how he can
attract a certain woman to him.  This woman is Christine (Judith
Godrčche).  She is beautiful, fair-skinned--and engaged.  Well, almost
engaged, for her love, Raoul (Peter Sarsgaard), can't find the opportune
time to pop the question (I'm not sure, but weren't engagements setup by
the parents back then?).  Unfortunately, before Raoul can ask her, Louis
"arranges" for him to be sent to the front lines of the war against the
Dutch.
With all of the poverty and hatred in the city, the king does need
guards.  One of them is D'Artagnan (Gabriel Byrne), a loyal follower of
Louis and captain of the Musketeers.  However, he happens to be good
friends with the infamous Three Musketeers (I still don't know why
they're called three--there are really four of them!).  Athos (John
Malkovich) is retired, and happens to be the father of Raoul (I smell a
plot convention).  Porthos (Gérard Depardieu) is also retired, although
he spends most of his time flatulently cracking jokes.  Aramis (Jeremy
Irons) is now a priest, but is also retired from the Musketeers.  After
Raoul's death, Athos proclaims that he will kill the king and anyone who
stands in his way.  Unfortunately, D'Artagnan maintains his loyalty to
his king, and won't allow Athos to proceed with his promise.  Athos
meets with Porthos and Aramis again, and tells them that he wants to
replace the king.
This is where the man in the iron mask comes into play.  Prior to this
moment, we have seen him only in agony in his cell.  However, now the
three come to release him from the mask.  They find that the man in the
mask looks exactly like Louis himself.  The next hour involves the three
trying to replace the king with Philippe (DiCaprio).  This is where the
film should have begun.  The screenplay, by Randall Wallace (who also
wrote BRAVEHEART), focuses on the wrong part of the story, and thus
destroys what could have been a highly entertaining film.  Wallace, who
this time also directs the film, seems determined to show that Louis
was, in fact, a completely evil person with no redeeming qualities
whatsoever.  Many people complained about Cal in TITANIC as being too
heartless and inhuman.  Here's a character that those people should
really be complaining against.  Louis practically has no good in him,
using his crown to pleasure himself.  Wallace focuses nearly two-thirds
of the film on this alone, and frankly, it gets extremely boring.  Most
everything that progresses in the "setup" could have been done in half
an hour, leaving the rest of the film open for exploration of the
dilemmas that surround replacing the king with Philippe, or the problems
in the city, or the romantic relationship between D'Artagnan and the
Queen Mother, Anne d'Autriche (Anne Parillaud).
Of course, THE MAN IN THE IRON MASK isn't completely horrid.  The final
thirty minutes is what the whole film should have been: enticing,
entertaining, and completely engrossing.  The swash-buckling action is
what most people have come to see, but we are left with iconic
characters skewered to miserable little men who don't pick up a sword
for an hour and a half.  Instead, Wallace hopes that the melodramatic
scenes towards the beginning cover up any poor writing.  It doesn't.  It
does, however, make the audience more aware of the flaws, as we
constantly have more time before something interesting happens.  And
yes, I will admit it--I nearly dozed off twice during the film.  Granted
I was tired prior the film, but normally a movie will keep me awake
throughout.  THE MAN IN THE IRON MASK had nothing to keep my interest,
and only towards the end did I sit enthralled.  Of course, it really
isn't worthwhile to sit through ninety minutes of poorly constructed and
convoluted story telling to get to these thirty minutes of refreshing
and energetic action.
One of the most obvious flaws of the film lies in the dialogue.  While
watching this movie, I was more aware than ever of how film is such a
different medium from the stage or a novel.  The silver screen has the
ability to show what the characters think or say, and yet most films
lean towards dialogue to propel the narrative.  Sometimes this is
effective (THE USUAL SUSPECTS), but here it isn't.  Lines like "I am
doing this because I feel guilty" are almost laughably oblivious to the
cinematic strategies that could have been implemented to portray this
same feeling.  There is also an incredible amount of anachronistic
humor, such as Porthos' mannerisms.  Did people refer to breasts as
"tits"?  Did people just passively "break wind"?  And one of the most
obvious attempts at cheap humor comes when Porthos tries to kill himself
by hanging himself (he also happens to be nude at this time).  I wonder
if Alexandre Dumas had written these into his novel, but I doubt it.  It
seems that he would have more taste then to lower himself to the
inclusion of bodily functions for humor.  Over time, the
"playing-for-the-audience" humor becomes more annoying than funny.
The cast does its best to work with the material at hand.  However,
DiCaprio is definitely miscast as King Louis/Philippe.  DiCaprio is
actually rather good as Philippe, but considering that two roles had to
be played by the same person, DiCaprio wasn't a good choice.  This is
yet another Hollywoodism, as producers try to benefit from his
popularity with the young women (though I bet they didn't realize how
much his success with TITANIC would help the film).  As Louis, DiCaprio
is almost unbearable to watch.  Perhaps this is just due to the writing,
but his cocky appearance is more of an artificial try at seeming
important.  His well-mannered Philippe is fully realized, though he
doesn't come into play for a very long time.  But it is Gabriel Byrne
who steals virtually every scene in the film.  His thoughtful and
emotional performance is the most interesting and captivating, and his
character does get quite a bit of screen time (though I wish it would
have focused on him more).  John Malkovich is energetic and fun as
Athos, and Peter Sarsgaard does a frightfully realistic impersonation of
his son.  Depardieu is just annoying as Porthos, as he tries to hide his
French accent (which is rather ironic considering that this is the one
time that he actually should have one).  Jeremy Irons is deliciously
mysterious, as we can't determine whether or not he is a good guy or a
bad guy (though it probably could have been even less clearly defined).
Both Anne Parillaud and Judith Godrčche provide nice and understated
performances as the only two important females in the story.  But Byrne
steals the film, and his scenes with Parillaud are some of the most
energetic in the whole movie.
As production values go, THE MAN IN THE IRON MASK is top-notch.  The
sets are visually stunning, with a castle that defies verbal
explanation.  The lush scenery radiates in each and every scene.  The
costumes are appropriate and provide an equal to the scenery.  The
cinematography captures the film with an almost dream-like quality.  The
camera captures the costumes and sets with pleasure, showing off the
incredible amount of work that must have gone in to producing the film.
The score by Nick Glennie-Smith is lush and epic, making it seem just
like the period piece that it is.  However, sometimes the music jumps
too quickly from cheerful to depressing.  But overall, the music is
probably the best thing in the film.
THE MAN IN THE IRON MASK is rated PG-13 for sequences of violence and
some sensuality/nudity.  With gorgeous cinematography (the unveiling of
the man in the mask is the best scene, visually, in the film) and a
wonderful supporting cast, one would have thought this movie would have
been better than it really is.  With no solid foundation from the
screenplay, everything else becomes window dressing, making a poorly
constructed film look better than it is.  It's sad that such a good and
talented cast is wasted in this motion picture.  It just goes to show
that the writing is probably the most important feature in a film.  Even
Wallace's confident direction can't save it.  Overall, just a big
disappointment.  My recommendation: go see TITANIC again, and help it
become number one for a thirteenth week.

Title
Review for Alien: Resurrection (1997)
Alien Resurrection (1997)        
Rated R for strong sci-fi violence and gore, some grotesque images, and language
----------  Out of 4 stars: ** (2 Stars)
Starring: Sigourney Weaver, Winona Ryder, Dominique Pinon, Ron Perlman, Dan Hedaya.
It was inevitable.  In ALIEN 3, Lt. Ripley (Sigourney Weaver) leaped to her death in order to kill an alien.
Most people thought this was the end of the Alien franchise, but as luck would have it, those greedy Hollywood
people wanted to make another Alien film.  Greedy isn't always a bad thing, because it can usually produce
some very good and entertaining films.  ALIEN RESURRECTION, on the other hand, is not good, and especially not
entertaining.  The Alien series was a top-notch, well-directed, and well-acted series, and I was a huge fan.
For months, I awaited the new entry into this series, as I loved every single Alien film prior to this one.
This was one of my most anticipated films of the year.
And what a disappointment it is.  ALIEN began a successful and extremely suspenseful set of films.  ALIEN was
directed by Ridley Scott, and with mounting tension, Scott released the alien upon us.  Next came ALIENS, the
most popular and most effective of all the films.  Director James Cameron changed this one into an action
film, and it took viewers on a relentless roller coaster ride, leaving many disturbed for days.  Cameron's is
my favorite.  In 1992, director David Fincher brought us ALIEN 3.  I realize I didn't like this one at first
as well, but there is something completely different from Fincher's and director Jean-Pierre Jeunet's
(director of CITY OF LOST CHILDREN).  I could give a very long list, but to shorten it, here are a few things
missing from Jeunet's that was present in all the others: mood, suspense, good dialogue, good characters, good
sets, good acting, scary music, etc.
ALIEN RESURRECTION is pretty much just a bad film.  From watching trailers and previews, I knew it was going
to be different, and I didn't mind.  ALIEN 3 was quite different, but with Fincher's strong direction, I grew
to love it.  The moralistic undertone of the film created a nice change from complete terror to gradual
build-up.  ALIEN RESURRECTION has a moral story as well, but this moral dilemma faced by Ripley this time
around is shoved into our faces, and rammed down our throats.  Nothing is very subtle in ALIEN RESURRECTION,
and we are shown pretty much everything, leaving no suspense whatsoever.  In fact, where all the Alien films
prior to this one succeeded, ALIEN RESURRECTION fails.  And the only reason Resurrection doesn't get a 1 star
rating is due to Sigourney Weaver's powerful presence and very good performance.
ALIEN RESURRECTION begins 200 years from the ALIEN 3 incident.  Opening with a short monologue by Ripley, we
see she has been reproduced (how is left to our imaginations).  However, due to the blood sample they
retrieved, the alien's DNA is still locked away, and the cloning reproduces the alien as well.  The scientists
had planned on this and remove the alien from Ripley's chest in order to let the alien procreate.  Buying
several people frozen in cryogenic tubes, they plan on training the aliens and taming them.  Ripley, who was
supposed to be killed after the alien was brought back, lives, but has alien DNA mixed in with her own.
Normally, this would be cause for a nice subplot about her dilemma on having this alien DNA in her, but ALIEN
RESURRECTION makes it so that Ripley can't remember anything from her previous encounters... or can she?
It's inevitable that the aliens escape their confinement somehow, but I was quite amazed at how well it is
done.  This scene shows how intelligent the aliens are (but then again, a snail would be smarter than the
humans in this film).  Unfortunately, there aren't enough of these scenes present, and we are left with many,
many scenes which seem extracted directly from the first three films.  The biggest difference here is the ship
on which the events take place.  In the Alien films of the past, the action took place in small corridors and
claustrophobic environments.  Here, the ship is massive with wide open rooms, and one begins to think how an
alien could hide from a crew member in that room.  But I accepted that aspect of the film quickly.  What
bothered me was the complete lack of suspense, which is what made the Alien films work.  Every Alien film had
some level of suspense (ALIENS is one of the most intense films I have ever seen), yet ALIEN RESURRECTION opts
for cool special effects and slimy alien costumes.  To be blunt, I am very angry at director Jeunet for making
us wait five years for this.  This film almost makes you wish the Alien series had ended on 3 (but hopefully 5
will be better).
ALIEN RESURRECTION does contain several well-directed scenes, and one actually gains some suspense (although
it is extremely ludicrous).  My favorite of the film occurs underwater, and quite a bit of suspense amounts
from this fact alone.  The only problem is that no one can hold their breath for that long, especially when
you are screaming underwater.  Ripley's dolphin-like swimming is effective, but only two of these crew members
could hold their breath for a long period of time.  However, if you forget this, you might find yourself
actually worrying about a couple of the characters.  Another good scene features Ripley playing basketball,
and proceeding to beat up Johner (Ron Perlman, a Jeunet regular).  It's very fun to watch, especially seeing
how much fun Weaver seems to be having.  Unfortunately, there just aren't enough scenes of this caliber to
maintain our interest.  
One of the biggest problems of ALIEN RESURRECTION is the cast.  Sigourney Weaver is the only one who seems to
be having any fun.  She relishes in playing a flawed heroine, and she shines amidst the rest of the cast.
Weaver's dialogue is very effective due to her terrific acting ability.  Weaver is still one of the best
actresses in Hollywood.  Winona Ryder is also a very good actress (she was terrific in THE CRUCIBLE), but here
she seems out of place.  Her character Call never comes to life (literally), and she gives a very poor
performance.  She never seems to find the right tone for the character.  Dominique Pinon (another Jeunet
regular) portrays Vriess, a handicapped crew member.  Pinon is among the wasted talent, though he never seems
to be right for the character in the first place.  Ron Perlman surprisingly gives a good performance.  Perlman
is usually good, but this time he seems to actually have fun.  Perlman's scenes with Weaver are some of the
best.  Kim Flowers also gives a nice performance, but her character is so underdeveloped that we really don't
care about her.  Flowers actually has one of the suspense-building moments.  Dan Hedaya is wasted in a
horrible role as General Perez.  However, he does provide a major laugh (though unintentional).
Director Jean-Pierre Jeunet has a very good visual style, which is very apparent in his CITY OF LOST CHILDREN.
Here, however, his style is completely wrong, using too many close-ups of the actors' faces.  Let's face it...
he hasn't exactly chosen an appealing-looking cast (Ryder and Weaver are the only two).  His characters are so
strange that I found myself hoping the aliens would kill everyone except Weaver.  Jeunet has single-handedly
destroyed a terrific series of suspense films.  Adding flat humor and revolting dialogue, Jeunet is reduced to
showing us extreme amounts of gore and slime, and some rather cool special effects.  But let's face it,
effects just aren't enough to carry a film these days.  Jeunet's direction shines through in the underwater
sequence, and some of his peculiar aspects (such as bad breath being an ID form) are fun.  But overall, Jeunet
removes most suspense by using too much sound too often.  ALIEN and ALIENS built suspense from moments of
extreme quietness, with the only sound being the repetitious beat of the tracking monitor.  Jeunet loves
sound, and only two scenes are quiet enough for suspense to mount.  Part of the blame should go on Joss Whedon
for writing a weak screenplay, with ridiculous dialogue and poor attempts at humor.  A few lines are actually
good ("I thought you were dead!" ... "Yeah, I get that a lot."), but for the most part, the writing is
laughably bad.
The Alien films have always had spectacular technical effects, especially set designs.  ALIEN RESURRECTION has
a very impressive design (though uneffective for building suspense).  The sets are massive and dark, usually
lit by red and yellow lights.  The cinematography is well done, although too many tight shots of actors
somehow deteriorate the overall tone of the film.  The underwater shots are especially remarkable.  The
special effects are very good, especially considering they are done by a rather unknown company.  One effect
towards the end is quite gruesome but amazing.  The amount of gore involved in ALIEN RESURRECTION is extremely
high (think all the gore from the first three films put together and then doubled), and you get the feeling
that a good story was sacrificed for these graphic displays of violence.  I usually don't mind gore,
especially when I know it is fake, but it really irks me when the producers feel that violence is the most
important thing in an Alien film.  Another aspect I felt needed an overhaul was the music.  ALIEN and ALIENS
had award-nominated scores, and the latter film had one of the most impressive scores ever written for a
sci-fi/action film.  ALIEN RESURRECTION's music was upbeat and "happy" (something Alien films are not supposed
to be).
ALIEN RESURRECTION is rated R for strong sci-fi violence and gore, some grotesque images, and language.  After
three terrific entries into the Alien series, there had to be a limit to how good it could get.  The stories
were becoming repetitious and boring, and ALIEN RESURRECTION pushes it over the line.  It takes its story from
ALIENS, with the new idea that Ripley should be cloned.  Of course, no Alien film could work without Ripley.
Despite a strong performance by Weaver, Jeunet's Alien flick destroys the entire purpose of the Alien
franchise: to scare the hell out of viewers.
Reviewed by Respect (respect@aros.net)
http://www.aros.net/~respect/movies.html

Title
Review for Devil's Advocate, The (1997)
Starring: Keanu Reeves, Al Pacino, Charlize Theron, Craig T. Nelson,
Connie Nielson, and Judith Ivey
If there is one thing that bothers me about Hollywood films it's their
predictable endings.  THE DEVIL'S ADVOCATE has the atypical Hollywood
ending, when everything that should happen does.  Unfortunately for
THE DEVIL'S ADVOCATE, this ending nearly collapses in on itself, and
ruins the entire film.  Nevertheless, the film does provide two and a
half hours of pure entertainment (note to self: kill whomever was in
charge of the previews for this film).  I don't think I was quite
prepared for this movie because the trailers made it appear to be some
supernatural horror film about Satan.  Well, it does contain this
element, but what is not mentioned in the ads is the other plot
elements (and seemingly more interesting ones at that).
THE DEVIL'S ADVOCATE begins in Florida with an ongoing trial in
session.  Kevin Lomax (Keanu Reeves) is the defense attorney, working
for a client whom has been accused of raping a young girl.  He ends up
with a not-guilty verdict, despite an emotional testimony from the
victim (Heather Matarazzo).  He leaves the courthouse with his lovely
wife Mary Ann (Charlize Theron) where he is approached with an offer
to travel to New York City to help choose a good jury.  He accepts
(mainly after seeing the paycheck he will receive) and he flies to New
York with his wife.  After proving his worth for selecting juries (and
his perfect winning streak in court), the head of the firm, John
Milton (Al Pacino), asks him to work permanently as a criminal lawyer.
He graciously accepts, where he is treated almost as a god.  He is
given an incredible apartment (which is bigger than my entire house
now), and a hefty paycheck.  His life seems to be on the rise.
And of course, his life suddenly begins to waver and slowly decline.
He is attracted to fellow employee Christabella (Connie Nielson), and
his wife begins to feel very lonely in her large apartment.  Mary Ann
takes up a friendship with a neighbor who always gives advice,
especially if it is not wanted.  Meanwhile, Kevin nabs a case
surrounding Alexander Cullen (Craig T. Nelson) who apparently murdered
three people.  He spends hours upon hours with this case, while
forgetting his loving wife, who may or may not be going insane.  All
of this while John Milton may or may not be the devil himself.
After a while, things turn completely upside-down, as Kevin's wife
claims to have seen monstrous images superimposed on her friends.  A
fellow employee is murdered in the park, and his mother (Judith Ivey)
reveals information about Kevin's real father.  Is it all just a big
nightmare?  Or is John Milton really Satan, playing tricks with
Kevin's life?  THE DEVIL'S ADVOCATE plays out fairly straight-forward,
but for some odd reason, the screenwriters wanted to surprise everyone
by giving us something we don't expect.  Is this surprise conclusion
supposed to make us feel good and go home without feeling depressed or
disturbed?  If so, THE DEVIL'S ADVOCATE messes up completely, and
ironically, I felt more depressed because of the ending as is now,
than I would have if it had ended ten minutes early.
I went into THE DEVIL'S ADVOCATE expecting a shocking horror film, and
that is exactly what I got.  I was settled in to be disturbed mentally
and emotionally, and that is what I got.  But what was the most
disturbing and horrible aspect of the movie is the poor ending (did I
mention that I didn't like the ending?).  The producers of this film
take you on a thrilling roller coaster ride and just as it is ending,
they pull the rug out from under you.  Films like SE7EN and THE USUAL
SUSPECTS can survive with this surprise ending because it is expected,
more or less.  We know it is going to end in an unpredictable way.
THE DEVIL'S ADVOCATE, on the other hand, ends unpredictably, not from
us knowing a lot, but knowing nothing at all.  If that is confusing, I
recommend watching the film, and then reading that again.
As for the film overall, I enjoyed the entire first two hours, being
drawn in by a terrific character study and then adding the
supernatural plot to increase the tension build from the character
study.  The film runs like a well-built clock, slowly building until
finally exploding with a highly charged climax (and an unpredictable
one at that).  And then you settle in for a nice resolution, which
does not occur.  It was at this point that I felt cheated.  Taking us
on a terror ride of intrigue, we follow Kevin Lomax around, as he is
the centerpiece of the film.  Everything occurs from his perspective.
He is our representation on screen (sort of).  But we are forced to
witness a conclusion which makes most of the film seem like a game.  I
don't want to spoil the ending, so all I can say is go see the film
and decide for yourself.
Perhaps the most shocking thing about THE DEVIL'S ADVOCATE is the
extreme amount of everything.  It earned its R rating for a reason.
There is plenty of nudity, sex, violence, gore, and then you have
gore, violence, sex, and more nudity.  This film really isn't subtle
about anything, showing us everything.  It actually surprises me that
this film did not receive an NC-17 rating, as it is quite harsh.
However, the movie does have its merits, and nudity and sex are among
those.  I don't condone sex and nudity in films, but if its there, I
might as well enjoy it.  The biggest merit of this film is also the
most interesting to watch.  The confrontations between Kevin Lomax and
John Milton are entertaining, but what stands out amidst this extreme
hatred is the decline of the wife, Mary Ann.  Portrayed by the
extremely effective Charlize Theron, Mary Ann's problems are
incredibly intense, and I found myself wanting to witness her decline.
This may sound uncaring, but I wanted to watch because I felt sorry
for her.  She is the most interesting character on the screen, who is
forced into a world where she is not wanted.
Something THE DEVIL'S ADVOCATE contained actually shocked me for
reasons other than extreme violence and nudity, especially for a film
of this nature.  The story actually has something to say about
humanity.  In one of the last scenes, John Milton explains to Kevin
Lomax the game God plays with his children (he is Satan, of course).
He comments that it is human nature to lust and loathe in vanity.
Then, God sets up rules which contradict human nature.  This
semi-religious bashing is more humorous than frightening.  What Milton
says is so true about our society that I found myself laughing out
loud, partially thinking it was funny, but patially realizing it was
true.  These moral dilemmas are present throughout THE DEVIL'S
ADVOCATE, giving it an added depth many films skip over in their
writing (but I'm sure they came straight from the novel it was based
on).  When a film has something to say about our society, it deserves
to be watched.
The cast of THE DEVIL'S ADVOCATE is one of the highlights, as we see
memorable faces, and they put spins on those memorable faces we don't
expect.  Heather Matarazzo makes a brief appearance as the terrorized
victim in the opening court case, and she does a great job.  Probably
the big surprise of this film is Keanu Reeves.  He has proven himself
an uneven actor (successes such as SPEED and bombs such as JOHNNY
MNEMONIC), but he tops himself with this performance.  I have never
seen him more believable to date.  Al Pacino is of course the scene
stealer.  His devilish performance is equal to those of Jack Nicholson
(THE WITCHES OF EASTWICK) and Max von Sydow (NEEDFUL THINGS).  He
could have easily gone too far over the top in many scenes, but he
remains completely believable (if that is the correct term).  Jeffrey
Jones (mostly known as the principal in FERRIS BUELLER'S DAY OFF) also
gives a good performance as Eddie Barzoon.  Judith Ivey manages a
credible performance as the mother who holds a secret to Kevin's past.
Connie Nielson is very effective in her role, and she also appears
naked several times.  One familiar face with a twist was "Coach" star,
Craig T. Nelson, who gives a very good performance.
THE DEVIL'S ADVOCATE is rated R for sexuality, nudity, violence,
language, and some gore.  At 144 minutes, this film moves along fairly
quickly.  For the first two hours, I sat completely engaged in the
good performances and strong characters.  The technical quality is
also remarkable, with great special effects and a good musical score.
Director Taylor Hackford has managed to create a very disturbing
motion picture, only to ruin a good chunk of tension with the final
fifteen minutes.  I guess my biggest problem with the ending is the
fact that I went into the theater expecting a disturbing film, and
Hackford gave me just that for a long time.  But just before the end,
he got jitterish and relied on the Hollywood safety net in order to
make his film more mainstream.  Personally, I would have preferred it
ending fifteen minutes early.
Reviewed by Respect (respect@aros.net)
http://www.aros.net/~respect/movies.html

Title
Review for Kiss the Girls (1997)
Kiss the Girls (1997)
Rated R for terror, violence, language, and suggested sex.
----------  Out of 4 stars: ***1/2 (3 1/2 Stars)
Starring: Morgan Freeman, Ashley Judd, Cary Elwes, Tony Goldwyn, Gina Ravera.
One of the biggest cliches of any serial killer film is also one of the most believable.  You know, the one
where the detective looks at a wall of pictures and other police information, and suddenly spots the clue
which reveals who the killer is.  Sure, it's been used over and over, but for some reason, it is always fun to
watch.  This cliche pretty much describes the level KISS THE GIRLS works on: overused, but always fun.  One of
my personal rules about watching a film is not how original the film is, but how it goes around giving its
story.  This rule applies highly to KISS THE GIRLS.
There is something psychologically stimulating in a well-crafted serial killer movie, and KISS THE GIRLS is
certainly well made.  However, the whole film screams of unoriginality, and so it relies on the power of its
actors and the technical detail to pull it through.  Well, not only are the actors capable of pulling it
through, but they add so much to the film that nearly every flaw is covered up.  Unfortunately, one of the
most revealing and rather insulting choices by the filmmakers (one that SEVEN, a film a lot like this one,
knew not to make) was to put the name of the killer in the opening credits.  That may give the actor credit
for the role, but throughout the film, hidden in my mind, I was waiting for him to appear on screen, which
spoiled the mystery.  However, credit must be given to the director for suspending this knowledge through most
of the film.  
Plotwise, KISS THE GIRLS shows almost no originality.  We are introduced to Detective Alex Cross (Morgan
Freeman), a forensic psychologist, and immediately we are given the cliched scene establishing him as the
hero.  He gets a call about a woman who has shot her husband and is now threatening to kill herself.
Obviously Cross succeeds at getting the gun, but this scene is quickly forgotten during the next scene.  At
his house, Cross is told that his neice, Naomi (Gina Ravera), has been missing for four days.  This provides
the motivation for Cross to find the killer, but we are never given a chance to establish the relationship
between the two, and as a result, we can't sympathize with Detective Cross.  However, what makes KISS THE
GIRLS slightly original is the introduction of one of the abductees... before she is abducted.  Dr. Kate
McTiernan (Ashley Judd, the actress of the Judd family) is a smart, athletic woman, and because of these
traits, becomes a target for Casanova--what the serial killer likes to call himself.  Because of these
character-developing scenes, we care for McTiernan, making the abduction scene all that more suspenseful. 
After being abducted, McTiernan wakes up and finds herself in a cell somewhere in the woods.  Remembering that
the killer gave her certain rules, she decides to break one of them by calling out.  When Casanova comes to
punish her, she breaks out and escapes by jumping over a waterfall.  After she is found, she begins to help
Cross find his neice.  From this moment on, KISS THE GIRLS takes on the form of every other serial killer
film, as the two leads search for the rest of the victims held captive. 
Many people will compare this film to 1995's SEVEN, another killer film starring Morgan Freeman, but I presume
that the similarities are intentional.  The screenplay, by David Klass, is adapted from the novel written by
James Patterson, and yet I don't quite see how this story could have worked in novel form.  What makes KISS
THE GIRLS so good is the acting and the technical and visual impressiveness.  The cinematography, by Aaron
Schneider, is reminiscient of SEVEN, and sometimes I felt that many of the shots were trying too hard to
impress us.  Sometimes a simple shot is the best one.  However, many of the shots are stunning, and unlike
SEVEN, most of them take place during the day, in sunlight.  The scene when Ashley Judd is running through the
forest is extremely well done, in more than one way.  The camera work is terrific, but the editing makes this
scene work so well.  The chaotic and MTV-type cutting gives the audience a sense of confusion and unawareness,
exactly what Judd's character is experiencing. 
However, the best aspect of KISS THE GIRLS is its actors.  Morgan Freeman is one of today's most powerful and
believable actors.  Detective Cross is a very good character for him, although it is just a similar one to the
character in SEVEN.  Because of Freeman's powerful presence, he carries half the film by himself.  The other
half is carried by Ashley Judd, one of today's most promising dramatic actresses.  In fact, her performance is
better than Freeman's, if that is even possible.  Her character is more original than Freeman's, and she
handles it wonderfully.  We finally have a female character in a movie like this who does more than just
scream.  The supporting cast is highly underdeveloped, but the cast members do as much as they can with it.
Cary Elwes portrays a cop in North Carolina, and unfortunately has scraps for a character.  Tony Goldwyn fairs
slightly better, but we don't really get to know his character either.  Gina Ravera gives a good performance,
but again she isn't in many of the scenes.  So as a result of all these small supporting parts, the weight of
the film lies on the two leads, and they do a phenomenal job.  Some of the best acting of this genre, and some
of the best acting of the year.
Two other essential aspects of the film are quite good.  Director Gary Fleder does a good job of controlling
his actors, but the second half of the film loses believability, especially during the revelation of the
killer.  He also doesn't handle the suspenseful scenes as a better director would have, losing a lot of
tension during many scenes.  However, to his credit, he does manage a terrific first half.  Part of the blame
falls on David Klass.  I'm sure the book developed many of the lesser characters more, but Klass focuses on
the two main parts.  While this may give the two leads more screentime, many of the small characters are
one-dimensional, and the killer, when revealed, is extremely implausible.  Thanks to the smart dialogue
adapted from the novel, KISS THE GIRLS always seems intelligent.  None of the conversations are laughable, and
all move the plot forward without seeming forced.  One of the biggest problems I had with the movie was the
motive of the killer.  I blame this mainly on the casting director, because the killer's motive is because of
rejection from women (or so I assume from the opening monologue), but the killer himself is very attractive
(One of my friends is a, shall we say, big admirer of the killer).
KISS THE GIRLS is rated R for terror, violence, language, and suggested sex.  With all the implausibilities of
this film, and with the mediocre second half, KISS THE GIRLS somehow manages to thoroughly entertain.  In
fact, I had the urge to see it again just for the performances.  The cinematography adds a lot of mood to the
already creepy tone, and the script is usually smart.  This is clearly one of those movies which rely on the
acting to pull it through.  Morgan Freeman is possibly today's most convincing actor, and Ashley Judd adds
another notch on her acting belt.  I must also say that I loved the ending.  The showdown between good and
evil was quite tense, and the resolution of the scene makes almost anyone cheer.  Perhaps it may not be
possible, but most of the film isn't anyway.  

Title
Review for I Know What You Did Last Summer (1997)
I Know What You Did Last Summer (1997)
Rated R for strong, graphic violence, terror, and language.
---------  Out of 4 stars: *** (3 Stars)
Starring: Jennifer Love Hewitt, Sarah Michelle Gellar, Ryan Phillippe, Freddie Prinze Jr., Anne Heche, and
Johnny Galecki.
Some movies are meant for entertainment purposes only.  These are the
films which you almost want to laugh at because the writing is bad, or
the acting sucks.  I KNOW WHAT YOU DID LAST SUMMER is one of these
films.  The acting is quite good for a film of this genre, but the
writing is very mediocre, bordering on hideous.  Based on Lois
Duncan's revered novel, I KNOW WHAT YOU DID LAST SUMMER's story is
changed dramatically on the transition from novel to screen.  Instead
of being a psychologically probing teenage story, LAST SUMMER ends up
as a horror film, with some psychological moments in the first hour.
In fact, the first hour is very well done, with characters you get to
know and like, and some you don't like, and that is when screenwriter
Kevin Williamson shifts the mood to horror.
I have no objections to the alteration, but I will say that much of
his writing is rather cheesy at times.  This is quite unusual coming
from the writer of the highest-grossing horror film SCREAM.  What made
that film such a success though, was the smart, ironic take on the
teen slasher genre.  LAST SUMMER doesn't exactly make fun of motion
pictures as SCREAM did (I think the closest example was when a
character commented, "Jodie Foster did this in a movie..."), and
sometimes it uses the cliches talked about in Williamson's previous
film.  But what makes LAST SUMMER work isn't exactly the writing.  The
plot is the high point of the script, with the dialogue being the
lowest, but the cast makes up for a lot of the plot holes left (and
there are quite a few).  However, actors can never cover up every
single plot hole, no matter how good they are.  Thankfully, the
direction by Jim Gillespie is usually well done, creating a lot of
suspense and terror.
I KNOW WHAT YOU DID LAST SUMMER begins with a very impressive shot
which zooms in onto a lone character, sitting on the edge of a cliff.
His solitude creates tension on the screen from the start, as we begin
to dread the fate of this character.  However, it doesn't turn out as
you might think, as fireworks break the silence.  The annual Croaker
Festival is occuring, and the highlight of the evening is the Croaker
Queen Pageant, as a few high school students perform and answer
questions in their swimming suits (a crack at the Miss America
Pageant?).  One of these students is Helen Shivers (Sarah Michelle
Gellar), whose answer to her question is a very funny spoof of beauty
pageants.  Helen wins, obviously, and becomes the year's Croaker Queen
(a very nice foreshadowing effect, I might add).  Her three friends
best friends, Julie James (Jennifer Love Hewitt), Barry Cox (Ryan
Phillippe), and Ray Bronson (Freddie Prinze Jr.), all sit in the
balcony and cheer.
After the crowning and party, the four jump in a car and race to the
beach to tell stories about killers with hooks (the foreshadowing is
almost overwhelming).  They all have sex, and then drive home.
Turning a curve, Ray is distracted by Barry and doesn't see the
shadowy figure whom they mow down with the car.  After dumping the
nearly dead body into the ocean, the four have to struggle with their
consciences, changing their lives forever.  Julie takes it the
hardest, and she becomes the central character of the film.  A year
passes, and Julie is nearly flunking out of college.  Her roommate
suggests that she go home to take a break from college and "get a
tan."  At home, she receives a mysterious letter, with "I Know What
You Did Last Summer" printed on it.  She contacts all of her friends
again, and they begin a search of who could know.  The most obvious
would be Max (Johnny Galecki) who drove by the scene of the accident.
Very quickly, bodies start piling up, and Julie and her friends begin
a race of survival and mystery.  Who is the killer?  Could it be the
dead victim himself?  All these questions are answered, rather
insufficiently because we, the audience, are never given a chance to
figure out for ourselves who is doing it (something SCREAM did very
well).  However, the mystery is not really an essential part of the
film.  The purpose of LAST SUMMER is to gross audiences out and scare
us while doing it.  The film succeeds at this basic premise quite
well, and so I am giving the movie a recommendation.  I will admit
that what LAST SUMMER did to make me like it was put good characters
into the situations.  Many critics claim that the characters are
unoriginal and uninspired, but I assume that that is exactly what
Williamson's intentions were.  Unfortunately, there is really only one
interesting male figure in the film, Max, the friendly fisherman, but
he is left in the shadow of the four stars.
Kevin Williamson's screenplay manages many scary moments, along with a
truly suspenseful highlight, which lasts around ten minutes.  After
watching LAST SUMMER, I realized that true suspense isn't watching
someone being chased around by a mysterious killer (although that
extended sequence is the highlight aforementioned).  True suspense is
expecting something to happen and then waiting for it to occur.  You
know someone is going to jump out of the shadows, but who will it be,
and when will it happen?  Sometimes, it doesn't occur at all, and the
suspense lingers as we continue to expect it.  Director Jim Gillespie
is no Wes Craven, but he does manage to create some genuine suspense,
along with several of those "jump" moments that we all know and love.
Unfortunately, many scenes create unintentional humor because the
writing requires one thing, while Gillespie does another.  Williamson
does write a very intelligent first half, which deals with the guilty
consciences of the friends.  This setup gives the audience an
emotional connection with the characters, making us care for them as
they are stalked.
The cast is one of the best parts of the film.  Jennifer Love Hewitt
is obviously the main character here, although one might think
director Gillespie was trying to give Sarah Michelle Gellar the
starring credit.  Hewitt's presence is very reminiscient of Neve
Campbell's role in SCREAM, but Hewitt's reaction to every situation
seems appropriate and accurate.  I liked her character, and Hewitt
added a lot to it.  Gellar nearly steals the film with a cheesy spoof
of beauty queens, obsessed with their hair.  Gellar, from TV's "Buffy,
the Vampire Slayer," seems like a perfect choice for this role, and
she adds more depth to the shallow character than required.  I'm not
sure if we were supposed to care for the character, but with Gellar in
the role, I dreaded the entire chase sequence involving her and the
killer.  Freddie Prinze Jr. gives no depth to his character, and his
performance is probably the worst in the film.  Ryan Phillippe is good
as his cliched character, but we never are very clear on what his
intentions are.  Anne Heche gives a very good performance, although
listening to her talk, I began to realize that none of the other
characters had Southern accents.  Heche is given a small shred of a
role, but she does a lot with it.  Johnny Galecki portrays the only
male figure that I liked in the movie.  Galecki has a very unclear
role, and this uncertainty gives us yet another character to add to
the list of possible killers.
I KNOW WHAT YOU DID LAST SUMMER is rated R for strong, graphic horror
violence, terror, and language.  Because the film is based on a novel,
I forgave the killer's choice of weapon.  I kept expecting one of the
characters to remark on how similar this is to CANDYMAN, the
frightening 1992 horror film.  Normally I don't like humor in a
slasher film like this (I didn't really appreciate the over-the-top
performance in SCREAM), but this film certainly could have used some.
LAST SUMMER isn't scary enough to make you scream, and as a result,
should have added humor to make it more entertaining.  For what it is
though, this film certainly is fun to watch.
Reviewed by Respect - respect@aros.net
http://www.aros.net/~respect/movies.html

Title
Review for Dead Again (1991)
Starring: Kenneth Branagh, Emma Thompson, Derek Jacobi, Andy Garcia,
Wayne Knight, Robin Williams.
Dead Again has one of the best endings to a film I have ever seen.
Period.  It ranks up there with CITIZEN KANE, THE USUAL SUSPECTS, and
other films with surprise endings.  However, while the resolution is
surprising, the denouement is so well done that you may find yourself
watching it over and over again.  Director Kenneth Branagh, with his
second feature, has proven that he is very capable of directing many
different types of films, and at the same time, starring in them.  No
other director that I know of has starred in his own films, given
credible performances, and at the same time, created a masterful work.
Dead Again has a very refreshingly original plot which allows the film
to combine the style of the 40s with the frantic, quick-paced action
of the 90s.  The film noir moments are filmed using black and white,
not only for effect, but to give the viewers a little clarity.  Both
actors, Emma Thompson and Kenneth Branagh, have dual roles and the
color/no color contrast allows viewers to distinguish which time
period the events are taking place in.  The only problem with the film
is the beginning which starts in the past, and then shifts to the
present.  It was a little confusing trying to figure out that Branagh
was playing two roles.  Fortunately, once the film gets on its feet,
it never stops its relentless adrenaline-pumping run.
Most of the film takes place in the present day, with Kenneth Branagh
portraying Mike Church, a private detective.  He is asked to
investigate the mysterious circumstances surrounding one Amanda
"Grace" Sharp (Emma Thompson).  Sharp won't talk, and she is paranoid
that someone is trying to kill her.  She locks the door to her room
and puts a chair under the door handle for added protection.  But what
makes her think she is being stalked is one of the essential pieces of
information Church must deal with.  She has been having nightmares
about a man on death row who stabs her to death with a pair of shears
which he stole after his final haircut.  Church suggests that she go
to a hypnotist who can help her.  Franklyn Madison (Derek Jacobi) is
only a part-time hypnotist, but a hypnotist nonetheless.  He considers
that her problem may be something in her past, perhaps in a past life.
Church, being the logical and sensible man that he is, thinks that
Madison is crazy.  Madison puts Sharp under, and she begins to tell
the story of a married couple: Roman and Margaret Strauss (Branagh and
Thompson).
I will tread lightly because most of the film hereafter is mysterious
in its unfolding, and I may not reveal anything at all.  I will say
that the rest of the plot consists of surprises, plot twists, and
uncertainty.  The revelation of the Strauss' life begins to uncover
events which may have led to Sharp's paranoia.  This story begins to
clarify why Sharp is so nervous, but suddenly twists arrive in the
plot, and nothing is as it seems.  Is someone actually trying to kill
her?  At the hands of a lesser director, nothing would have made
sense.  Branagh, being his second major film, is a powerful director,
with traces of Hitchcock in his film.  We may even have our next
Hitchcock in Branagh.  Unfortunately, Branagh has strayed from
mainstream films, choosing to direct the brilliant HAMLET, a film most
people tried to stay away from.
Watching Dead Again, I began to realize how much detail is involved in
Branagh's work.  The music is perfect (and won a Golden Globe
nomination) and sets the right mood for the different time periods.
Composed by Patrick Doyle, who also appears in the film in both
timelines, the eerily enchanting score enhances the mystery as well as
the tone.  The ending is the best moment of the film.  Many directors
don't know how to end a film, or it isn't consistent with the rest of
the picture.  Branagh uses slow motion to enhance the final showdown,
a film technique which, if used appropriately, can strengthen the
suspense and climax.  Dead Again is one of the few films which end
with the climax, instead of a resolution.  In my opinion, most
resolutions are slow and distasteful.  Sometimes a film will call for
one, but after the climax, most audience members don't care what
happens.  Branagh wisely ends this film once the high point of the
film is finished, leaving a sense of pleasure, instead of a sense of
boredom.
Most of the praise should go to the director, but without the actors,
there is no director.  Kenneth Branagh is one of the only directors
who can star in a film and direct it at the same time, creating a
masterpiece (this does not include Mel Gibson).  As an actor, Branagh
is terrific.  His dual role is handled extremely well, and without
revealing too much, his portrayal of Mike Church has some hints as to
the ending of the film.  Certainly, only Branagh would be able to
handle this kind of role while directing.  Emma Thompson fairs better
than Branagh, because she has a more complex role to play.  Thompson
maintains her nervous, but paradoxally trusting, character throughout
the film.  In her dual role, she does the same thing Branagh does,
revealing small clues as to who is who and what is what.  Derek Jacobi
has a tough job, trying to rise to the level of the two leads.
Surprisingly, he does so, and gives one of his best performances I
have seen him give.  Andy Garcia gives a good performance in his
smaller role.  Unfortunately, Garcia's role is a little too small, and
his performance isn't as memorable as the rest of the cast.  Also
worthy of note is Wayne Knight (from SEINFELD), and Robin Williams,
toned down from his normal frantic self.
Dead Again is rated R for violence and language.  The screenplay,
written by Scott Frank, is very intelligent and witty.  The plot
twists are amazingly detailed and impressive, and I wonder how the
Academy forgot to nominate this screenplay.  Maybe it was too original
for their tastes (and SILENCE OF THE LAMBS was out that year).  The
cinematography, done by Matthew F. Leonetti, is quite impressive,
especially his management of both time lines.  Dead Again is a
masterful piece of filmmaking with impressive sets, great acting, and
some of the best direction of a film of this genre.  Snubbed by the
Academy, this film exhibits Branagh's multiple talents, and the ending
is pure cinema.  Films these days aren't made like this anymore.
Reviewed by Respect (respect@aros.net)
http://www.aros.net/~respect/movies.html

Title
Review for Wild Things (1998)
WILD THINGS (1998)
Rated R for strong sexuality, nudity, language and violence.
----------  Out of 4 stars: ***1/2 (3 1/2 Stars)
Starring: Kevin Bacon, Matt Dillon, Neve Campbell, Denise Richards,
Theresa Russell, Daphne Rubin-Vega
As much as I wanted to like this film as I went into it, the more
pleased I was when I left.  First, getting through all the usual lines
of newspaper glitz:  "If you liked Scream, you'll love Wild Things!"
"Campbell gives a stunning performance!"  "This twisty plot will have
you dazzled for days!" (Oh yeah, the day a newspaper uses these is the
day Neve Campbell falls in love with me)
Now, onto more serious stuff (and with this film, I mean that in nearly
a sarcastic way).  WILD THINGS has single-handedly broken down the rules
surrounding the R rating from the MPAA.  I'm not saying that in a bad
way, but when you see this film, you may be shocked by what you see.
However, perhaps the MPAA was pleased by the film's charming cast and
tricky plot, that they let the film slide with an R rating.  Being
Mormon, I'm bound to hear an uproar from religious zealots warning me
not to see the film.  Trouble is, I have already seen it.  And I like
it!
WILD THINGS is a film noir of the 90s, filled with 40s sensibilities,
and yet breaking the rules and modern-day taboos of 90s culture.  The
style in which it is filmed is rich in color.  The actors are all
gorgeous people, seemingly drawn from the same gene pool and placed into
this film.  Sure, it's all too good to be true, but ain't it fun to
watch?  When movies like this come along (sort of a better version of
Basic Instinct) there is bound to be people who either love it or hate
it.  There will be people who don't want to admit liking what they see,
but I tell you, most anyone who sees this will like it.
WILD THINGS begins at Blue Bay High School, the one high school in the
world that any teenager would love to get into.  It's almost as if
students are put through entrance exams just for admittance (totally
based on looks alone).  Of course, there are those select few who may
look slightly ugly, but compared to the average person, they are
gorgeous.  Immediately, the film finds its tone and the audience settles
in for an enjoyable time.  We can turn off our brains, right?  Wrong.
While you may be expecting one thing to happen, it certainly doesn't
turn out that way.
The film begins in a classroom, with nearly all the main characters
present.  There's Sam Lombardo (Matt Dillon), a counselor for the
students.  He's heading the class discussion.  There's also Kelly Van
Ryan (Denise Richards), a snobby rich teen who has fallen in love with
Sam.  Teaching the class, however, are two policemen: Ray Duquette
(Kevin Bacon) and Gloria Perez (Daphne Rubin-Vega), who want to talk
about 'Sex... (Cheers) Crimes (Boos)'.  "What is a sex crime?" Ray
asks.  "Not gettin' any!" one student responds.  This pretty much sets
the tone of the film we are about to watch.  However, upon hearing this,
one student, Suzie Toller (Neve Campbell), stands up and leaves the
room, commenting that they can both kiss part of her body.  And so, WILD
THINGS sets into motion.
Quickly, Kelly begins hitting on Sam, but Sam doesn't want anything to
do with her advances.  Kelly is stubborn and continues to pursue him.
She even pleads with him to let her wash his Jeep.  Surprisingly, that's
really all I can tell you about the plot.  Any more would give away one
of the many crucial plot twists.  And what's more, these plot twists are
actually unpredictable.  Going along the way of SCREAM, WILD THINGS
maintains that film's surprises, and then adds even more to them.  There
are more plot twists in this film than probably any I have ever seen.
And even though you think you may get tired of them, the surprises are
so genuine that it's rather pleasing.  Going back over them in my mind,
nearly all of them work, though some stretch the boundaries of belief.
Thankfully, the convoluted plot doesn't give us much time to think about
each one, pouncing yet another twist on us before the shock of the
previous one has worn off.
As for the critics who complain that the film is trashy--well, it is.
This is pretty much just one trashy film.  However, it is the kind of
trashy that isn't hard to watch.  It's good trash, in a sense.  One, the
screenplay knows that it's not to be taken seriously, and it includes a
lot of humor and satire into the story.  This varies everywhere from
Kelly's mother (Theresa Russell), who is more of a caricature of rich
people, all the way to an ambulance-chasing lawyer (Bill Murray), who
wears a neck-brace to cover an insurance scam he is running.  Bill
Murray also provides the best character in the film, and most of the
genuine laughs.  And two, the sex is more than gratuitous, although not
unwelcomed.  WILD THINGS is supposed to have sex in it (what film with
that title wouldn't?), and this movie breaks the boundaries.  Instead of
having heterosexual sex scenes, it also includes lesbian scenes between
Denise Richards and Neve Campbell (don't worry... it's not as graphic as
you might think).  The heterosexual scenes are quite graphic, but the
surprise shocker is Kevin Bacon's full-frontal nude scene.  It's very
brief, so if you blink, you may miss (ahem) it.  And, for as long as I
can remember, I don't think I have seen an R-rated film show an erect
one before (it's not completely, but judging from the audiences'
reaction, it was more than they expected too).  Also, during one scene
late in the film, there seemed to be a relationship brewing between
Bacon and Dillon's characters, but nothing came of it (makes you wonder
if the director had to cut it in order for the R rating, or if the
actors refused to do it).
What first made me want to see WILD THINGS was its cast.  Neve Campbell,
of course, has been one of my favorite actresses since the SCREAM films
were released.  Here, however, she turns every typical role she has done
on its head and plays a gothic pothead.  The closest role to this was
her performance in THE CRAFT (though even in that she was a nice girl).
Campbell is probably the best in the film and shows her wide range of
talent.  You can tell she will be around for a long time.  Denise
Richards will also be around for a long time, although she may be
limited to the roles without much range.  Here, she gets to express more
emotions than in her stiff (yet effective) performance in STARSHIP
TROOPERS.  Hopefully one day she will land a very good role that can
display her ability.  And then there is Daphne Rubin-Vega, a newcomer to
the movies.  She gives a very good performance, although her character
is mostly left to the background for the first hour and a half.  Towards
the end she does get a bigger part.  On the male side, Matt Dillon is
probably the best, giving a subtle performance that surprises with every
twist.  Kevin Bacon has a slightly wooden character, but he makes the
most of it.  You must have admiration, though, for what he did on
screen.  And judging from many of the women's reactions in the theater
to that shot, they have grown a deeper appreciation for Bacon (yeah,
right).  And then there is Bill Murray.  His performance is the comic
relief, and he nearly steals the film.  As a whole, the entire cast
works wondrously together, and they seem at home, even when doing the
menage a troi.
Director John McNaughton, who has previously done the critically
acclaimed HENRY: PORTRAIT OF A SERIAL KILLER, has constructed a
wonderfully twisty plot that works.  His direction is smooth and
stylish.  The visuals are striking, filled with rich colors, and almost
so realistic that we can actually breathe the humidity in the air.
However, he seems more at home when the actors aren't talking.  His
fly-by shots of the swampy areas are brilliant, and his photography of
Denise Richards' climbing out of the pool is a highlight.  The
cinematography is gorgeous in its details.  Its not often that you see a
film like this, and we should watch it just to see how the camera can
take pictures.  Then, there is the music.  This was probably the most
obvious thing to me, as it set the perfect mood for the film.  It's hard
to describe in words, so just see the film and listen to it.  It's
wonderfully composed and presented.  And be sure to stick around during
the closing credits!  McNaughton has finally put the ending credits to
good use (while most comedies use it for outtakes).  He has included
some small scenes which help explain the preceding events.  Some may say
that these are lame attempts to explain the convoluted plot, but it's an
entertaining way to finish the film.  Plus, there are some shocking
moments in these ending credits which just add to the fun.
WILD THINGS is appropriately rated R for strong sexuality, nudity,
language and violence.  Again, the nudity is rather unnecessary, but
let's face it--people want to see it.  So why not give it to them?  Neve
Campbell, admirably, has a no-nudity clause in her contract, and the
most you see of her is from behind as she takes her top off (way to go,
Neve!).  The sex scenes are graphic, especially the first one we see,
between the mother and one of her deck hands.  One almost wonders how
they got away with the R rating.  The language is quite harsh too,
ranging from sexual innuendo to your average, everyday profanity.  And I
can't stress it enough: Don't allow kids under 18 to see this film.  The
target age for the movie is the 18-24 range, and that's who should see
it.  It's definitely not for those under 18!  Did I mention that this
film is rated R?  However, for those that do get a chance to watch it,
you will probably more likely be pleased, and may even take friends to
see it the next time.
Reviewed by Respect (respect@aros.net)
http://www.aros.net/~respect/movies.html

Title
Review for Horse Whisperer, The (1998)
THE HORSE WHISPERER (1998)
Rated PG-13 for a disturbing accident scene and some brief profanity.
----------  Out of 4 stars: **** (4 Stars)
Starring: Robert Redford, Kristen Scott Thomas, Scarlett Johansson, Sam Neil,
Dianne Wiest, and Chris Cooper.
One of the many challenges of adapting a best-selling novel is making
it appealing to the fans of the book.  Unfortunately, Robert Redford
may not have done that, as his film, THE HORSE WHISPERER, alters the
ending drastically (from what I have heard).  I haven't read the
Nicholas Evans' novel, but I can't imagine it being better than this
filmed version.  Robert Redford is one of the few underrated directors
whose work is usually acknowledged as good, but not great.  I like to
think of Redford as one of the greatest directors working today.
THE HORSE WHISPERER proves just that.  His smooth direction is key to
the film's tone and emotions, and without bending into the
melodramatic, he almost forces tears out of our eyes.  Redford has
proven a great director before, with such films as his directing
debut, ORDINARY PEOPLE (oh yeah, he snagged an Oscar for that one), A
RRIVER RUNS THROUGH IT, and the Oscar-nominated QUIZ SHOW (my personal
favorite of all of his films).  And now, he makes an incredibly moving
motion picture that beckons back to the good old days of making motion
pictures for the heartfelt emotions (TITANIC anyone?).  Of course,
there are bound to be those cynics who claim that the film revolves
around a ludicrous plot, and yes, if you think about it, the plot is
slightly corny.  But that's not what the film is about.  It's about
emotions.
THE HORSE WHISPERER begins with a stunning montage sequence of a horse
moving gracefully across sandy hills.  The main plot is set in motion
with a horrific and terrifying scene.  Two girls, Judith (Catherine
Bosworth) and Grace (Scarlett Johansson), set out to take a peaceful
ride through the snowy country.  Deciding to take a shortcut up a
steep embankment, the two girls find themselves in trouble when
Judith's horse can't make it up and slides down the hill, taking Grace
and her horse, Pilgrim, with her.  A huge 18-wheeler approaches the
two girls as their horses try to escape.  The attempts fail, and the
truck slides over Judith and her horse, while Pilgrim throws Grace
off, injuring himself in the process.  The PG-13 rating is mostly
warranted because of this scene, which is more graphically implied
than witnessed (in other words, we think we see more than we do).
Grace is injured badly, and her leg is amputated, while Pilgrim hides
under a bridge, grotesquely disfigured.  Grace's parents, Annie and
Robert MacLean (Kristen Scott Thomas and Sam Neill), race to the
hospital, where they are faced with a decision: put the horse to
sleep, or let him suffer in pain.  Under so much pressure, Annie
recommends that they keep the horse alive.  A while later, Annie
visits Pilgrim, who seems to peer into her soul.  Annie decides that
she can't kill the horse, but help it heal, as it may aid in healing
her daughter.  Grace, meanwhile, is struggling through ridicule from
her peers and depression.  Assisted with a prosthetic limb and
crutches, she struggles to do the simplest of tasks, like walking up
stairs.  Annie begins to lose all hope when she hears about a man in
Montana--a horse whisperer.  Tom Booker (Robert Redford) first
declines her offer, but being so determined, Annie picks up and leaves
her husband and work to meet with Tom, taking Grace and Pilgrim with.
While this may sound a little corny, it's played out seriously, and it
works beautifully.  Arriving in Montana, Annie pleads with Tom to take
a look at Pilgrim.  He accepts, only to find a horse with seriously
mental and emotional problems.  How can he figure this?  Not by
whispering, as the title may suggest, but by watching Pilgrim's every
move, and judging it as a sign of communication.  Horses have a unique
gift that only few animals have.  If you have ever touched or ridden a
horse, you know of the love and care that they give.  It's a special
thing when a horse bonds with its owner, and THE HORSE WHISPERER
flaunts the connection between animals and humans continuously.  If
you love animals, as I do, you are more likely to love this film than
not.  An animal's enduring trust can be something no human could ever
give.  Of course, the film's only flaw lies in the relationship that
ignites between Annie and Tom.  Tom has suffered a divorce from the
woman he loved, and he is unsure whether to try it again.  Annie is
married, but can't contain the love that soon grows for this man of
the country.  The only problem is that because of Tom's wariness, he
is hesitant to get involved with her, and the romance is left
smoldering instead of bursting into flames on screen.  But this really
only emphasizes the connection that is made between Grace and Tom, and
Tom and Pilgrim.
As aforementioned, the ending of the novel is changed in its
translation to the big screen, but the change made is for the best.
Instead of sinking into melodrama, it turns into a character-driven
drama that skillfully deals with many subjects at once.  The
screenplay, adapted by Richard LaGravenese and Eric Roth, contains a
lot of humor that lightens things up.  Most of the humor comes from
Booker's subtle personality and dry wit and MacLean's city-adapted
mannerisms.  Nearly all the humor pays off, and the audience will find
themselves laughing as much as crying.  But on top of the seemingly
heavy drama, Redford stands proud, holding everyone back from
venturing into gagging, sappy romance.  Redford's direction is some of
the best I have seen for a long time, and hopefully should earn him
another Oscar nomination.  If not, then something is wrong in the
state of California.  Keeping things slowly paced, we get to
experience the visual palette that he has provided for us, sort of the
way Kubrick did in 2001: A SPACE ODYSSEY.  Many scenes are obligatory,
but we relish them, nonetheless.  And it's mostly all due to one
simple reason: cinematography.
I have one rule that I apply to all the films I see (one of my many
rules): if the plot, characters, acting, and direction is awful, but
the cinematography is excellent, I will give a positive review of the
film.  This is the one reason that I think David Fincher is the best
director working today.  Cinematography, for me, is the most important
aspect of any film because it's the one thing that distinguishes films
from plays or novels.  THE HORSE WHISPERER's camera work is exquisite,
capturing the luscious scenery like eye candy.  Filmed by Oscar-winner
Robert Richardson, the film contains some of the most gorgeous
cinematography ever captured on celluloid.  And he doesn't just limit
himself to the countryside.  Richardson knows how to film actors,
capturing small details that other people may think unnecessary.  I
can't emphasize this enough: if this film does not win (that's
right--win) the Best Cinematography Oscar, there is no justice in the
world.
Robert Redford has done an incredible job in presenting this
story--not just story-wise or technical-wise, but with top-notch
actors who flesh out the characters completely.  This is the first
time Redford has directed a film in which he has performed in, and he
has done something that Mel Gibson and Quentin Tarantino could never
do (the only other successful one that comes to mind is, of course,
Kenneth Branagh).  Redford succeeds as both an actor and director; he
almost forces us to like Booker, and yet we begin to connect with him
as he connects with the horse.  The astonishing sequences between
Redford and Pilgrim are the best in the film.  The dramatically
energized scenes contain more emotion than some movies in their
entirety.  Not to be outdone is Kristen Scott Thomas, the nominated
actress from the much-acclaimed THE ENGLISH PATIENT.  While her
performance in that film was vastly overrated, Thomas exerts the exact
amount of emotion and confusion that we expect from this character.
Her growth is slow and gradual, and almost mimics the horse as she
comes to term with her situation.  But more importantly is Scarlett
Johansson, the most complex character in the film.  At times, she
reminded me of Sarah Polley in THE SWEET HEREAFTER, and both compare
equally.  Johansson gives an Oscar-caliber performance that deserves
recognition.  This is one of the best performances you will likely see
this year, and she now joins the ranks of young actors that exceed
expectations (also on the list is Christina Ricci, Elijah Wood,
Natalie Portman, Anna Paquin, and a couple others).  Sam Neill remains
in the background for most of the film, but his scenes with Thomas are
exciting because Neill is not portrayed as the villain of the film, as
some would like to think.  He's a logical, smart human being, and his
final talk with Thomas is heartfelt and gratifying.  Supporting actors
Dianne Wiest and Chris Cooper are both very good in their roles, but
again, it's Johansson who steals the film.
THE HORSE WHISPERER is rated PG-13 for a disturbing accident scene and
some brief profanity.  THE HORSE WHISPERER flies along at two hours
and forty-eight minutes, and it almost seems too short.  I heard the
original cut was around four hours long, and I really wouldn't have
cared.  While the film does contain it's share of flaws, they are
quite insignificant to hurt it's power.  Some of the images are still
stuck in my head, days after seeing it.  The music by Thomas Newman is
simplistic but effective.  At the beginning, I could almost hear the
TITANIC theme in my mind.  But after a while, the music became
appropriate, underscoring every scene with a simple, country song.
This is likely to be one of the best films of the year, and being into
May already (with the summer season coming around the corner), you are
probably unlikely to see another one like this for a while.  Who
knows?  Maybe THE X-FILES will surprise us (as it should).

Title
Review for Jackie Brown (1997)
Jackie Brown (1997)
Rated R for language, sex, violence, drug use, and offensive dialogue.
----------  Out of 4 stars: ***1/2 (3 1/2 Stars)
Starring: Pam Grier, Samuel L. Jackson, Michael Keaton, Bridget Fonda,
Robert De Niro, Robert Forster, and Chris Tucker
Quentin Tarantino seems to have a knack for giving his stars big
careers.  After his PULP FICTION, many actors began receiving many
offers for jobs.  John Travolta made his come-back and is now one of
today's most bankable stars.  Bruce Willis proved his acting chops and
is now considered an actual actor.  JACKIE BROWN, on the other hand,
boasts quite a well known cast, except for the main lead: Pam Grier.
Most likely you have heard of her and seen her in films, but she's
never really had a breakthrough performance (her first film was in the
Roger Ebert-written BEYOND THE VALLEY OF THE DOLLS).  That is, until
now.
JACKIE BROWN is a highly anticipated feature film from Quentin Tarantino, whose last film was the huge hit
PULP FICTION.  After mediocre acting jobs, Tarantino returns to what made his name a household one: directing
and writing.  JACKIE BROWN is the result, and it is fantastic entertainment.  Despite excellent direction from
Tarantino, the cast steals the film, giving one good performance after another.  Pam Grier gives a stunning
performance as Jackie Brown, and she is supported by an incredible mix of talent--Samuel L. Jackson, Bridget
Fonda, Michael Keaton, Robert De Niro, and Robert Forster.  More than likely, you will see a few of these
names in the Oscar pool come Oscar nominations.
Describing a Quentin Tarantino film is very difficult, as you really
can't say much or you spoil it for everyone else.  I will tread
lightly.  JACKIE BROWN opens with an impressive shot of Jackie Brown
(Grier) in a blue outfit walking through the airport.  The camera
tracks along with her, and ends up revealing her occupation.  We are
also introduced to Ordell Robbie (Jackson), who sells illegal guns to
interested buyers...  for a hefty price.  Ms. Brown carries the money
from buyer to Ordell in order to keep the cops away.  However, an FBI
agent (Keaton) and a local L.A. cop (Michael Bowen) are out to find
Ordell and catch him while taking the money.  They try to reach him
through Beaumont Livingston (Chris Tucker), one of Ordell's buyers,
but he mysteriously ends up dead.  They try again through Brown, but
she is hesitant to admit to any wrong-doing.
But after unknowingly carrying some drugs for one of Ordell's friends
(Fonda), she is caught and sent to jail.  Ordell pays her bail through
a bail bond agent, Max Cherry (Forster), and then wants to find out
what she told the cops.  After she claims to have said nothing, she
reveals the fact that she will tell them about Ordell in order to stay
out of prison.  Ordell doesn't like this, but they both come up with a
scheme to throw the Feds and cops off their track.  This scheme seems
to be going as planned, but unexpected occurances may or may not foul
up their goal.
Revealing more would spoil the fun of JACKIE BROWN, and that's the
biggest reason to go see a Tarantino film.  Tarantino seems to have a
fascination with hitmen and unusual predicaments (and slang terms),
but they are always done very well and believably.  His hitmen are
normally cruel, but pleasant, in that nasty sort of way.  They talk
like normal people, except for when doing business, and they are rude
to their girlfriends.  Of course, this is a Tarantino film, and you
know you can expect some awkward situations to arise.  And perhaps the
biggest flaw with JACKIE BROWN is the slow middle section in which the
pace begins to drop.  Of course, Tarantino fixes this by moving onto
the climax of the film, adding a lot of his RESERVOIR DOGS-style
storytelling to it.  Things are told from one person's perspective,
and then from another, and then from another, each time learning more
and more.  This all leads up to a very interesting conclusion, which
decides who is on whose side.
On the technical side of JACKIE BROWN, Quentin Tarantino directs it
with the same style as he did with his 1994 film.  However, this time
around it isn't as nearly as impressive or original.  The writing, on
the other hand, is quite good, although I do find Tarantino's use of
slang terms offensive.  The story jumps back and forth in time as in
PULP FICTION, but it's much more easy to understand.  His previous
film needed a second viewing in order to understand the time
differentiation, but JACKIE BROWN is very simply to follow, especially
considering that the time is given during the "leaps" in time.
Perhaps this is a result of the screenplay being written from the
novel "Rum Punch" by Elmore Leonard.  The dialogue is pretty much
intelligent, and all the characters are fully realized.  The
cinematography is very well done by Guillermo Navarro (who has worked
with Tarantino on previous films) and the editing is very good.  And
as with PULP FICTION, the music is a highlight, bringing back
memorable songs from the 70s and 80s.
The acting side of JACKIE BROWN is unforgettable.  The performances
are incredibly rich, with hidden meaning behind every characters'
actions.  Nothing is quite as it seems, and you can't really tell
which side one person is on.  The real treat, of course, is Pam Grier
who gives an astonishing performance as Jackie Brown.  Her poor living
conditions are superceded by her superior wits, which play an
important role in the film.  Watching Grieg, I could tell what was
going through her mind, even if I didn't know what she was thinking.
Her face portrays a lot of emotion that you can tell when she is sad,
happy, or in deep thought.  Bridget Fonda gives a very good
performance as a druggie couch potato.  I didn't even realize it was
Fonda until I saw her name in the final credits (her performance
actually reminded me of Heather Graham's in BOOGIE NIGHTS).  Michael
Keaton comes across very well, as does Michael Bowen.  Chris Tucker
has a small, but effective performance.  Samuel L. Jackson is very
good, but it seems to me that he was replaying his Jules Winnfield
character from PULP FICTION (although much less cynical).  But no
matter... Jackson is very strong in his role.  Robert De Niro is
actually a little annoying at times, but overall he does a good job as
one of Ordell's perspective clients and friends.  Robert Forster gives
one of the best performances in the film, as he has one of the most
developed characters.  He is present throughout most of the film, and
he holds his own against Jackson and Grier.
JACKIE BROWN is rated R for language, sex, violence, drug use, and
some offensive remarks.  As a film by itself, JACKIE BROWN is a
terrific piece of entertainment, with a complex plot to draw viewers
in.  However, one can not help but compare it to Tarantino's PULP
FICTION, and expect great results.  When compared, it comes up short,
but not that short.  It's a worthy effort, with terrific acting and
some impressive writing from Elmore Leonard and Tarantino.  Perhaps
the best thing about JACKIE BROWN is the discovery of Pam Grier as a
major Hollywood actress.  I can't remember seeing her in anything
(except for a small role in MARS ATTACKS!), but hopefully she will get
many more roles from this one.  Expect to see her name floating around
the Oscar nominations (and hopefully she will even be able to nab
one).
Reviewed by Respect (respect@aros.net)
http://www.aros.net/~respect/movies.html

Title
Review for Antz (1998)
Starring the vocal talents of: Woody Allen, Sharon Stone, Sylvester Stallone,
Gene Hackman, Christopher Walkin, Dan Aykroyd, Jane Curtin, Anne Bancroft, and
Danny Glover.
Most people fit into two different categories: you either love Woody Allen, or
you hate his guts.  My family, for the most part, hates him and his movies.  I
think he's very funny, but his shtick has gotten forced and contrived over the
years.  So maybe taking his body away was the best decision any producer could
have thought of.  Unrestrained by physical boundaries, Allen's humor comes
shining through.  Those who had problems with his physical appearance will be
able to join the rest of us in laughing at Allen's intelligent observations of
life.  Those who had problems with his verbal comedy may want to skip this one.
In 1995, a film was introduced to audiences which sparked their imaginations and
showed them something they'd never seen before.  TOY STORY used state-of-the-art
computer technology and presented a world of toys who would come alive when no
humans were present.  Many critics will call that a better film, but I believe
they only say that because it was a completely original motion picture.  ANTZ,
however, has upped the ante considerably.  Disney's A BUG'S LIFE isn't due out
for another two months, and DreamWorks seems to have received the better end of
the deal.  By beating Disney out, they have satisfied the audience's thirst for
computer-animated films.  But don't let that fool you: Disney is definitely not
scared.
In the past two years, competitions have broken out between studios.  In 1997,
it was the volcano duel.  In my opinion, DANTE'S PEAK came out way ahead of its
predecessor, both in time and in quality.  VOLCANO had an original premise, but
destroyed that with some very ridiculous situations.  In 1998, there are twice
as many competing films.  First was the comet competition, and ARMAGEDDON blew
away it's cheesily dramatic competitor DEEP IMPACT.  But now, it's even more
interesting, as one beloved studio (Disney) goes up against the newcomer
(DreamWorks).  Who will prevail?  Time will tell, but I'm sure that Mr. Mouse
has nothing to fear.
This may sound like I didn't like ANTZ; on the contrary, I'd put it up there
with TOY STORY.  But due to it's PG rating, many parents may be put off by some
of the dialogue which shouldn't appear in Disney's version.  Some of the
dialogue in ANTZ pushes the envelope for a family-oriented film.  Sexual
innuendoes and profanity pop up occasionally, which makes DreamWorks' animated
feature geared more for an adult crowd.  The humor is also written especially
for adults, though many kids were laughing in the theater I attended.  This is
the type of film that should be made for families more often: entertaining for
kids AND entertaining for parents.
ANTZ begins with a hilarious monologue which seems a meld between Woody Allen's
shtick and Franz Kafka's METAMORPHOSIS, the short story of a man who wakes up to
discover himself as a bug.  Z (Allen) is a troubled ant, believing he was not
made to be a worker.  "When you're the middle child in a family of five
million..." he comments about his neglected childhood.  One night, Z is sitting
in a bar with his friend Weaver (Sylvester Stallone), discussing his pathetic
place in life.  In walks Princess Bala (Sharon Stone), whom no one recognizes
without a crown.  Bala asks Z is he would like to dance, and they engage in a
PULP FICTION-esque dance while everyone else is following the leader.  After
discovering that she is the princess, Z falls in love, but there's a problem:
Bala is getting married to General Mandible (Gene Hackman), a ruthless leader
who merely wants to control a better and stronger colony.  In order to do that,
he must eliminate not only the Queen (Anne Bancroft), but the weakest of the
colony, namely the worker ants.  But to get rid of the Queen, he needs to get
rid of the loyal army ants who would be willing to die for her.
He and Colonel Cutter (Christopher Walkin) come up with a plan to send the loyal
ants off to battle, where they will surely be killed.  The Queen is reluctant at
first, but decides it is best for the colony.  Meanwhile, Z wants to meet Bala
again, and he asks Weaver, an army ant, to switch places with him.  So Z gets
sent off to battle, but he manages to survive the slaughter by the termites.
The battle sequence is absolutely stunning, though you may have flashbacks to
STARSHIP TROOPERS, which contained a very similar sequence.  However, ANTZ and
that 1997 film were both in production around the same time, so the similarities
are merely coincidence.
The second half of the film revolves around Z's kidnapping of Bala, and their
search for a mythical place called Insectopia.  There, an ant can be his own
boss and have all the food he wants.  The adventures Z and Bala get into are
surprisingly high in tension, especially one involving a magnifying glass.
Looming over the targets like the spaceships from INDEPENDENCE DAY (in fact, I'm
just going to assume that the producers referenced ID4 intentionally).  The ants
look up in awe, and then a beam of fire blasts into the ground.  Visually, it's
an exciting rush of adrenaline.  But don't be fooled... little kids shouldn't
see this, as they may just try and copy it.  After seeing ANTZ, I vowed never to
intentionally step on an ant again.  Hopefully, children will learn that killing
ants is rather cruel.
As an animated film, ANTZ is probably the best you will find to date.  Visually,
it's as stunning as WHAT DREAMS MAY COME.  The best aspect of animation is the
fact that the characters aren't limited by gravity.  They can take ridiculous
situations and make them seem plausible.  One great moment involves a mass of
worker ants bunching up to form a wrecking ball.  The animation is so perfect
that you can virtually see every single ant on the ball.  However, the most
exhilarating scene involves Bala getting stuck to the bottom of a young boy's
shoe.  It's truly a great example of film making at its finest.  With computer
technology, the animators have carefully made the ants' faces look similar to
the actors providing the voices.  The best example would have to be Barbatus
(Danny Glover).  At one point, you can even see the pores on his face (although,
I doubt ants have pores... do they?).  Barbatus also has a touching but rather
gruesome scene as he has his final words with Z without a body.  Young kids may
be disturbed by the site of a dismembered head, but a good deal of humor is
derived (more appropriate for adults, of course).  Disney's A BUG'S LIFE looks
good, but I don't know if they will be able to best DreamWorks' newest animated
feature in terms of animation.  If not, then DreamWorks will have done something
no other studio could do: go head to head with the big Mouse, and knock him down
(yes, Anastasia was good, but not nearly as good as even the worst of Disney).
Vocal talent is always essential to an animated feature, and ANTZ has one of the
best line-ups seen since TOY STORY.  In fact, it far exceeds that one.  Woody
Allen has always been funny, but here he transcends most of what he's done in
the past few years.  Without a body, his comic timing is the most noticeable
thing.  In fact, I'm pretty sure that the writers let him improvise a lot of his
lines.  Sharon Stone as Bala shows off some of her comic ability, though for the
most part, Stone works best as a dramatic actress.  Sylvester Stallone (teamed
up with Stone once again) is beginning to solidify his statement that he wants
to be an actor, not a typecast action star.  After a snub at the Oscars last
year, Stallone is proving himself as the serious (or comedic, as illustrated
here) actor that he is.  Gene Hackman is superb as the gruff-talking General,
almost doing another take on his CRIMSON TIDE persona.  Christopher Walkin is
probably more noticed by his voice, and so many people will remember him from
such hits as BATMAN RETURNS.  Anne Bancroft has a minimal role, but she's
effective nonetheless.  Danny Glover has a small role, but he does a very, very
good job.  Dan Aykroyd and Jane Curtin also lend their voices as two lovesick,
Euro-trash bees--both are very unrecognizable, especially Aykroyd.  Jennifer
Lopez plays a worker ant who falls in love with Weaver, although most people
won't recognize her voice either.  Many people will recognize Grant Shaud's
voice as the foreman.  He played Miles on the TV show MURPHY BROWN.  This is
definitely a huge cast with some high-profile names, and it will definitely help
it's grosses.  Of course, you can probably tell where a lot of the $60 million
budget went to, also.
Directors Eric Darnell and Lawrence Guterman are relative newcomers (though
Guterman did direct a 1994 feature, HEADLESS!).  But both show an incredible
talent for this type of a picture.  Tense at times, and very funny throughout,
the two hold this film together like professionals.  The screenplay by Todd
Alcott and Chris Weitz is quite simple in plot, but it contains a lot of
subtlety that makes the film more suitable for adults.  Kids will delight in the
animation, while parents can laugh heartily at the humor.  Most of it will go
over young children's heads.  Does that mean you shouldn't take kids to see it?
Not at all.  They will have a lot of fun watching this one.  What is great is
the themes that are given to us.  Part social commentary, part romance story,
and part moral drama, ANTZ gives everyone something to talk about, whether it be
the animation, or the discussions of individualism and community.  Thankfully,
it's not subtle in either aspects.
ANTZ is rated PG for mild language and some intense action.  Sometimes the
language can be pushing the limits for a family movie, but the violence is what
should keep kids at home.  The battle scene has ants melting in acid, and bugs
being speared to death.  And the magnifying scene shows an ant disintegrate in
the beam of sunlight.  But other than that (and some sexual innuendos), it's a
perfect choice for some wholesome fun at the theaters.  I doubt many children
will understand the sexual innuendos unless they are old enough, but it's still
advisable to leave really young children at home.  Have I confused you enough?
If you do take your kids, I recommend seeing the film with them, because more
than likely, you'll enjoy it the most.

Title
Review for In & Out (1997)
In & Out (1997)
Rated PG-13 for sex-related dialogue and some strong language.
Starring: Kevin Kline, Joan Cusack, Matt Dillon, Tom Selleck.
----------    Out of 4 stars: **** (4 Stars)
As if you haven't heard, either from reading other reviews, or
actually witnessing the event, Tom Hanks outted his high school drama
teacher in his Oscar acceptance speech for "Philadelphia."  While his
teacher had already been out, and since there is hardly any humor
behind that, producer Scott Rudin asked Paul Rudnick ("Jeffrey,"
another hilarious gay-related film) to write a screenplay about the
same event happening; only the teacher wouldn't be gay.  And so In &
Out is brought to the screen from a gifted writer, and a talented
director and cast.
It's been a long time since I have laughed this hard during a film.
There are several films which made me laugh recently, but none of them
are going to remain in my memory once they get shuffled off to the
video shelves.  But In & Out will stay in my mind for a long time to
come.  It is the best comedy of the year, and I doubt any comedy will
be able to compete with it.  Unlike Rudnick's last screenplay
"Jeffrey," In & Out didn't focus on sex or the grief it can cause.
Instead, it allows every type of person, even your most conservative
homophobe, to enjoy the sharp-witted humor.  Rudnick also wrote the
very funny "Addams Family Values," which just happened to be better
than the original.  He has proven himself a talented writer, who can
create one-liners, funnier than any you have probably ever heard.  But
not all the humor comes from the dialogue.  Much of it comes from
reactions of the cast, and Kline's physical humor, as he showed in "A
Fish Called Wanda."
In & Out is a film that works on a lot of different levels, which most
Hollywood films pretend to do.  It has satirical elements,
above-standard-fair humor, and in the midst of all the comedy, it
slyly works in some social discrimination problems.  I advise you to
not read ANY review of this film before you watch it.  Not even this
one.  Stop right here if you haven't seen it.  Stop.  Stop!  Okay, so
it isn't that important, but if you do read on, I won't be the one to
spoil those surprises.  Luckily, before I went to film I forgot to
read my local critic's review of the movie.  Lucky, because he spoiled
both of the surprises.  Anyway, In & Out begins in the small town of
Greenleaf, Indiana.  They are all awaiting one of the most anticipated
nights of the town's year: the Academy Awards.  Why?  Former student
from Greenleaf, Cameron Drake (Matt Dillon), has been nominated for
Best Actor.  The film he is nominated for is a funny spoof of Forrest
Gump, mixed with Philadelphia.  Not surprisingly, he wins (you see
that in the trailer) and he praises his high school English teacher,
Howard Brackett (Kevin Kline).  "... and he's gay." Drake adds,
surprising not only the entire town of Greenlead, but Brackett and his
wife, Emily (Joan Cusack), as well.  
The next day, the town is swarming with reporters, trying to get the
feature on the teacher who was outted by his student.  One of those
reporters is Peter Malloy (Tom Selleck, in a nearly perfect
performance) who wants to do an entire week on Howard.  But he isn't
fond of the idea because he is getting married in three days, after
three years of being engaged (and not once physically bonding the
relationship).  All of his students want to know, as well as the
principal (Bob Newhart, doing his best kind of comedy--deadpan).  Of
course, because Howard has now been declared as a homosexual, the
school board is concerned "for the children."  Yeah, right.  The
principal tells Howard that if he does not get married, then he will
be dismissed from his teaching duties.  And to top that off, his
parents are gravely concerned.  Berniece and Frank Brackett (Debbie
Reynolds and Wilford Brimley) are confused, but as Berniece puts it,
"You better have this wedding.  I need something beautiful in my
life... it's like heroin."
But the most concerned is Howard himself.  Howard tries to make
himself more masculine using audio tapes, and by ripping his clothes
off in order to finally consumate their relationship.  The scene
involving the masculinity tapes is the funniest scene in the entire
film.  Not that other scenes aren't funny, but this is the moment In &
Out will most likely be remembered for... oh, and one of the two
surprises.  The biggest problem with the film is that the film drags
towards the end, but thankfully spoofs "Spartacus" to bring up the
comedic level again.  Surprisingly, In & Out does incorporate some
plot twists into its straight-forward storytelling.  Some of the plot
twists are mild, such as the speech from Drake, and some are
completely shocking if you don't know what is going to happen.
I am giving In & Out four stars because not only is it above your
usual standard shtick, but it makes you care for the characters, and
then makes you feel giddy and happy at the end.  I already want to see
it again.  It's amazing to see a comedy like this released these days.
While the subject matter tackled is rather lightweight, many
heterosexual men will probably try and avoid seeing the film.
However, I advise seeing it.  While it is offensive in some parts, it
mainly comes from the language, and most of it coming from the mother
and her friends.  Even if you are homophobic or extreme conservative
people, if you like to laugh, I highly recommend In & Out.  It is not
only the best comedy of 1997, but it is also one of the best overall
films.  Some people may claim that it is predictable and unfunny, but
I was surprised several times, and while the ending is inevitable, it
is not predictable.  
The cast is essential for this film to work, as for every other film
to work.  But never have I seen a cast work so well together.  Well,
in a comedy anyway.  In Jim Carrey's films, it's usually just Carrey
doing his stuff, but In & Out relies on intelligent writing and good
performances from the cast.  Kevin Kline gives the best performance of
the film, and hopefully he will at least get another Oscar nomination.
Kline proves that he is one of America's best comedians, and he
doesn't have to overplay anything to get laughs.  Kline has the facial
expressions to make you laugh, and he also knows to say his lines as
if he were being serious, and relying on Rudnick's dialogue to carry
through.  Sometimes, Kline is able to get laughs out of lines that
wouldn't have been funny with any other actor.  Joan Cusack is still
brilliant, and I could watch her for hours.  She has perfect timing,
and her struggles with her dilemma is hilarious.  Tom Selleck, whom I
haven't seen since Citizen Ruth, gives one of his best performances
ever.  I hope to see him on the screen more, because he has a natural
screen presence which many actors lack.  Matt Dillon uses a wry tone
when delivering his lines which make them all the more funnier.
Shalom Harlow plays Drake's bulemic girlfriend, and her stiff lines
make them funny.  Her look at the rotary phone is a gem.  Debbie
Reynolds picks up where she left off in Mother, and Wilford Brimley
turns in a good performance.  Bob Newhart fits very nicely among the
cast, and he also gives some of the best reactions to what is going
on. But it's Kline's show, and he runs with it.
In & Out is rated PG-13 for sex-related dialogue and profanity.
Director Frank Oz (who also did the hilarious "Dirty Rotten
Scoundrels") gives the film a professional look to it, and he also
makes the satirical moments much more funny.  The conservative town is
given a "Leave it to Beaver" feel, and Oz knows how to let his actors
go.  Many Barbra Streisand remarks are funny enough that even
Streisand should laugh.  Kline's dancing deserves an Oscar, just for
that, which compares to Travolta's of "Saturday Night Fever."  And
hopefully Rudnick will get noticed more with his bright and funny
screenplay.  A classic ensemble piece which seems like it came from
the early 80s, and changed the morals and story.  Physical humor is
hard to get, but physical humor and spoken humor is nearly impossible.
In & Out does it and does it well.  This is one of the year's best
films.

Title
Review for Cop Land (1997)
Respect's Reviews can be found at
http://www.aros.net/~respect/movies.html
I'm not exactly sure that I can review this fairly.  I am pretty
biased towards Stallone films, but then I figured that critics are
supposed to be biased.  I admit it... I love Stallone movies.  Even if
they are brainless action flicks (with the exception of The Specialist
which was just plain awful) I usually have a good time watching them.
However, upon hearing Stallone's reduction of salary in order to play
a kind-hearted sheriff in Cop Land, I was hoping and praying that the
role would turn out to be a good one for Stallone.  After films like
Assassins, Judge Dredd, Daylight, and The Specialist, one can get
tired of his usual antics on screen.  Watching Rocky, I knew Stallone
had the talent to become a big star, but he was launched into a career
of action films which bombed here in the USA, but did quite well
overseas.
But that isn't saying some of his action films weren't good.
Demolition Man was highly entertaining and pretty good for what it
was.  Cliffhanger was just plain terrific with good performances from
the entire cast and some incredible action sequences.  But Stallone
was always known as Sly Stallone, not as serious actor Sylvester
Stallone.  Until now.  It has taken over 20 years for him to get
another role just as good as his Rocky persona.  Was it worth the
wait?  Some of us loyal and faithful ones pushed through the cliched
action films in hope for a better film.  Well, it is here.  Cop Land
is not only one of Stallone's best films, but one of the best films of
the year.  Considering that it is already August, I can truthfully say
that.  My only hope is that this film is remembered when those Oscar
nominations are made.  
Cop Land begins with a monologue from a narrator telling us about the
hero of the movie.  Freddy Heflin (Stallone) is the sheriff of
Garrison, New Jersey, which is known by the locals as Cop Land.
Freddy dreams about being one of the NYPD cops that he sees everyday
in his jurisdiction.  Unfortunately, Freddy went deaf in one ear
during a heroic rescue when he was younger, and this keeps him from
getting any kind of job on the NYPD.  So he settles for being the
sheriff of this small town.  Cop Land was created when some of the
police officers of New York didn't want to have to live in the city
and put their families at risk.  But the only problem was that no cop
could live on the other side of the river without being a transit cop,
at least part time.  So a group of New York's finest, led by Ray
Donlan (Harvey Keitel), become part-time transit policemen and live in
Cop Land.
As Freddy begins to suspect, New York's finest may not be so fine at
all.  He witnesses things that make them look less and less heroic,
and more and more corrupt.  But by nature, Freddy isn't one to speak
out or stand on his own.  He remains quiet, and with his overweight
but kind physique, he never really is taken seriously.  His only real
friends are the girl he saved from drowning and the other officers
working with him.  Naturally, he is in love with Liz Randone
(Annabella Sciorra), who remains friends with him because she owes him
her life.  But she is married to Joey Randone (Peter Berg), a sleazy
cop who treats her with as little respect as possible.  Soon, however,
an incident involving a drunk cop (Michael Rapaport) who accidentally
shoots two African Americans because he thinks they had a gun, sparks
an investigation of the Cop Land cops.  Murray "Superboy" Babitch, the
drunk policeman, doesn't want to be caught in a slew of
investigations, so he jumps off the bridge connecting New York to New
Jersey.  Or does he? 
Freddy is the only witness to the truth and he knows exactly what is
happening.  The investigation of the suicide brings in internal
affairs Moe Tilden (Robert De Niro), who believes that because Freddy
lives around all the cops, he probably sees and hears more than anyone
else.  Unfortunately, the Cop Land cops have a lot of power behind
them, and the internal affairs investigation is quickly cancelled.  It
is up to Freddy to deal with what he should and shouldn't do.  But he
does have help from Gary Figgis (Ray Liotta), a corrupt cop who wants
revenge after his partner is killed.  Together, these two uncover the
conspiracy behind the suicide of Superboy, and the corruption of the
Cop Land cops.
What makes Cop Land so much better than most other films of this same
genre is the way it is done.  While the film does have action
sequences, this is more or less a drama with colorful characters to
drive it forward.  The pace is kept slow, and this allows the
emotional effect to come out of the woodwork, which makes the film
more entertaining than almost any other film out this year (the
exception may be Contact).  Freddy is such a great character because
he is much different from every character Stallone has ever played.
But that isn't the only reason.  Freddy, the sheriff with an
unrealized dream, is so much like the average person that most people
could probably relate to him.  He doesn't speak his opinion, he
doesn't pull over speeders unless they are going about 50 over the
speed limit, and his weight is a result of his dream shattering
hearing loss.  His emotions are stored up inside him, and they are
released in a final battle between good and evil at the end of the
film which is very disturbing and shocking.
But let's face it: the entire cast is terrific, with Stallone and
Liotta giving the two best performances of the film.  Liotta almost
steals the film from under Stallone, but considering that he isn't a
very likeable character, he doesn't quite succeed.  Liotta is a very
underrated actor, and hopefully he will get some more roles like this
one in the future.  Keitel is amazing as the leader of Cop Land's
cops.  It was almost a role destined for him.  De Niro is terrific as
usual, and I don't really need to say more.  Sciorra gives a nice,
low-key performance which compares to Stallone's.  Janeane Garofalo
gives a very god performance, although she isn't in the film all that
much.  When she is, she handles herself quite well.  Rapaport is good
with some nice moments of his own.  But, as the hype has been
suggesting, this film is Stallone's, and it is rightfully his.
Perhaps I am just overexaggerating his performance because it is so
different from his action roles.  But I don't think so.  Hopefully,
Oscar won't forget this film.
Cop Land is rated R for language, violence and some gore, brief
nudity, as well as some drug use.  Director/writer James Mangold
(Heavy) has created a wonderfully fresh and emotionally involving film
about corrupt cops.  Nothing is really surprising, except for the
shocking showdown at the end.   But none of that matters, as this is a
vehicle for strong performances and a great story.  It's nice to see a
film that doesn't rely on special effects to move the story along.  I
just hope that Cop Land doesn't get lost in the shuffle of big-budget
films with no story.

Title
Review for Midnight in the Garden of Good and Evil (1997)
Midnight in the Garden of Good and Evil (1997)
Rated R for language and brief violence
----------  Out of 4 stars: ***1/2 (3 1/2 Stars)
Starring: Kevin Spacey, John Cusack, Lady Chablis, Jude Law, Jack Thompson, Alison Eastwood.
MIDNIGHT IN THE GARDEN OF GOOD AND EVIL's ad campaign is magnificent,
in my opinion.  I first heard about this film upon seeing a magazing ad
for it; not from previews, not from word of mouth.  Without seeing any
of the trailers, I immediately wanted to see it.  If you haven't seen
this ad, I will explain a little.  The ad shows a luscious green garden. 
This garden is shot with a wide angle lens, and in the background, a
small green statue stands alone.  Were it not for the ray of sunlight
hitting the statue, you probably wouldn't be able to see it.  The visual
style of this ad is quite incredible, and this alone made me want to see it.
Now that I said that, I must admit that I have never read the book
Midnight in the Garden of Good and Evil.  Despite this, the film
MIDNIGHT IN THE GARDEN OF GOOD AND EVIL is highly entertaining.  For
more than 2 and a half hours, I sat enthralled by the eccentric
characters portrayed on screen.  What makes it even more entertaining
is the fact that everything going on IS fact.  The novel, written by
John Berendt, is a non-fiction book, and realizing this makes it a lot
more fun to watch.  In fact, you don't necessarily watch this movie
-- you experience it.
A lot goes on in Clint Eastwood's film, and yet, it doesn't seem like
a typical Eastwood movie.  It doesn't seem like a typical Hollywood
film, period.  Eastwood is one of the few directors who have complete
control over every aspect of a movie (others include Stanley Kubrick
and Woody Allen).  However, perhaps a little help could have aided
Eastwood with his version of the best-selling book.  While it is
visually stunning, and very fun to watch, something is missing.  Was
it present in the novel?  Perhaps, but I can't be sure.  The motion
picture lacks emotional connection with the audience, with many
characters who seem distant and superficial.  Among them include one
of the main characters, John Kelso (John Cusack), a character loosely
based on Berendt himself.  Kelso is the narrator and the audience's
representation on screen, yet we can't really relate to him.  Cusack
has a very natural appearance, but his character was obviously
created for the film (I doubt Kelso was a physical character in the book).
MIDNIGHT IN THE GARDEN begins with Kelso arriving in Savannah, Georgia
to cover a Christmas party for a popular magazine.  The party is hosted
by a rich Jim Williams (Kevin Spacey) who seemingly has something to
hide behind his suave persona.  Williams takes Kelso on a tour of his
house, and explains that there will be two parties: one that night,
and one the next.  The first is for bachelors only, and Kelso declines to
attend, but the next night, he does attend.  There, he meets a wide
variety of characters from women who plan on shooting their husbands,
to a greasy-haired sex toy (Jude Law).  That same night, Williams
shoots Billy Hanson (Law) in self-defense.  Unfortunately, due to some
mysterious coincidences, Williams is thrown into jail to await a trial. 
Perhaps Williams shot Billy for a different reason.  The final hour
and a half of the film mainly focuses on the trial, which is actually
the slowest part of the entire movie.  Before this, we get to see the
lifestyles of many of the characters.
The most interesting character is Williams, but the most fun to watch
is Lady Chablis (played by Ms. Chablis herself).  Chablis is a wildly
colorful character, who needs to go to a doctor in order to get female
hormone injections (if you know what I mean).  If you don't know what
I mean, Chablis is a transvestite.  Chablis steals many scenes and
gives one of the most memorable performances in the film.  In fact,
the entire first hour and a half is extremely entertaining, as we get
to watch all these wacky characters arrive on screen.  Perhaps the only
throw-away character is Mandy Nichols (Alison Eastwood), the love
interest of Kelso.  The relationship seems artificial, and Nichols is
one of the few "normal" characters present.  I wonder what purpose
her character really served other than to make ol' Pop proud.  Most
of the other characters, however, do have some different way of doing
things: one guy has flies attached to hiim and threatens to poison the
town's water supply if the food isn't good; another guy walks an
imaginary dog who died several years earlier.  Minerva (Irma P. Hall)
is a voodoo expert who helps Williams with his conscience, in a way. 
Then there is Sonny Seiler (Jack Thompson), the defense attorney
working for Williams.  Seiler is one of the best characters in the
film, and his courtroom scenes almost seen ripped from a John Grisham
novel.  And then there is Judge Oliver (played by the real Sonny Seiler)
whose reactions seem natural and unforced.  
The trial itself is the moral standing point of the film.  We learn
secrets hidden by characters, and some seem to play an outcome in
the trial.  Williams reveals that Billy was his lover, at which
point the jury seems fixated on convicting him... not for murdering
a human being, but for being homosexual.  With this revelation, other
characters also begin to reveal secrets, from an emergency room nurse
who bagged the hands of the victim, to the friend of Billy (who also
reveals homosexual tendencies).  Many of these courtroom scenes could
have been overacted and played foolishly, but Eastwood restrains his
actors and holds them back.  As a result, everything which occurs
seems very realistic.  We are not forced to having miraculous
discoveries which lead to the conviction or release of a character,
as in other courtroom dramas; instead, everything occurs at an easy
pace with no scene being rushed anymore than it has to.  The final
outcome subtley reflects the title perfectly: Midnight in the Garden
of Good and Evil.  
Despite all the characters and plots and subplots, the most impressive
thing about MIDNIGHT is the technical details.  Eastwood's Savannah
seems to jump right off the screen with lush greens and moody oranges. 
I could almost smell the moisture in the air.  The set design is very
impressive, though probably could have been even more outrageous than
what it is.  The most memorable aspect of this set, of course, is the
smaller version of the Lady of Justice statue.  This little green
statue has a face of mystery and wonder, holding one plate in each
hand (again, symbolic of the title).  Eastwood bookends the film with
this statue: one shot of it at the title scene, and one at the very end,
which holds as the credits roll by.  The cinematography, by Jack N. 
Green, adds a lot to the visuals, but Eastwood isn't another David
Fincher (THE GAME).  His visuals are relaxed and more unfocused.  The
music, composed by Lennie Niehaus, is haunting and pleasant to listen
to.  The adapted screenplay is one of the highlights, with smart
dialogue and an unusual story structure.  You can never tell where the
film might go next.  This unpredictability is very much welcome by
this reviewer, especially after seeing films like THE JACKAL.
MIDNIGHT IN THE GARDEN OF GOOD AND EVIL is rated R for language and
brief violence.  Most of the language comes from Lady Chablis whose
comedy act is riddled with sexual innuendos and funny one-liners. 
MIDNIGHT is one of those few films which time seems irrelevant, as the
154 minute long film flew by.  If the movie does have flaws, it is
mainly from the lack of emotional connection with the audience.  In
fact, I'm pretty sure that MIDNIGHT was a very difficult film to
adapt for the screen.  Watching this movie makes me want to read the
novel, but I think that would just spoil the fun of this movie.  Maybe not.
Reviewed by Respect (respect@aros.net)
http://www.aros.net/~respect/movies.html

Title
Review for Hush (1998)
Hush (1998)
Rated PG-13 for some violence, sensuality and brief strong language
----------  Out of 4 stars: **1/2 (2 1/2 Stars)
Starring: Jessica Lange, Gwyneth Paltrow, Johnathon Schaech, and Nina
Foch
HUSH is one of those few films that means to entertain, and does to some
degree.  However, it also contains its fair share of problems, namely
its unfortunate title.  Originally titled "Kilronan" and "Bloodline"
(both better titles than HUSH), HUSH is one of those films that will
fail at the box office because of its name.  It's got an appealing cast,
but it seems that even that isn't enough to draw a crowd these days.
Selecting a title that appeals to everyone is a difficult process, but
we take it for granted.  That is, until we hear a title like HUSH, which
makes you want to laugh at it.
However, nitpicking titles is not a critic's job, and so I will move on
to bigger and better things.  HUSH is another entry in the genre that we
thought died with THE GOOD SON (has there been another "evil
_______-in-law" film since that one?).  Despite this, HUSH is
surprisingly effective, boasting good performances from the cast, and
keeping it real enough to be semi-scary.  Many films of this type fall
into the cliched formula of beginning as a light drama, and then
twisting (usually quickly) into a psychologically frightening film.
HUSH begins the same, but I was quite surprised at how smoothly the
transition was.  Instead of having the "evil" character do something
completely evil that establishes them as the antagonist, HUSH gives this
character a background that explains what she does.
That character is Martha (Jessica Lange), and at first glance she seems
normal enough.  She loves her son Jackson (Johnathon Schaech), and her
new daughter-in-law Helen (Gwyneth Paltrow).  The film begins with
Jackson taking Helen down to his mother's home, Kilronan, a large
horse-farm.  Jackson and Helen live in New York City, so the trip to the
country is gladly welcomed.  Helen is especially thankful for the warm
hospitality she receives from Martha.  Unfortunately, this hospitality
begins to break down, as Helen becomes more aware of Martha's motives.
And as is the tradition of all these films, no one believes
Helen--except for one person: Alice (Nina Foch), Martha's
mother-in-law.  Of course, Alice happens to be in a nursing home, and no
one believes her either.  As the countless cliches come into order, the
film begins to take on a life of its own.  We know where it will go, but
we don't know how it's going to get there.  And as the film approaches
its conclusion, we begin to wonder if it will follow in the grand
tradition of this genre--a bloody shootout or fight between good and
evil.  It doesn't.  Instead, it goes for a more psychological and
realistic ending.
The difference between HUSH and the countless other films of this genre
is pretty basic: HUSH maintains a level of believability.  Whenever the
characters do anything, it is usually upon instincts and not as a plot
convention.  These characters think for themselves, and sometimes it
gets almost too real.  There is one moment in HUSH that scared me the
most.  It is a very small and seemingly insignificant moment, but it was
startling nonetheless.  It comes close to the end of the film.  Martha
enters the room of Helen, in order to do some evil deed to her, but she
is startled by her son's presence.  As she tries to convince him to
leave the room and fails, she turns and pauses for a brief second.  This
pause is the moment.  It occurred to me that this woman is not insane at
all.  She is fully rational, thinking everything out and planning her
next move.  It's amazing what a good performance can do for a role.
There are several problems with HUSH, however.  Most of them are rather
apparent, but some lie in the details.  While many critics complain
about the Schaech character being too dumb for his own good, I think he
is actually quite effective (I will explain later).  The problem lies in
the actual presentation of the story.  Director Jonathan Darby isn't
able to hold together a decent pace, making some scenes riveting, while
others boring and dull.  Overall, there are more scenes of the latter.
Some include the preposterous, as when Helen and Jackson begin taking
each other's clothes off in the middle of the hallway.  Martha walks
back in and stares at them.  She smiles, and then walks back into her
room.  During another moment, I tried to remember if those steam
machines had handles on them for cold water.  I can't recall that they
do.  But mostly, HUSH relies on a lot of coincidental plot tricks, as
when Helen decides to check out the room above the barn ("The light was
on...").  I would also like to know if the same medicine that is used
for horses can be used for humans, or if that was just to move the plot
along.  I also noticed that one scene in the trailers of HUSH was cut
out of the film (The part involving the poison in the bathroom).  But
despite all these flaws, the cast does come through as fun and
appealing.
Jessica Lange has proven to be quite a reliable actress.  It seems that
she excels at playing these crazy characters, although sometimes she'll
give a bravura performance as in BLUE SKY.  This is probably one of her
better performances, as she is very fun to watch.  The only problem I
can see is that the producers were trying to make her look more crazy
than the character needed to be.  I began to feel sorry for her
character, even towards the end of the film.  This isn't Lange's fault,
as she gave a very good performance.  Gwyneth Paltrow is also appealing
in the cast, giving the film some emotional depth.  As for Schaech, he
surprisingly gives a decent performance.  Other critics complain that
his character is too slow to catch on, but I disagree.  First, you have
to put yourself in his position.  You lived with your mother for years
and years, but have only lived with your wife for a couple of years.
Whom would you believe in this situation?  Everything Lange does,
Schaech is probably used to, and he doesn't think it is very strange.
Another performance deserves to be noted, and that is by Nina Foch.  Her
wiseacre character is hilarious and adds a lot of humor that could have
been used more throughout the film.  She also provides the best line in
the film ("I am answering, but you can't see my finger!").  A very good
cast which is forced to plod through this uneven plot.
HUSH is rated PG-13 for some violence, sensuality and brief strong
language.  There is a brief glimpse of Paltrow naked, but it's very
quick.  There is a graphic description of how horse-breeders "help" the
horses mate, though it's not as graphic as it could have been.
Surprisingly, the language is nearly non-existent, though a few words
(including on f-word) are rather harsh and unnecessary.  While the
screenplay and plot may not be original or very good, the cast does its
best to make the film enjoyable.  For the most part, they succeed.  But
sometimes, they fall victim to contrivance and coincidence, and that
makes HUSH a mild disappointment.
Reviewed by Respect (respect@aros.net)
http://www.aros.net/~respect/movies.html

Title
Review for Starship Troopers (1997)
Starship Troopers (1997)
Rated R for graphic sci-fi violence and gore, and for some language and nudity.
----------  Out of 4 stars: ***1/2 (3 1/2 Stars)
Starring: Casper Van Dien, Denise Richards, Dina Meyer, Jake Busey, Neil Patrick Harris, Patrick Muldoon, and
Michael Ironside.
Ladies and gentlemen, 1997's INDEPENDENCE DAY is here!  It's title:
STARSHIP TROOPERS.  And surprisingly, it is more entertaining than
ID4.  I realize that I gave last year's sci-fi hit a 4 star rating,
but I was under the spell of the powerful first hour.  After
subsequent viewings, I feel that INDEPENDENCE DAY really wasn't as
great as it seemed--though I still give it a positive review.
STARSHIP TROOPERS, on the other hand, has a mocking sense of humor,
knowing perfectly well how ridiculous it may seem.  As a result,
STARSHIP TROOPERS is a more exciting, energetic, and lively science
fiction film.  In fact, I probably could never get tired of watching
this film.
STARSHIP TROOPERS is very reminiscient of STAR WARS, another kick-ass
space opera which reinvented the sci-fi drama altogether.  While
STARSHIP TROOPERS is no STAR WARS, it comes quite close, and the
easiest assessment would be to call this film: "The 'Star Wars' of the
90s."  Am I being to generous to this film?  Perhaps, but when a
science fiction film comes along that can mix humor and romance,
effectively, into the warring races.  In essence, this is the science
fiction equivolence of Pulp Fiction.  The easiest way to write a
review of this film would be to compare it to other science fiction
films, and I may have to.  STARSHIP TROOPERS is not quite an original
film persay, but director Paul Verhoeven gives the film a
"kick-the-aliens'-asses" style.  ID4 had this same style, except it
was forced, most likely the cause of Will Smith having a major role.
This new "Star Wars" has a very simple, basic plot: mankind vs. an
alien species.  The alien species in question here is the Bugs, a
seemingly advanced civilization of arachnid-type insects.  However,
the underlying morals of STARSHIP TROOPERS are fleshed out with deadly
accuracy.  Sometimes the morals are buried by the bloody violence and
intense action scenes, but during quiet moments, we realize that
STARSHIP TROOPERS has something to tell us about our civilization.
More than likely, these morals will be overpowered and quickly
forgotten by the time the movie ends.  And they should be.  I doubt
Verhoeven intended this film to be a thought-provoking film.  This is
an "event" film, but surprisingly above average.  It is extremely
refreshing to watch a sci-fi war film, and actually root for the human
side (something INDEPENDENCE DAY never achieved).
STARSHIP TROOPERS begins with a satirical portrayal of those strange
"Join the Army" ads.  Mixing a Web-based interface, these summations
of events are refreshingly original.  Stating, "Would you like to know
more?", these short news bulletins give the film an immediate sense of
humor, and we know we should not take it seriously.  However, we also
witness the murder of several troopers in battle, in a gory, yet
funny, way.  After witnessing the slaughter, the film jumps back one
year, to setup what we just saw.  We are introduced to Johnny Rico
(Casper Van Dien) and Carmen Ibanez (Denise Richards).  Rico flirts
with Carmen by sending her messages over computer terminals in school
classrooms.  However, Carmen isn't as interested in Rico as she is in
becoming a pilot.  However, another classmate, Dizzy Flores (Dina
Meyer), has her eye on Rico.  Unfortunately, Rico isn't interested in
Dizzy.  This setup is rather cliched, as is the result of the setup,
but it still is fun to watch.
Carmen signs up to become a starship trooper, and as a result, Rico
signs up.  And as a result, Dizzy signs up.  Everyone is assigned a
certain position in the academy: Carmen gets the pilot position she
wanted, Carl Jenkins (Neil Patrick Harris), a psychic, gets a position
in the training program, and Rico is left in the lowest class of the
Starship Troopers: the Mobile Infantry.  The main story follows Rico
through his trials and relationships.  In reality, I found myself
watching a space version of "Melrose Place," but with better special
effects.  An hour into the film, the war begins.  A sense of tension
grew in the audience I watched this film with.  The first hour may
have been a funny (sometimes unintentionally) setup, but we grew to
care for the flat characters, because no matter how hard I tried not
to like the characters, their gorgeous looks won me over (call me
superficial, if you must).  Following the training sessions, which had
many dramas in themselves (too many to mention here), the troopers are
sent to war.  The Bugs live on the planet Klendathu, a planet which
consists of dirt and rock, and pretty much nothing else.  Many dramas
occur during the war, until finally the troopers realize that their is
something behind the Bugs' attacks.  A sort of intelligence which
masterminds the defense.  The troopers are ordered to locate the
"brain" and capture it.
I hopefully left the plot as vague as possible, because STARSHIP
TROOPERS is not about plot.  It's about special effects and gory
violence.  Director Verhoeven, most known for his nudie film SHOWGIRLS
and BASIC INSTINCT, returns to his sci-fi days, which gave us good
films like Total Recall.  Verhoeven likes to push the envelope of the
MPAA, but despite all the violence, the comic book feel gives the film
a sense of falsehood.  STARSHIP TROOPERS is extremely violent, with
more gore than this year's EVENT HORIZON.  The R rating is well
deserved, and hopefully parents will not allow their 12 year old
children to see it.  My guess is that Verhoeven's target audience is
the 18 to 25 male group.  The film has a testosterone level off the
charts, with chiseled men and beautiful women.  Despite these
superficial elements, STARSHIP TROOPERS also creates a world which
made STAR WARS so successful.  While watching the film, we never
second guess the character's decisions because they seem perfectly
clear.  Thankfully, no hero is punching aliens in the face, which
gives the flat characters some depth for which we can identify with.
The cast of STARSHIP TROOPERS is quite annoying to begin with, but
they soon grow on you.  Casper Van Dien has the chiseled facial
features and tan skin which will make most girls swoon.  To most guys,
he will come across as artificial.  Fortunately, Van Dien is the worst
of the cast, despite how hard he tries to come off as a real
character.  Dina Meyer does a much better job of fleshing out her
character.  Her Dizzy is extremely likeable.  Denise Richards also
does a good job, and her scenes are very well done.  Jake Busey, Gary
Busey's son, gives a wonderfully funny performance, and provides one
of the biggest laughs of the film.  Neil Patrick Harris (remember, he
was Doogie Howser) is a little wooden, and slightly out of place with
the rest of the cast.  However, he does give a good performance.
Michael Ironside gives the best performance of the film as the teacher
with one arm.  His performance rises above the rest.  Perhaps it is
because his character is the most developed, but I think it is just
Ironside's presence on screen.  Unfortunately, no particular cast
member gives a star-making performance, which is too bad because the
material here could have made many of the cast members stars.
Director Verhoeven is the main star of the film.  His direction is
fast and unrelentless.  He never slows down his pace, which makes for
a wild ride.  Writer Edward Neumeier adapted the screenplay from the
book by Robert Heinlein.  The writing is usually very funny, and
sometimes very corny.  The dialogue is smart but not too smart.  We
aren't required to know everything, but some plot holes are left
unanswered.  Thankfully we are not intended to notice, and we really
don't (except for one which lingered in my mind for quite a while).
Amazingly, with all the wars and romance going on, the screenplay
manages to include some surprising governmental issues.  In fact,
these governmental changes seem fairly plausible, and this adds
another layer to the story.  The moral debate of the characters is
quite surprising to find in a film of this genre, but what is even
more surprising is the amount of humor included into all the carnage.
I haven't laughed this loud, even in some comedies.  Oh, and the
special effects are first rate.
STARSHIP TROOPERS is rated R for graphic sci-fi violence and gore, and
for some language and nudity.  Believe me when I say this: don't take
young kids to see this film.  It is extremely violent.  In fact, it is
probably the most violent film out this year.  However, if you are old
enough (over 17) to see it, STARSHIP TROOPERS is guaranteed to
entertain.  It's been a long time since I have cheered for the heros,
while also cheering for the bad guys.  And still, it is my dream to
see a sci-fi film in which the alien race destroys mankind, and take
over the world.  Now that would be entertaining!
Reviewed by Respect (respect@aros.net)
http://www.aros.net/~respect/movies.html

Title
Review for Edge, The (1997)
Starring: Anthony Hopkins, Alec Baldwin, Harold Perrineau, Elle MacPherson
I swear I have seen The Edge before.  In fact, it reminded me of THE
BEAR, THE RIVER WILD, and other various films mixed into an entirely
different film.  However, The Edge has done something that most action
films should do, and that is add heart and characters we like to the
plot.  In doing so, The Edge draws many more suspenseful moments out
of cliched scenes than, say, THE PEACEMAKER.  Unfortunately, because
of those overused moments, we can pretty much guess the outcome of the
film.  But leave it to screenwriter David Mamet to add humor and a few
surprises to mess with your head.  One surprise, in particular, left
me smiling just because Mamet actually had the guts to add it to his
script.
Action films are a dime a dozen in Hollywood, and while they are
somewhat successful at entertaining us, they lack the one thing which
would make them a more respected genre: intelligence.  Even horror
films have learned this, a genre which is probably the least respected
of them all.  THE RIVER WILD was one of the best action/suspense films
I have seen from the 90s.  The intelligence of the screenplay, and the
suspense drawn from the realistic characters is nearly unmatched to
this day.  The Edge has the intelligence and smart characters, but
this time the lack of originality is the downfall.  I must admit that
it was very suspenseful, and had an original third half, but the first
hour and a half is riddled with cliches and plot holes.  This is an
example of the final act saving the film, instead of the other way
around (as in The Lost World).  If only the screenplay had maintained
the final thirty minutes' intensity, it could have become a great
action film (and I use the term loosely).
The Edge is pretty much a survival-of-the-fittest film.  But taking
SCREAM's lead, The Edge makes fun of the genre's cliches, and then
uses them (though not quite as effectively).  Charles Morse (Anthony
Hopkins) is the main character, a rich and very intelligent man who
wonders what the accumulation of all this knowledge has brought to
him.  For once, we don't immediately care for the main character.
Instead, we like Bob (Alec Baldwin), a photographer who is going to
take pictures of Charles' wife, Mickey (Elle MacPherson), out in the
wilderness.  They board a plane and head to a cabin somewhere in the
Arctic.  Charles' birthday is the same day, and he receives a gold
watch from his wife, and a pocket knife from Bob.  As action films go,
these items do have importance to the rest of the story, but quite a
bit more than we first expect.
Soon, however, Bob wants to find a native to shoot pictures of because
of his "personality."  Charles, Bob, Bob's assistant Steve (Harold
Perrineau), and the pilot head off to find him, and as shown in the
previews, hit a flock of birds flying south for the winter.  Down the
plane goes, the pilot is killed, and the three are left to survive in
the wilderness.  Director Lee Tamahori is aware of the silly plot
which is about to follow, and therefore has to create original ways to
approach the situations.  He succeeds often enough for us to enjoy the
film.  Take, for instance, the entire man-hunting bear plot.  This has
been done many times in films with different animals, and even bears.
But given the Charles' intelligence, and Bob's uncertainty, many of
the cliches are given fresh twists.  Even Charles himself seems to
have seen these action films before.  My favorite line of the film
comes from Charles: "Most people die in the wilderness because they
didn't do the one thing that could save their life... thinking."
Despite the predictability of the main plot, a subplot develops late
in the film which took me by surprise, and made me smile when I
realized that everything isn't as it seems anymore.  I have to write
cautiously as to not reveal this surprise, so instead I will avoid it
entirely.  The first two-thirds of The Edge have many humorous moments
to push it along, and some of Charles' survival techniques seem
possible, even making fire from ice.  Tamahori is able to create a lot
of suspense from the stalking bear, but whenever the bear is present,
the characters lose all sensibility.  I have always wondered why
characters in films walk over a log to get across water.  Why not do
what an intelligent person would and crawl across?  I guess getting
chased by a bear makes your thought process turn off for a while.
Thankfully, we already have begun to care for the characters, and so
we let this small detail slide.  But some of the technical details are
awkward, such as the nice stitching done on the fur coat that Charles
and Bob make (where did they get thread and needles?).
The acting of the film is highly above average for a film of this
nature, and borders on phenomenal.  Anthony Hopkins gives a terrific
performance, creating his most likeable and layered character since
REMAINS OF THE DAY.  Hopkins usually brings greatness to his roles,
but here he exceeds at gaining the audiences' sympathy, something he
definitely did not do in SILENCE OF THE LAMBS.  Alec Baldwin gives one
of his best performances I have ever seen (it sure is better from his
FAIR GAME).  Baldwin can be a good or a bad character, and here he
succeeds at both in a way.  You can never quite guess if he is a nice
or a vllainous character until the end, and Baldwin is able to handle
the double-natured photographer.  Elle MacPherson gives a good
performance, albeit slight.  She isn't in the film all that much, but
for the scenes she does have, she handles as an actress, not as a
model.  Harold Perrineau is a good actor, and his scenes are nice and
underplayed.  He is eliminated early, and I reveal nothing by saying
this because it is inevitable and predictable.
The Edge is rated R for graphic violence, some gore, and language.
Some of the violence is a little too disturbing, even for me.  This
film is a nice change from the mindless action most of us are used to,
but too many cliches bog it down.  Director Tamahori has created a
very smooth and suspenseful action film out of recycled parts.  David
Mamet's script, though, has a lot of humor to keep the first hour
afloat, and the acting is solid.  The best thing about the script is
the ending which doesn't end with the normal high-strung action
sequence, but with a small detail involving a certain gift.  It's a
nice touch considering what we have had to go through with the bear.
And by the way, most people laughed when the film faded to black due
to a large credit to Bart the bear.  Way to go, Bart.
Reviewed by Respect (respect@aros.net)
http://www.aros.net/~respect/movies.html

Title
Review for Boogie Nights (1997)
Boogie Nights (1997)
Rated R for strong sex scenes with explicit dialogue, nudity, drug use,
language, and violence.
----------  Out of 4 stars: **** (4 Stars)
Starring: Mark Wahlberg, Burt Reynolds, Julianne Moore, Heather Graham,
Luis Guzman, William H. Macy, Don Cheadle, John C. Reilly.
Darkness.  A little shimmer of light from the New Line Cinema credit.
Then darkness again.  Darkness, and more darkness.  Suddenly, breaking
the darkness and the silence is a huge neon sign sporting the title of
the film: BOOGIE NIGHTS.  The 70s music destroys the peaceful silence
when the audience finally shuts up.  The neon sign is vibrant, wild,
and very descriptive of the film we are about to see.  Preparing for a
good time, and not really knowing what to expect, I walked into the
theater for a special engagement of the film.  In fact, it was obvious
most audience members didn't know what to expect.  Overall, I feel
that the film left its mark for life on every single audience member,
in one way or another.
BOOGIE NIGHTS is one of the best films of the year.  Period.  I have
heard all the praising done by critics, but never had I expected this
film.  Opening with probably the best character-introducing scenes
that I have ever seen in all my years of watching films, a smile came
across my face which never left for the first hour of the film.  The
camera pans away from the neon sign and drifts across the street and
into a local club.  We follow the host of this club, Maurice
T. Rodriguez (Luis Guzman), as he seats a couple of people.  This
couple is Jack Horner and Amber Waves (Burt Reynolds and Julianne
Moore).  The camera never cuts throughout this entire sequence,
following one person, and then landing on someone else to introduce us
to.  We follow Rollergirl (Heather Graham) and we finally meet Eddie
Adams (Mark Wahlberg).  This one sequence is so impressive that even I
was marvelling the great camerawork done.  I have never seen a scene
like it before, and if I ever do, it will probably not be as well done
as this one.
Director Paul Thomas Anderson has fully recreated the 70s decade in
vivid and shocking detail.  The colorful clothes and wild hairstyles
are magnificently reproduced.  But despite this, BOOGIE NIGHTS is more
of a character-driven drama.  Deriving its plot from the hardcore porn
films of the late 70s and early 80s, Nights creates an atmospheric
setting in which the adult film actors rise and fall from stardom.
The film centers around Eddie Adams, who changes his name to Dirk
Diggler after venturing into the porn business.  Adams is a busboy at
the club in which the film begins.  Jack Horner, a respected adult
fimmaker (respected in the porn industry anyway), who spots Eddie in
the club.  Later, he asks Eddie if he would like to be a star in one
of his films.  "I got a feeling that behind those jeans is something
wonderful just waiting to get out," remarks Horner.  All of this
happens within the first 15 minutes.
The rest of the film deals with many different characters, but focuses
mainly on Dirk Diggler and Jack Horner.  Amazingly, with all the
characters, all of them are well developed making us care for them and
their situations.  Among them include Little Bill (William H. Macy,
FARGO), Reed Rothchild (John C. Reilly), Buck Swope (Don Cheadle), and
the Colonel (Robert Ridgely).  Of course, these are just a few of
them.  Many critics complained that the film didn't develop any of the
characters completely.  On the contrary, BOOGIE NIGHTS does develop
every single character, but what screenwriter Anderson does is cut out
all the scenes which supposedly bring the characters out even more.
Many of these scenes are fillers and unnecessary.  Running at around 2
hours and 30 minutes, BOOGIE NIGHTS establishes the characters, shoves
them into the porn industry, and then yanks everything out from under
them.  At its most basic, this film is a simple "Rise and Fall" story.
But what lies beneath this is a world of discovery and surprise.  And
beneath that is a world of love and hope.
More goes on in BOOGIE NIGHTS than in most movies of this genre
(whatever that may be).  It has more subplots than PULP FICTION and
more characters than any film out this year.  Many characters appear
in other films, but BOOGIE NIGHTS actually focuses on the happenings
of all the different people.  Little Bill is disturbed because his
wife (porn star Nina Hartley) keeps committing adultery, and not being
too shy about it.  In one scene, she displays her sexual talent in the
driveway, surrounded by on-lookers.  When Little Bill asks her what
she is doing, she says, "Shut up Bill.  You're embarrassing me."  Reed
Rothchild becomes one of Dirk's best friends, and he also becomes his
sidekick in some of the porn films.  Buck Swope has an entire subplot
devoted to him, beginning with him as a country-loving stereo salesman
to a loving hubsand.  Due to his activity in the porn industry,
however, Swope is prejudiced against in his future business deals.
One of the most inventive and effective techniques used by Anderson is
the change from the 70s to the 80s.  During the 70s, the porn industry
is done on film and shown in theaters.  Jack Horner's dream is to make
movies with actual stories to keep the audience in their seats once
they have achieved their purpose for watching the film.  The change to
the 80s is done in one remarkable scene.  During the New Year's Eve
party, everybody is at Horner's house, and having a good time.  Little
Bill finds his wife with another man, and fet up with her
adulterations, gets a gun from his car.  He walks into the house,
shoots his wife and her partner, walks into the living room with all
the guests, and sticks the gun into his mouth.  The transition from
the disco, fun-loving 70s to the violent, disturbing 80s is very well
executed.
Despite what may sound like a sex-filled drama, BOOGIE NIGHTS cleverly
manages to show us very little.  In fact, what it does show us is done
in such a way that it is more humorous than erotic.  In one scene, the
film expires and they have to change reels.  Horner tells Dirk and
Amber to pause while they reload.  The conversation between Dirk and
Amber at this moment is truly hilarious, and also makes us realize
that sexual pleasure is more like this ("Does it feel good?") than in
other films with sex scenes.  The nudity is more explicit, showing
full frontal nudity of both sexes.  However, Anderson wisely waits
till the very last shot (considered to be the "money shot") to show
the audience Dirk's possession.  Previously, Anderson relies on
actor's expressions to display the impressive size of Dirk Diggler.
In one of my favorite scenes, The Colonel asks to see it, and gets an
awkward grin on his face, replying, "Thank you."  Never leaving the
actor's face during this moment, we are left to imagine... until the
last scene, of course.
The cast of BOOGIE NIGHTS is top-notch and I sense a couple of Oscar
nominations headed towards Burt Reynolds and perhaps even Mark
Wahlberg.  Burt Reynolds does an incredible job, giving one of his
best performances ever.  Instead of overacting (like he did in
STRIPTEASE), he relies on the character's depth and conviction to
propel the character forward.  He remains low-key, but everything
seems to revolve around him.  Mark Wahlberg gives an outstanding
performance, proving to be a better actor than a singer.  His turn in
Fear was quite frightening, but here he establishes a star-making
performance.  Julianne Moore gives one of the best performances in the
film with one of the best characters.  Moore's character becomes
Dirk's surrogate mother when Moore regrets losing her son years ago.
Heather Graham, as Rollergirl, is very good and charming.  Refusing to
take of her skates--which also aid in a very violent scene--Graham
gives the character added depth with a sweet face and an innocent
appearance (which, as we all see, is not entirely true).  William
H. Macy gives yet another good performance, providing a lot of humor
himself.  John C. Reilly gives a good performance in a slightly
underdeveloped character.  Don Cheadle is extremely effective as the
stereo salesman, who provides one of the most complex characters in
the film.  Many other actors appear, and all are very good.
BOOGIE NIGHTS is rated R (and a very hard R it is) for strong sex
scenes with explicit dialogue, nudity, drug use, language, and
violence.  Nearly receiving an NC-17 rating, Anderson cut several
scenes out.  By doing so, he creates an "R rated depiction of XXX
rated movies."  The sex scenes are filmed not by showing the actual
deed, but by showing the filmmaker's reactions.  The language is very
harsh, but it is to be expected.  Be advised that this film is not for
the weak of stomach or heart.  In fact, several people walked out in
disgust during the screening of the film.  Perhaps they were offended
by Anderson trying to put the porn industry into a good light, but
they also missed the downfall of the porn stars, which gave the film
added depth.  BOOGIE NIGHTS is a courageous and daring film which
reminds us how fun watching a movie can really be.
Reviewed by Respect (respect@aros.net)
http://www.aros.net/~respect/movies.html

Title
Review for Game, The (1997)
Starring: Michael Douglas, Sean Penn, Deborah Kara Unger, James
Rebhorn.
Director David Fincher has such an eye for detail which is very rare
in Hollywood these days (Terry Gilliam comes to mind as another one).
Film is one of the best art forms because not only can you tell a
story, but you can use the camera to capture the smallest detail and
have it mean something.  But most directors seem to go for action with
the slightest ounce of a story.  So whenever a director uses the
camera to its fullest potential, the film almost automatically
deserves a good review.  And when they add a fascinating story to it,
you have nearly perfect entertainment.
Fincher's The Game is no exception to this.  The Game is one of the
most interesting and complex films to come out of Hollywood in a long
time.  Fincher hasn't made a film since "Seven," his box office and
critical hit which defied expectations and became one of the best
movies ever.  So it is about time he made another film.  And what a
ride it is.  The Game isn't quite as powerful as "Seven," but in some
ways it is better.  Overall, The Game could have used a little more
clarity, or a little more uncertainty.  It walks a line of insanity
and reality, but it never goes either way until the very end.  The
outcome is satisfying enough for the preceding events, and it makes a
lot of sense once everything is set straight.  Unfortunately, unlike
"The Usual Suspects," we are never given enough information to figure
out for ourselves what is happening, whether it be true or false.
However, this also gives the film a frightening aspect which The Game
uses to the fullest extent.
The Game is told completely from its main character's point of view.
Nicholas Van Orton (Michael Douglas) is a high-strung and isolated
businessman.  He lives alone in his giant mansion, divorced from his
wife Elizabeth, and is celebrating his 48th birthday; the same age at
which his father committed suicide at, in the same mansion.  For his
48th birthday, Conrad (Sean Penn), the rebel of the family, gives
Nicholas a gift certificate to CRS: Consumer Recreation Services.  "It
will make your life fun again," his brother promises.  As skeptical as
Nicholas is, he is somewhat intrigued, and annoyed by the lack of
information--something this businessman hates.  Seeing a billboard in
an office, he decides to visit the mysterious company.  Jim Feingold
(James Rebhorn) greets Nicholas and guides him through the sign-up
process, which consists of psych-tests, physicals, emotional
responses, and other mind games.  "Each game is suited to each
person's emotional and psychological needs," explains Feingold.
One day, Nicholas gets a call from CRS and they explain that he failed
the tests.  Even more intrigued and now somewhat angered at the time
he spent signing up, he starts asking around to see what people can
tell him about the company.  What he doesn't realize is that the game
has already begun.  The phone call is just the first of many strange
events to be thrown Nicholas' way.  How he finds out that he is
involved has to be witnessed because it is amusing and fun and
visually impressive.  The detail involved in Fincher's shots is
incredible and almost requires a second viewing just to appreciate the
effort that went into them.  With "Seven," Fincher had almost every
single shot mean something.  He also has the unique ability to make
you look at exactly what he wants you to.  Compared to "Seven,"
though, The Game is light and comical.  Because of this film's sense
of humor and self-awareness, nothing can be taken quite seriously.  So
don't try to make much sense of what goes on in The Game, because it
doesn't want you to.
What does make sense is the final revelation--when everything becomes
apparent and clear.  If taken as it is, The Game's ending makes
complete sense.  But if you try and critique every minute detail, then
you get yourself into plot holes and incredibility.  Perhaps that is
the reason I docked the film.  While trying to remain realistic and
plausible, the plot is too unbelievable to create any real tension on
screen.  We don't really care if Douglas' character lives or not
because it isn't believable.  The ending requires you to have believed
anything that has happened previously, but if you suspend disbelief
and take the film as it is, you can accept The Game as an emotionally
and psycholically disturbing thriller.
Michael Douglas gives a terrific performance as Nicholas.  Douglas has
played lonely businessmen before, but here he adds another level to
his performance.  His character, who is normally level-headed and
relies on facts, is forced to trust nobody.  Can he believe the
waitress he bumped into?  What about his brother who got him involved
in the game in the first place?  Douglas portrays this aspect of his
character extremely well, and gives one of his best performances (even
better than his "Falling Down" persona).  The supporting cast is
essential in this film, and casting was critical.  Sean Penn is always
good, and he gives yet another credible performance as Douglas'
brother.  Deborah Kara Unger (from "Crash") is the waitress he bumps
into, and her performance is extremely good.  In fact, she almost
steals the film from Douglas.  James Rebhorn portrays his character
very well, and adds some confusion and desparation to Douglas'
predicament.  Another good performance comes from Armin Mueller-Stahl
(from "Shine") as the book editor.  But considering that Douglas is in
every single scene of The Game, he not only commands this cast, but
makes this distant and lonely character come to colorful life.
The Game is rated R for language, violence, some gore, and some nudity
and drugs.  What is essential for this film to work is the writing.
John Brancato and Michael Ferris have woven a confusing and compelling
screenplay with witty dialogue, and some very funny moments.  This
screenplay will probably get an Oscar nomination for Best Original
Screenplay because it does almost exactly the same thing The Usual
Suspects' did.  However, the visuals of The Game are enough to make
the viewer enjoy the vexing plot.  And if you can get yourself to
believe everything occuring on the screen, you will be thoroughly
entertained by one of this year's best films.

Title
Review for Babe: Pig in the City (1998)
Rated G for some violence and suggested sex.
---------- Out of 4 Stars: **** (4 stars)
Starring: Magda Szubanski, Mary Stein, Mickey Rooney, and James
Cromwell.  Featuring the voices of Elizabeth Daily (Babe), Glenne
Headly (Zootie), Danny Mann (Ferdinand), Steven Wright (Bob), and many
others.
Let it be known that I was one of the very few individuals to want
BRAVEHEART to lose at the Oscars to BABE, the 1995 family film.  Of
course, that was before I became the cynical and jaded person I have
become.  I preferred films that dealt with happy subjects.  I didn't
like SE7EN the first time I saw it in 1995.  Now, I think it's 1995's
best film.  As you can tell, my taste in film has changed considerably
(mind you, I still think BABE should have won, since SE7EN wasn't
nominated).  So upon hearing about the release of a sequel to BABE, I
was worried that I might not like it.  From the previews, I thought I
would hate it.
And gosh darn it, it takes those expectations and flips them
completely.  Just as the first film did, it surprises with a touching
and heartfelt story that is very hard to find these days.  Taking
themes that can be used in everyday life, Babe created a modern day
fairy tale.  The old story of an outsider trying to find his place in
society was reinvented for animals.  A pig, stolen from his mother,
gets sold to a farmer.  This farmer nurtures him, hoping for a
fantastic Thanksgiving ham.  But he then spots something different:
this pig could herd sheep better than any sheep dog ever could.
Well now that pig is back, and I couldn't be happier.  Frankly, this
is exactly what a sequel should be.  It doesn't really improve on the
original... it builds on it, making the franchise as a whole more
solid.  It's not better than the original, mostly due to some
particular plot elements that keep it from reaching the status that
Babe did.  But other elements, most notably the visual style, improves
dramatically.  For once, a sequel that doesn't rely on rehashing the
same old themes the original did.  Surprisingly, I wouldn't mind it if
this film were nominated for Best Picture again.  You aren't going to
find a better family film all year long.
BABE: PIG IN THE CITY begins precisely when the original left off.  As
we left Farmer Hoggett (James Cromwell) three years ago, his pig Babe
(now voiced by Elizabeth Daily) won the sheep herding contest after
being ridiculed by humans and animals alike.  A parade is now thrown
for the pig and his "human" as they arrive back home to greet his
loving wife, Esme Hoggett (Magda Szubanski).  But trouble is around
the corner.  As Babe wonders what to do next, he watches as Farmer
Hoggett descends into their well out back, in order to update it.
Unfortunately, Babe gets a bit too close, and falls in, causing
Hoggett to smash his finger in the pulley, plunge to the bottom of the
well, and get hit on the head by the counterweight which held him up.
Needless to say, he is unable to work for quite a while.
Esme takes over the chores, but she finds herself struggling, and
soon, two men dressed in black, their eyes seeming hollow and
soulless, arrive.  Yes...  they're bankers.  They want to sell the
farm unless the Hoggetts can come up with money to pay for their
mortgage.  Despite the prestige the pig has brought them, they are
still struggling.  They received many invitations for the pig to come
perform.  In return, a nice sum of money will be rewarded.  Esme
decides to take Babe to the festival, hoping the money will suffice to
save the farm.  But trouble brews when a drug-sniffing dog shows Babe
how he gets security's attention.  Esme is now suspected for carrying
drugs, and she misses her connecting flight to the festival.
Depressed, she wanders aimlessly to find a motel that will accept
pets.  Being unsuccessful, she sits and waits in the airport when a
mysterious janitor hands her an address.  "They'll take care of you
there," he says.
She finds the hotel, a massive, four-story building one might find in
Disneyland.  The landlady (Mary Stein) seems nervous and fidgety, and
finally accepts the two into the hotel.  Inside is a world of animals,
varying from dogs to cats to mice to monkeys.  Outside is a world of
hatred and anger.  Babe now must befriend his fellow inhabitants, find
food, rescue enemies, and save the farm.  How can one pig do all this?
Easy, when you are Babe.
While the plot seems rather childish and loony, it's handled with the
utmost intelligence, mixing themes with thoroughly entertaining sight
gags.  Instead of trying to fit one pig into a different world, we
have a pig trying to unite two sides together.  In order to
successfully live, the enemies of instinct must combine and set aside
their natural urges.  When Esme travels outside the hotel to find a
pay phone, she discovers a world of hatred, one very similar to the
animals' world.  Surprisingly, these complex themes are handled very
well, and the adult viewer will be pleasantly surprised by the
intelligence in which it is handled.  While some family films pander
to the lowest common denominator just to amuse kids, BABE: PIG IN THE
CITY tries it's hardest to entertain everyone at the same time.  And
it does, on every aspect.
Visually, this is definitely one of the best of the year, definitely
beating WHAT DREAMS MAY COME and even PLEASANTVILLE.  Full of
incredibly funny sight gags, from the wickedly designed hotel to the
humorous landscapes, BABE: PIG IN THE CITY incredulously improves on
its predecessor in this aspect.  Looking out the window of the hotel,
one can see America scrunched down into one city.  You see the
Hollywood sign on one end, and the Statue of Liberty on the other.
Frankly, this film will be nominated for at least one Oscar, and
that's for Best Set Design.  Roger Ford, the production designer, will
receive an Oscar nomination again for his work on this sequel.  If he
does not, then there is no justice in the world.  Frankly, I don't see
how the Academy could overlook his work.  Every set is immensely
appealing.  The hotel and the surrounding Venice-like waterways are a
sight to behold.  The puppet animals, such as the pelicans, are
wonderfully cartoon-ish.  Simply put, it's a real-life cartoon.  It's
pure eye-candy, and I ate it up intently.
Costume designer Norma Moriceau has an incredible job, creating
costumes for every single animal and human.  This varies from
black-and-white tuxes and ballroom gowns, to sweaters and clown suits,
Moriceau impressively creates a perfect costume for each individual's
personality.  The cinematography Andrew Lesnie does an extremely good
job at capturing the fairy tale-like story that unfolds before the
camera.  The colors are vivid and bright, even in the middle of the
night.  Look for both to be nominated at the Oscars.  Animal trainers
Karl Lewis Miller and Steve Martin (no, not that Steve Martin)
arguably had the motherload of the work placed on them.  Many animal
films have animals that obey simple commands or seem just like
animals.  But here, the animals come to life, producing extremely
life-like characters.  If it were possible, I believe that Bob (Steven
Wright) and Zootie (Glenne Headley), the husband-and-wife chimps in
Fugley Floom's (Mickey Roonie), deserve Best Supporting Actor and
Actress awards.  I'm not kidding.  You really have to see their
performances to believe it.  In the history of film, I have never even
thought of an animal receiving an Oscar nomination.  Here, I have made
an exception.
The performances are uniformly terrific, despite the lacking presence
of 1995's Oscar-nominee James Cromwell.  Though he has a limited
performance, we still care about him from the first film.  Now, we get
to learn more about Mrs.  Hoggett, portrayed by Magda Szubanski who
exudes energy in every inch of the frame.  Frankly, I feel sequels
should do this more often: center on a different character, instead of
the original human lead.  Now, we know both characters equally well.
Szubanski is a gem to behold as she fights to save her farm.  She
balances the film very well.  The other main human character is Mary
Stein.  Making brief appearances on "Star Trek: The Next Generation"
and other various shows, she finally lands a role that could introduce
her to the world.  Her towering 6-foot-1 body is appropriate for the
strange role, but she plays it with deadpan humor.  As soon as I saw
her, I knew I'd like her.  Mickey Rooney also makes a brief
appearance, but he has a heart attack and is removed from the film
rather quickly.
The voices are also terrific, especially the two aforementioned
chimps.  Frankly, I don't want to mention all of them, so I'll just
give a list of my favorites.  Elizabeth Daily, of course, who takes
over Christine Cavanaugh's vocalizations from the previous film.
Strangely, you can't tell the difference (it may be that Cavanaugh and
Daily both provide voices for "The Rugrats" television show).  Danny
Mann is Ferdinand, the quirky duck who hates to be without Babe at his
side.  Mann is hysterical once again.  The scene-stealers are Wright
and Headly, who turn in incredibly delicious vocal performances.  If
these two actors could receive Oscar nominations for their voice work
alone, they should.  James Cosmo, Nathan Kress, and Myles Jeffrey all
do great work as the other chimps.  Adam Goldberg is hilarious as an
arthritis-stricken dog who must wheel around in a hind-leg coach.  And
while I'm not sure who did the voice, the little kitten who complains,
"I'm still hungry," is sad but cute at the same time.
Director George Miller, who also produced and co-wrote the original,
has done an immense job in bringing this film to life.  Filmed in
Australia where filming is much cheaper, Miller was able to capture
the same intensity and tone the original had.  His impressive resume
continues to grow (it's hard to believe this is the same guy who
provided us with pure evil in THE WITCHES OF EASTWICK).  The writing
team of Miller, Judy Morris, and Mark Lamprell have crafted a
finely-tuned screenplay with witty dialogue that never seems tacky or
forced.  It's smart, funny, and sad all at the same time.  Just as
many sequels are, this one is darker than the original, but as they
say, "The best family films always have a dark side."  To prove this,
just look at the classics: THE WIZARD OF OZ, MATILDA, SLEEPING BEAUTY,
BEAUTY AND THE BEAST.  All had dark sides to them.  BABE: PIG IN THE
CITY is no different.  The music is pretty similar to the original,
right down to the singing mice (this time, a little more
prominently... just 'cause they're so cute!).  This is one of those
few films that provides you with many different emotions, but you
leave the theater feeling good all over.
BABE: PIG IN THE CITY is rated G for some violence and some suggested
sex (though nothing harsh whatsoever).  If this sounds too harsh for
your children, it really isn't.  The audience I attended the film with
seemed overwhelmingly pleased, especially little kids.  Even adults
cheered the film's intelligence.  If the Oscars do award this film
with another Best Picture Oscar, I wouldn't be disappointed in the
slightest.  While it's not quite up to par with the original, it
certainly pleases those looking for an entertaining time at the
movies.  I'm pretty sure that this film will end up on my top ten list
at the end of the year.

Title
Review for What Dreams May Come (1998)
Many people will not find much to like in WHAT DREAMS MAY COME, the new film by
visionary director Vincent Ward.  Most will come to see the computer animated
landscapes and vibrant colors.  But little do they know (as I so plainly found
out) that this has quite a complex story to tell.  Walking out of the theater, I
could see the audience's disgust... one member even had to be awakened after the
film ended.  Don't believe the previews that you see... this is definitely not a
film for everyone.
This is quite possibly one of the most adult-oriented films to come out in
recent years.  Kids will get bored with the slow plotting and the complex
storyline.  The plot is just as fluid as the heaven that Ward presents to us.
It goes back and forth in time, as if it has no boundaries.  Think of the film
CITY OF ANGELS.  Now add a more complex screenplay and a more unique vision.
Both films deal with the afterlife, but I doubt WHAT DREAMS MAY COME will do
well at the box office.  Costing around $85 million to make, the film would have
to do extremely well in order to make it's money back.  But due to it's story, I
doubt it will.  For everyone who thought TITANIC's story was too simple and
cliche, here is proof that if James Cameron had written a more complex
screenplay, it may not have done nearly as well.
But don't get me wrong... I hope the film does do well.  It's a vision of pure
visceral enjoyment that hardly ever gets put to the screen.  I doubt most of us
could have thought of this place, even in our own mind.  WHAT DREAMS MAY COME is
the second best film of the year when it comes to visuals.  The only film that
surpasses it is DARK CITY.  Full of rich, shocking colors, we get to see a
heaven that most of us would probably die to get to.  But don't do that, because
you'll end up going to hell.
WHAT DREAMS MAY COME begins with two boats colliding on a lake.  Chris "Christy"
Nielsen (Robin Williams) is startled by the sudden jolt, but is even more
startled by the beauty of the woman in the other boat.  Annie (Annabella
Sciorra) spies Chris, as well, and both eventually bond and get married.  Annie
is an artist, whose paintings are colorful, lush, and surrealistic.  Chris is a
doctor and loves Annie more than life itself.  They also have two children,
Marie (Jessica Brooks) and Ian (Josh Paddock).  But one day, the two children
are killed in a car crash, and it almost destroys Annie.  She tries to commit
suicide, but fails, and is then put in an institution.  Chris copes with the
problem by realizing they aren't around anymore, and nothing will change that.
Just as Annie gets her life back in order, Chris is killed while trying to save
the life of a car crash victim.
Chris goes to heaven, or his version of heaven, rather.  Guided by Albert (Cuba
Gooding, Jr.), Chris explores his new surroundings with pure delight and joy.
That is, until he realizes how miserable he is without Annie.  Prior to heaven,
he would try to comfort Annie, but the more he was around, the more pain she
felt.  Chris decides to leave her alone.  Little does he realize what will
happen next.  I'm not about to say, because the plot point is crucial to the
rest of the story (many critics, however, give it away).  Certainly, Chris dying
is crucial to the plot, but they tell you that he dies in the previews.
Story is not necessarily important for this movie to work, because it deals with
the afterlife.  However, strangely, virtually nothing is heard of God or the
Devil.  A couple of comments here and there, but the story maintains its focus
on Chris and his search for the love of his life.  "We're soul mates!" Chris
exclaims.  Heaven, in movies, is almost always depicted as a glowing city of
white, purity, and love.  Usually, it also looks like it rests among the
clouds.  But WHAT DREAMS MAY COME goes a different route.  It shows us a heaven
that most of us have never seen before.  Chris' heaven is his memories brought
to life.  His thoughts can make anything real, and he makes the paintings Annie
drew become his heaven.  "I've never seen anyone use real paint before," Albert
says.  Equally good as the depictions of hell which cast away the normal
stereotypes of fire and brimstone.  Instead, it's a state of being.  In one
gloriously horrific scene, Chris and his "tracker" (Max von Sydow) arrive at a
sea of faces.  Thousands of heads are stuck above ground, their bodies somewhere
else.  Mostly dead silent, some quips are made, almost as if to lighten the
mood.  It's truly a frightening sequence.
Production designer Eugenio Zanetti is definitely going to be up for an Oscar
nomination.  Using state of the art computer technology, worlds are created for
exploration.  Sometimes, some scenes play out as if they are only there for the
visual impact.  It's not necessary to be there, but we appreciate seeing it.
Costume designer Yvonne Blake (who also appears in the film) has done an
incredible job providing some interesting and colorful costumes.
Cinematographer Eduardo Serra, whose work was last seen in the luscious WINGS OF
THE DOVE, has a difficult job, as most cinematographers do working with special
effects.  But Serra's entire universe is a computer generated image, and he does
a masterful job.  Writer Ron Bass, adapting from the novel by Richard Matheson,
provides a very fluid screenplay with no real set plot.  The story is extremely
vague in its details, allowing viewers to think for themselves about the
meaning.  And director Vincent Ward puts it all together into his final vision.
WHAT DREAMS MAY COME is a good example of German expressionism which may just
turn off a good portion of the audience.  Your average movie goer more than
likely isn't used to expressionistic techniques.  The film will also definitely
draw attention from religious people, but they shouldn't take it too far.  It
is, after all, just a movie.
Robin Williams has continuously impressed with his dramatic performances, while
his comedic roles have been suffering.  His comedy is perfection when he makes
up his own stuff, but when is confined by a screenplay, he isn't quite as
effective.  But drama is really his strong point, and you can see that here.
It's doubtful he'll get another Oscar nomination, but I wouldn't really mind if
he did.  The real surprise here is Annabella Sciorra who impressed last year
with COP LAND.  This may be her breakout role and may garner her some much
needed attention.  It's also quite possible that she could get an Oscar
nomination.  However, the Academy doesn't like to award performances for these
types of films.  Cuba Gooding, Jr. has been better, but he's certainly not
distracting.  Max von Sydow is underused, as are Jessica Brooks and Josh
Paddock.  A treat for some movie goers is to see Werner Herzog appear (if they
even recognize him) as Chris' father lost in the sea of faces.  It's not hard to
see why Herzog would be attracted to this film, considering he thinks that
audiences are starving for great images.  Overall, it's Williams and Sciorra's
film.
WHAT DREAMS MAY COME is rated PG-13 for thematic elements involving death, some
disturbing images, language, and some partial nudity.  The film is definitely
aimed at a more adult audience.  Some will find the plot distracting.  Some will
find the visuals absolutely glorious.  And some will find both.  The only real
problem with the film, that I could see, was that it slows down considerably
during the midsection, just after we have been immersed in the visuals and
before the search for Annie begins.  By the way, some controversy even
surrounded the title, which was mistaken for a sexual term ("what" becomes "wet"
and you should understand).  In actuality, the title is from a soliloquy in
HAMLET.  Just thought I should let you know.

Title
Review for Scream 2 (1997)
Scream 2 (1997)
Rated R for graphic horror violence and gore, and language.
----------  Out of 4 stars: ***1/2 (3 1/2 Stars)
Starring: Neve Campbell, Courtney Cox, Jamie Kennedy, David Arquette,
Jerry O'Connell, Jada Pinkett, Sarah Michelle Gellar, Heather Graham,
Omar Epps, Laurie Metcalf, Duane Martin, Timothy Olyphant, Liev
Schreiber.
"Sequels suck!" explains Randy (Jamie Kennedy), one of the survivors
from last year's surprise box office hit SCREAM.  SCREAM was a
breakthrough film, spoofing the very horror films of the 70s and 80s
which caused the demise of the horror genre.  The characters in SCREAM
had seen those same slasher films and were familiar with them.  They
discussed the cliches, and at the same time, SCREAM used those cliches
by renewing and updating them.  Director Wes Craven had a lot of fun
slamming the genre he helped create, which was ruined by countless and
inferior sequels.  But that doesn't mean that there aren't good
sequels.  The characters in SCREAM 2 openly discuss superior sequels
(ALIENS, THE GODFATHER PART 2, TERMINATOR 2), but this also puts
pressure on Craven and writer Kevin Williamson to create a good enough
sequel as to not become one of the sequels made fun of in the SCREAM
saga.
And SCREAM 2 delivers.  Again, characters are put into a situation of
terror, but while SCREAM had more broad humor, SCREAM 2 is focused
more on the satirical edge of the SCREAM franchise.  The sequel to the
hit SCREAM talks about sequels openly, but what is lacking this time
around is genuine scares, which made the original a hit.  Many of
these moments were everyone's favorite: the "jump" moments.  I love
these moments, because...  well, it scares me.  SCREAM had many of
these moments.  What makes them so effective isn't the sudden
appearance of some unexpected person in the shot, but the loud musical
chord that accompanies the action on screen.  These moments are
incredibly scary, making viewers literally jump in their seats.
SCREAM 2 has fewer of these than its predecessor, and those it does
have aren't as scary.
SCREAM 2 begins in the same way SCREAM did, but much less scarier, and
more satirically.  It opens in a movie theater showing a sneak preview
of STAB!, a filmed version of Gale Weathers' best-selling novel The
Woodsboro Murders, which is based on the murders from the original
film (in essence, we have the movie SCREAM on the screen in SCREAM 2).
We meet two characters standing in line (Jada Pinkett and Omar Epps),
who discuss the teen slasher genre.  Both characters are black, and
Pinkett points out that black people are no where present in horror
films of this kind (as a result, Craven places many black characters
into the film).  In the theater, Ghostface costumes are handed to
every audience member, most of whom don the costume for the film.
However, lurking in the theater is a real killer, wearing the same
costume.  Trying to guess which one it is is the most suspenseful
moment in this scene.  Pinkett's comments are perfect and exactly what
most people said to the original film.  During the opening scene of
STAB!, Casey Becker (Heather Graham) gets phones calls just like Drew
Barrymore did in the original film.  Pinkett yells at the screen,
"Hang up and Star-69 his ass!"  In the end, two people end up dead,
and the serial killings begin once again.
With the two recent killings, reporters begin showing up, and among
them is Gale Weathers (Courtney Cox), who has now gathered a small fan
club (including Laurie Metcalf from TV's "Roseanne").  Also to show up
is Dewey "Dwight" Riley (David Arquette), who now walks with a limp
due to his stab wound a couple years earlier.  Weathers has a new
cameraman (Duane Martin) who has no idea of the events which occurred
a couple years before.  As sequels go, "the body count is always
higher," and so a bigger cast is introduced.  There is Randy (Kennedy)
from the original film, along with his new film freak buddy Mickey
(Timothy Olyphant).  Derek (Jerry O'Connell) is Sidney Prescott's
(Neve Campbell) new beau, and Hallie (Elise Neal) is Sidney's
roommate.  Accompanying Weathers is Cotton Weary (Liev Schreiber), the
wrongly accused killer in SCREAM.  Surprisingly, all these characters
are developed rather nicely, but you pretty much realize that many of
them will be gutted.  Smaller roles include Helen (Sarah Michelle
Gellar) as a designated driver and, in the STAB! film is-wouldn't you
know it?-Tori Spelling as Sidney!  That tricky Williamson... he did
that on purpose (Neve Campbell remarked that Spelling would most
likely play her in a film).
SCREAM 2 may not be as scary as the original film, but it sure
maintains a high level of suspense throughout.  My heart almost never
stopped pounding.  Most of the suspense comes from us knowing
something is going to jump out from behind a corner by the framing of
the shot.  When and who is what makes us hold our breath.  Will it be
the killer, or just a friend?  Sometimes nothing happens, but we still
remain in a tense state, and just as we begin to let our guard down,
something scary occurs on screen.  Unfortunately, it just isn't as
scary this time around, and it's hard to understand why.  The musical
chords are there, and the people jumping out from behind dark shadows
is present, but for some reason, it just doesn't work as well this
time.  Does that make it a lesser film?  Well, actually, yes.  Perhaps
a lot of the blame could be put on the bigger budget, as the original
relied on genuine scares instead of elaborate set pieces.  SCREAM 2
has an incredibly impressive set design, with some set pieces which
are sure to astound audiences.  In fact, the only bad thing about
SCREAM 2 is that lack of scariness. But what it does make up for is in
its technical aspects.
The technical aspects of SCREAM 2 are equal, if not superior, to its
predecessor.  The set design is spectacular, which adds a lot of
suspense by itself.  A highlight involves a Greek play starring
Sidney, but as she is rehearsing for it, she begins to see the killer
on the stage.  The surrealistic portrayal of this scene is very
effective, as the camera spins around, blurring all the Greek masks
together, but you can distinctly see the Ghostface amidst the crowd.
The music, written by Danny Elfman (for the Greek scenes only), is the
best in the film.  Another impressive scene involves a police car, the
killer, and Sidney and her roommate.  It leads up to one of the film's
most genuinely suspenseful moments.  However, after watching SCREAM 2,
I got to feeling that bigger is not always better, because SCREAM had
a pretty small budget (in Hollywood's terms) and the scares were
created by skillful film making instead of elaborate sets.  SCREAM 2
does contain a few "jump" moments that work, but they are all when the
killer jumps out.  When it is a friend, it seems as if Craven didn't
put as much energy into the shock value as he does with the actual
killer.  The Drew Barrymore scene this time around is a good example.
It involves Helen (Gellar) who is stuck in her sorority house alone
because she is the designated driver for the rest of the girls.  She
begins getting calls, and she goes through the same errors that
Barrymore did.  This scene mounts to some incredible tension, but it
ends very quickly, and the possible scares are lost.
The writing of SCREAM 2 is a big highlight.  Kevin Williamson is a
terrific writer, and after the second sequel, he will probably put his
talent towards writing some great comedies or great dramas.  His
satire is some of the best in film, making fun of many other films,
while giving sequels a good name.  The dialogue is witty, and very
realistic.  Most of the characters talk exactly the way your average
person would talk about movies.  Of course, he does include some
stereotypical "dumb blonds," but only for the laugh.  He doesn't put
them in there as actual characters, but as characters in a horror
film.  They know they are in a slasher film, and they act like people
who deserve to be slashed.  Surprisingly, many of the people who get
slashed are the ones we like the most.  Williamson also gives another
surprise ending, which I never guessed.  This film makes you guess,
but if you do get it right, it's only by chance.  As for the
direction, Wes Craven does a masterful job, and he is probably the
only director who takes this genre seriously.  He may spoof it and
slap it around, but he takes it seriously.  He is the most skillful
horror director available, with a long list of the best slasher films
to back him up (NIGHTMARE ON ELM STREET, WES CRAVEN'S NEW NIGHTMARE).
Craven doesn't do as good a job as he did with SCREAM, but it is still
a good job.
The cast is the best aspect of SCREAM 2, giving terrific performances
all around.  Neve Campbell again stars as Sidney, and she does a great
job.  She is probably the best actress in teen slasher history.  Her
kick-ass persona is a major improvement over the frightened, weak
Jamie Lee Curtis of the slasher genre.  Courtney Cox gives an equal
performance to Campbell, but her role is more developed here than in
SCREAM.  Cox provides many of the film's tense moments, including an
extended chase sequence through film school.  Jerry O'Connell gives a
very good performance as Sidney's boyfriend.  This is a major
improvement over his "Sliders" television show.  David Arquette gives
another good performance as Dewey.  Unfortunately, his character has
matured a little, and it's actually a little disappointing.  Jamie
Kennedy provides one of the most shocking moments in the film, and
also some of the funniest lines ("Showgirls," his response to what he
thinks is the scariest film he's ever seen).  Sarah Michelle Gellar
has a small role, but she gives one of the most believable
performances in the film.  Duane Martin is hilarious as the cameraman
who fears for his life when he learns about the fate of Weathers'
ex-cameraman.  Laurie Metcalf gives a very good over-the-top
performance in her small role.  Timothy Olyphant is extremely
effective in his limited role, but his discussions with Randy are
perfect and reasonable.  Liev Schreiber gives a nice performance as
Cotton Weary, and his obsession with being famous could easily be a
motive for killing the teens who accused him of murder.  And
surprisingly, Tori Spelling gives a rather good performance in her
semi-spoof of herself.
SCREAM 2 is rated R for graphic horror violence and gore, and
language.  Again, SCREAM 2 leaves out unnecessary nudity, which
Williamson comments on in his screenplay (Jada Pinkett complains about
Heather Graham stripping in STAB!).  SCREAM 2 marks one of the best
sequels ever created, and probably the best for the teen slasher
genre.  While it may not approach the scariness of the original, it
adds many other elements which make it a very entertaining sequel.
Overall, it isn't as impressive as SCREAM was, but it will surely rake
in the money at the box office.  In fact, it will most likely surpass
the original's grosses due to a high interest in the SCREAM franchise
spawned by the re-inventing SCREAM.  Watch for it to break records its
first weekend (but it will drop rapidly due to the release of the much
anticipated TITANIC opening next week), and remain strong.
Reviewed by Respect (respect@aros.net)
http://www.aros.net/~respect/movies.html

Title
Review for Alien (1979)
Alien (1979)
Rated R for violence, language, and partial nudity.
----------  Out of 4 stars: ***1/2 (3 1/2 Stars)
Starring: Tom Skerrit, Sigourney Weaver, Ian Holm, John Hurt, Harry Dean Stanton, Veronica Cartwright, Yaphatt
Koto
ALIEN redefined the science fiction genre like no other.  Other films invented the sci-fi genre, but ALIEN
gave it the horror twist it has nowadays.  ALIEN opened in 1979, the year I was born, and so I never saw it in
the theaters.  In fact, I had never seen it until a couple years ago.  I had to rent the movie again for two
reasons: one, to see if my opinion changed of the film as it did with other films, and two, to refresh my
memory.  And there lies its main problem.  While it did a lot for the sci-fi genre, it isn't as memorable as
the two sequels.  That isn't saying that it's bad, because I feel it's better than ALIEN 3.  However, the film
now seems obsolete, with a hysterical portrayal of an advanced computer (nowadays, a home PC can do more than
that).  
I realize that it was made in 1979, and I can't dock it for these
reasons, but the reason I mark it down is because of the pacing.  The
pacing is off in the first hour of the movie, usually dragging on with
no suspense or action.  This is the same reason I am not a big fan of
Stanley Kubrick's 2001: A SPACE ODYSSEY.  However, once it picks up
speed, ALIEN hardly ever stops.  The suspense builds and builds, and
finally ends with a satisfying, if a little dull, conclusion.  The
film is predictable, but not to the point of ridiculousness.  However,
this doesn't extinguish any suspense, because we may know the alien is
in the room, but we don't know where it is or when it will attack.
This impending doom is something lacking in most modern day suspense
films.
ALIEN begins by explaining to us that there are seven people aboard a
massive ship called the Nostromo.  These seven people (and a cat) are
in hypersleep, heading towards Earth.  However, the computer starts
processing, and wakes everyone up from their sleep.  They find out
they still have quite a ways to go to Earth, but realize there is a
signal coming from a nearby planet, which must be investigated.  After
landing on the planet, three members of the crew go out to look for
the source of the signal.  Among them is Kane (John Hurt) who comes
across a strange blue mist, and underneath it are big, slimy
egg-shaped masses.  In reality, they are eggs, and one hatches in
front of Kane.  The alien inside jumps out and grabs onto Kane's suit.
Taking him back onto the ship, the crew study the lifeform.  Unable to
pull it off, they try to cut it off, only to find acid for blood which
threatens to eat through the ship's hull.
After a while, the alien falls off dead, and Kane wakes up.  The most
memorable and shocking moment occurs around this time, and even
explaining it couldn't lessen the impact it has.  If you haven't seen
it, you more than likely have heard about it, or seen it spoofed in
countless numbers of films.  I have already spoiled this scene in my
other reviews of other ALIEN films, so no need to leave it out here.
Sitting around the table, the crew eats dinner.  Suddenly, Kane starts
coughing and choking.  He breaks out in convulsions, and finally blood
spurts from his stomach.  Then a small alien breaks out, spraying
blood everywhere.  The alien then runs away, leaving the crew shocked
and bewildered.  This scene may have been spoofed several times, but
the impact is still quite shocking.  The way the movie leads up to the
scene is very slow and gradual, and from here on, the movie turns into
a very suspenseful thriller.
The final hour of ALIEN is pretty much a cat-and-mouse game with
deadly stakes.  ALIEN's chase sequence is quite intense, with one
truly frightening moment (it made me jump without playing any loud
musical chords!).  One by one, the crew members are picked off, until
finally only Ripley is left to fend for herself.  Well, the cat is
there too.  ALIEN likes to remind us of how effective movies of this
genre can be when done correctly.  Horror films have become a
disrespected genre, and ALIEN makes us wonder why.  With a heroine we
immediately care for, ALIEN makes us clench our seats in fearing the
inevitable.  We know how the movie will end up, and we know who is
going to be killed.  But Ridley Scott's direction creates a lot of
suspense from the dark sets and creepy mood.  With ALIEN, Scott has
produced a genre which hopefully will be around for a long time.
Sigourney Weaver makes her starring film debut with this motion
picture, and it launched a very successful career for her.  She has
starred in three sequels of ALIEN, as well as wonderful performances
in COPYCAT, DEATH AND THE MAIDEN, or the GHOSTBUSTER duo.  Watching
Weaver, I began to realize that despite her well-endowed list of
films, she hasn't become a big name with your average filmgoer.  This
is quite disappointing, because Weaver is one of the most believable
actresses available.  With her strong stature, she is capable of
playing many different roles believably.  Unfortunately, she isn't
given as many roles as she should get (in fact, if you think about it,
her roles usually profit millions more than Demi Moore, yet Moore is
still around and active).  Weaver deserves much more, and I think an
Academy Award is deserved (she's been snubbed three times; twice in
the same year).
As for the other performers, all are good, but are overshadowed by
Weaver.  Tom Skeritt is the strongest male figure, giving a nice,
low-key performance.  Skeritt is a very reliable actor, who normally
plays strong male characters.  Veronica Cartwright (originally pinned
for the role of Ripley) gives an okay performance, though I felt her
character was too stupid to live (and so, she is killed).  I have
never met a single person in my life who would actually stand in one
place, staring at an alien, while it approaches and kills them.  Ian
Holm gives a very nice performance as Ash, a character with something
to hide.  John Hurt gives a very good performance in his small role.
Yaphett Koto is strong as Parker, and Harry Dean Stanton is very good
as Lambert.  Acting like this is hardly ever in horror/sci-fi films
anymore.
ALIEN is rated R for violence and language, along with some partial
nudity.  ALIEN is a very effective and very scary motion picture,
which spawned a very successful franchise and is probably one of the
most famous series created.  INDIANA JONES and BACK TO THE FUTURE are
entertaining, but as a long-term series, ALIEN beats them out.  And
with the recent entry in the ALIEN series, these last three are likely
to gain popularity once again.  Ridley Scott has created a very
memorable and moody film, with technical details good enough to match
those today (sort of).
Reviewed by Respect (respect@aros.net)
http://www.aros.net/~respect/movies.html

Title
Review for Dark City (1998)
Dark City (1998)
Rated R for violence, gore, nudity, and some mild profanity.
----------  Out of 4 stars: **** (4 Stars)
Starring: Rufus Sewell, William Hurt, Kiefer Sutherland, Jennifer
Connelly, Richard O'Brien, and Ian Richardson.
In 1994, a film was released which became a major box office success
mostly due to the controversy surrounding the picture.  This film was
THE CROW, and its star, Brandon Lee, was killed due a faulty blank
bullet.  The dark mood of the film and its story was given a haunting
twist due to the loss of its star.  The director, Alex Proyas, used
special effects to finish the film without Lee, and audiences flocked
to see how Proyas would end the movie.  However, what was most
startling aspect wasn't the controversy, but its rich atmosphere.
This film marked the beginning of a director's career that would only
grow with his next film.
DARK CITY is a highly anticipated film which deals with a subject that
requires thinking to be done in the theater.  Science fiction films
have been the genre most widely known for creating thought-provoking
subjects.  However, due to the success of big-budget films such as
INDEPENDENCE DAY and MEN IN BLACK, thoughtful science fiction films
have become a thing of the past in pursuit of more expensive and loud
films.  If you don't believe me, just look at the good science fiction
movies which have done poorly at the box office (THE ARRIVAL and
GATTACA to name a couple).  And from the look of the film, DARK CITY
will follow on the same path as those films.
The film itself is a step up from Proyas' debut film, with a better
story, better production values, and a terrifyingly realistic premise.
It's still science fiction, but many of the ideas underlying the film
can be interpreted into our own lives.  Beginning with an interesting
monologue from an unseen character, we are told that a race of aliens
have discovered the planet Earth.  The narrator likes to refer to them
as The Strangers, as they have a ghost-like quality to them.  The main
plot begins in a small, cramped room, with only one light swinging
overhead.  A man lies naked in a bathtub, and suddenly awakens,
startled to find himself there.  This man is afflicted with amnesia,
but more startling is the dead prostitute in the bedroom.  He grabs
some clothes from a chair, and finds a set of keys in the pocket.  A
phone call interrupts the silence, and the voice on the other line
belongs to a Dr. Schreber (Kiefer Sutherland), telling him to get out
of the apartment quickly.  He complies, and as he leaves, the elevator
opens to reveal three ominous, pale figures.
He discovers that his name is John Murdoch (Rufus Sewell), and that he
has a wife, Emma (Jennifer Connelly).  At home, however, he finds
Inspector Frank Bumstead (William Hurt) waiting to question him about
the murder.  Since not even remembering committing it, Murdoch flees,
but finds himself in an even more precarious situation.  At midnight,
exactly, as he tries to find Dr. Schreber, all the noises in the city
stop.  As he watches, the clocks stop moving, people fall asleep at
the wheel of their cars, and trains stop running.  Then, he watches as
several Strangers walk out of a door which has appeared from a wall.
Dr. Schreber follows.  The confusion only increases when the city
becomes alive, as buildings sprout out of the ground.
Revealing any more of the plot would spoil the mystery, and the
mystery is what keeps the story buoyant.  It seems that many of the
great science fiction films are about the unknown (2001: A SPACE
ODYSSEY, CONTACT).  DARK CITY uses its mystery to wonderful effect,
and ends with a surprise ending that doesn't seem contrived or forced.
Instead, it finishes the film with a flourish, giving another level of
meaning for us to ponder over.  And by the end of the film, DARK CITY
equals the many classics of the past, such as BLADE RUNNER and
SOLARIS.  Many people won't like the film because it may seem like a
muddled mess, but it isn't.  Many critics don't like the almost
non-existent lighting, but that has a purpose in the film.  The film
noir setting is emphasized by the darkness, and an entire plot twist
centers around the everlasting darkness.  Critics who complain about
the film obviously aren't thinking during the film, and this spoils
their enjoyment.  DARK CITY entertains while hiding the message under
its visually impressive surface.
Alex Proyas has constructed a masterfully ingenious science fiction
film which toys with the imagination while preaching to its audience.
His thoughts on humanity are never easy to grasp, and yet they are a
basic function of our human lives.  This simplistic approach becomes
frightening as we realize that we as human beings are really like the
characters portrayed in the film.  Proyas, who also wrote the
screenplay, never asks any easy questions, and the answers are left
for us to determine.  Proyas' direction maintains the steady monotony
of darkness, but the film never gets boring.  There is quite enough
action to maintain anyone's attention, including some awe-inspiring
chase sequences that had me cheering with delight.  The pace of the
film is so tight and so continuous that one wishes Proyas would have
stretched the running time even more.  Several of the scenes seem
quickly cut, and Proyas could have taken more time with each scene
(but this is just a minor flaw).
Then, there are the special effects.  No science fiction film goes
without them, and what makes the thought-provoking science fiction
films separate from the destroy-everything-on-screen films is simple:
the special effects in the latter group are more obvious.  When a film
uses special effects to its advantage, everyone should take note.
Everyone seemed to have with TITANIC, but that's only the tip of the
iceberg (pardon the pun).  DARK CITY uses special effects so
flawlessly, that many people forget that they are effects.  I am one
of those people.  The effects are so seamless that it's hard to tell
what is and what isn't real.  When the buildings twist and bend, you
find yourself submerged in the story and characters so much that the
effects seem realistic.  When a film can suspend your belief by making
everything as real as possible, it deserves to be noticed.
As with all films, the cast is an essential part to the overall
impact.  If the wrong cast is chosen, the film won't have the same
impression.  DARK CITY has a top-notch cast, with zany characters and
terrific performances all-around.  Leading is Rufus Sewell who turns
in a solid performance on an ever-growing and impressive resume.  In
1996, he appeared in HAMLET as Fortinbras, and in 1995's COLD COMFORT
FARM.  He can also be seen in the recent Dangerous Beauty.  Sewell
commands the screen, never letting anything overpower his presence.
William Hurt also turns in a rather humorous performance as the older
Inspector, who is baffled by the mystery unfolding before him.  Kiefer
Sutherland portrays Dr. Schreber with a frightened sense of knowledge.
He is the only human being who knows what is going on, and his rasping
breath gives his character an almost haunting sound.  Jennifer
Connelly is perfect as the film noir-ish vixen, unable to understand
the mad rantings of her husband (and yet she still loves him).  Then,
there are the Strangers.  The most prominent are Richard O'Brien (from
THE ROCKY HORROR PICTURE SHOW fame) and Ian Richardson who appeared in
the visually-similar BRAZIL.  The Strangers speak in monotone and
eerie voices, almost like an echo coming of the walls.  Overall, an
impressive cast to accentuate the style.
DARK CITY is rated R for violence and gore, nudity, and some light
profanity.  DARK CITY could have easily been rated PG-13, though the
subject itself may have warranted an R rating.  With sets that
resemble BLADE RUNNER and other various science fiction films, many
people are likely to think that DARK CITY merely copied those other
films.  However, the story presented is true to life, and the result
is an original film that has something to say.  Of course, as my
philosophy goes towards science fiction films, DARK CITY won't find a
big audience, and that's a real shame.  DARK CITY deserves to be
watched again and again.  The visuals are rich and dark, the style is
gloomy but not overwhelming, and the action is top-notch.  This is
already one of the year's best movies, and it deserves to be held as
an early Oscar contender.
Reviewed by Respect (respect@aros.net)
http://www.aros.net/~respect/movies.html

Title
Review for Gattaca (1997)
Gattaca (1997)
Rated PG-13 for brief violent images, language, some sexuality, and nudity
---------  Out of 4 stars: ***1/2 (3 1/2 Stars)
Starring: Ethan Hawke, Uma Thurman, Loren Dean, Jude Law, Alan Arkin, Tony Shalhoub, Gore Vidal, and Xander
Berkeley
With the release of GATTACA, I began to wonder why all science fiction
films deal with destructive aliens, or aliens in general.  Hollywood
has given audiences plenty of thrills with those alien films, but what
was usually lacking was a good story... and good characters... and
good acting, etc (CONTACT being the exception).  And for some reason,
Hollywood has never taken a look at the aliens here on Earth.  The
closest, that I have seen anyway, was 2001: A SPACE ODYSSEY, which
made mankind an alien race themselves, being dwarfed by the technology
which they created.
Now comes GATTACA, another film about technology reigning supreme,
except here on our planet.  The difference between 2001 and this one
is simple: GATTACA is more frightening.  Most of the concepts of this
movie are based on recent discoveries in genetic engineering.  Using
this premise, writer/director Andrew Niccol creates some genuine
suspense and thrills.  Unfortunately, due to a lack of advertising, I
fear GATTACA may fair horribly at the box office.  Since seeing the
film, I have been asking people if they have seen GATTACA.  Lately,
however, I have been asking them if they have even heard of GATTACA.
Most people don't even realize that it is a film.  Despite this fact,
I surely hope that the audience members who have seen this film will
tell their friends about it.  Niccol's film deserves more than what
Independence Day made because it is smarter, better produced, and more
realistic.
GATTACA begins in the 21st Century.  Procreating is now done in a
petri dish, and genetic engineering is the normal way of doing it.
Natural child birth is considered old-fashioned.  We are introduced to
Jerome Morrow (Ethan Hawke), an employee of the Gattaca space program.
One of the directors of the program has been murdered, and the main
suspect is one Vincent Freeman.  The only problem is that Jerome
Morrow IS Vincent Freeman.  Vincent was born the natural way when his
parents decided on bringing their first child into the world through
love.  However, after his birth, and through several genetic tests,
doctors tell his parents that he will have a 99% chance of a weak
heart, as well as poor eye sight and a short life span.  As a result,
both parents decide to bring their next baby into the world via
genetics.  Anton (Loren Dean) is produced without flaws, and the
competition between brothers spawns.  Vincent has a dream to fly a
solo-flight around the Titan, the 14th moon of Saturn, but because of
his condition, Gattaca, and society in general, forces him to do
menial labor around the company.
Labeled an "in-valid," Vincent's dream seems impossible, until he
meets a black-market DNA specialist, German (Tony Shalhoub).  German
introduces him to a "valid" who has been paralized from the waste down
due to an automobile accident.  Jerome Morrow (Jude Law) agrees to
give Vincent all the proper identification tools (urine, blood, skin
and hair samples, etc.) that he will need to get past Gattaca's tight
security.  In exchange, Vincent will provide Jerome with the rent
money and friendship.  After the murder, however, his dreams are put
at risk due to one of Vincent's eyelashes left at the scene of the
crime.  Irene Cassini (Uma Thurman) is a genetically flawed "valid"
working for Gattaca, and she begins to fall in love with
Vincent/Jerome.
GATTACA is one of the best science fiction films I have seen in a long
time.  Only two other intelligent science fiction films have come out
in the past two years (CONTACT and THE ARRIVAL) and GATTACA will rank
among them.  Unfortunately, whenever one intelligent film comes out
against special effects-laden films, it normally gets buried.  The
second best thing about GATTACA is the production design by Jan
Roelfs.  The orange glow of GATTACA's scenes are impressive, but the
sets deserve most of the credit.  The sets are very well done,
creating a futuristic sense, but not too futuristic as to alienate
viewers.  As we look at the designs, we realize that these buildings
aren't too far into the future.  This brings the plot even more
credibility as genetic engineering becomes more possible by every
passing day.  The best thing, however, is the plot.  The story is more
than your average sci-fi/thriller.  At its heart, it develops a theme
which is never overpowering but is always present.  Perhaps Niccol is
warning our race about the changes genetic tampering could bring.
Would our society become a bunch of soulless zombies?  Maybe human
nature is a result of mankind's flaws.  If we get rid of flaws, do we
get rid of dreams as well?  Niccol's intelligent script handles all
these questions extremely well, and the result is an incredibly smart
thriller set against a dramatic story, or vice versa.
The power of the actors brings a lot of credibility to flat
characters.  While flat may sound like a poor job on Niccol's part, it
actually enhances the meaning behind the story.  Ethan Hawke has
developed into a handsome adult actor, giving his best performance of
his lifetime so far.  His curiosity and motivation pushes his
character past all the discouraging remarks from his parents and
"valid" peers.  Uma Thurman is... well, Uma Thurman.  Her character is
slightly underdeveloped, but the story isn't about her.  However,
Thurman gives a lot of depth to the flat character.  Jude Law gives
the most complex performance of the film with the most disturbingly
realistic character.  He provides several nice touches, and his final
scene is a very touching and heartwrenching one.  Loren Dean gives a
nice performance in his well-developed character.  Dean is also
responsible for some of the most suspenseful scenes in the movie.
Alan Arkin portrays one of the detectives with a little less more
excitement than with his psychiatrist in GROSSE POINTE BLANK.  Still,
he does a good job.  Gore Vidal and Xander Berkeley both provide some
very good supporting roles, and Berkeley also gives a heartfelt
discussion towards the end of the film.
GATTACA is rated PG-13 for brief violent images, language, some
sexuality, and nudity.  Despite the somber and desolate mood of the
entire film, I wasn't exactly prepared for the ending which left me
feeling empty.  It turned me off slightly, but then I realized that
everything turned out the way it should have.  If this had been a
typical Hollywood film, it would have ended much differently.
However, with all the mindless science fiction films out there, it is
nice to have a film which doesn't talk down to its audience (I
especially like the ironic title and how it consists of the four
letters which make up the genetic coding: G, T, C, and A).  Instead,
it provides some much needed entertainment which gives us science
fiction fanatics just what we want: a science fiction film with morals
behind it.  Whatever happened to giving the audience a lesson while
entertaining?  Hopefully more writers and directors will learn from
GATTACA... and hopefully audiences will too.
P.S. Personal note to P.J. Gladnick: How dare you call this film the
worst film of the year.  I can't even begin to image what film you do
like.  That frightens me beyond anything.
Reviewed by Respect (pun intended) - respect@aros.net
http://www.aros.net/~respect/movies.html

Title
Review for Excess Baggage (1997)
Excess Baggage (1997)
Rated PG-13 for violence, drinking and sex-related dialogue
Starring Alicia Silverstone, Benicio Del Toro, Christopher Walken
Going into Excess Baggage, I didn't quite know what to expect.  I knew
Alicia Silverstone was in it, and I knew that it was about a
kidnapping gone awry.  But the trailers are so misleading that one
might think Excess Baggage was a comedy in the same realm as Ruthless
People.  Well, if you do go in expecting this, you might be
disappointed, or you may be like me and find yourself quite
entertained by the humorous mishaps of Silverstone and Del Toro.
Baggage is a very different type of film which somehow barely manages
to maintain the threads holding it together.  If it wasn't for Del
Toro and the rest of the cast, Excess Baggage could have just been
another lost cause amongst the August releases.
Excess Baggage is the first film from Alicia Silverstone's new
production company, First Kiss Productions.  Surprisingly enough, the
movie is fun to watch and originally done.  Unfortunately, there are a
few problems which pop up along the run of the film, especially the
script, which could have used some major work.  The beginning of
Excess Baggage reminded me so much of Clueless, Silverstone's best
film, that I wondered if Silverstone was trying to capitalize on the
success of that much more entertaining film.  So much is similar
between her two characters in these films that you begin to think that
this is the only role she could ever play.  After seeing films like
Batman & Robin, this seems like a major possibility.  Not that there
is anything wrong with that, as I could watch numerous Clueless
sequels if as well written as that first one.  But I fear that if our
poor Alicia doesn't get an original role soon, she will be lost
amongst the quickly forgotten stars who could never get past their
childhood persona.
Excess Baggage does have a lot going for it, though, namely the cast.
The film begins very quickly as a spoiled daughter, Emily Hope
(Silverstone), kidnaps herself.  The reason is established through a
monologue given by Hope, and we learn that she is doing this because
her father doesn't pay enough attention to her.  Alexander Hope (Jack
Thompson) is the ignorant father, but he shows glimpses of compassion
when his daughter is kidnapped.  She orders her father to throw one
million dollars onto a barge floating down the river, and then ties
herself up and locks herself in the trunk of her green BMW.  This is
all rather interesting, and it gets even more intriguing when Vincent
Roche (Benicio Del Toro), an advanced, but slow-witted car thief,
steals the car Hope is locked in.  To his (and her) surprise, he
discovers her after he reaches his final destination: a warehouse
filled with stolen cars.
This pretty much sets up the entire film for a rush of
misunderstandings and coincidental occurances.  Still, for some reason
I expected these events to be funnier than what they were.  Some were
quite funny, such as some of the scenes between Del Toro and
Silverstone, and some are very dull (scenes of the father all fit in
this category).  The first half hour of Excess Baggage are
entertaining and original, which usually can foreshadow the final half
hour as being drop-dead boring.  This film doesn't reach that point,
thankfully, but cautiously and unintentionally remains on the border.
One way could have made the film succeed even moreso, and the other
could have caused the film to drop in the ratings.  It's a shame that
the three or four writers weren't able to come up with some original
ideas towards the end of the film.  They even tried to create suspense
by attempting to make us guess as to what Silverstone's character was
going to do.  It was actually more insulting than anything else.
To the writers' credit, however, is the wonderfully funny and cute
scenes between Silverstone and Del Toro.  I would have loved for
Excess Baggage to try something new, and not have the two leads fall
in love.  This wasn't going to happen, and in fact created some
unrealistic chemistry between these two (they fell in love in two
days--a Hollywood subplot regular).  Whenever they didn't get along,
the screen lit up with sharp dialogue and humorous situations.  It was
a lot more fun (and definitely much more believeable) when they
couldn't get along, but this is a Hollywood film.  In fact, when I
think about it, the first hour of Excess Baggage is so wonderfully fun
that the last part seems drained and forced.  The scenes between
Raymond Perkins (Christopher Walken) and Hope's father are
excruciatingly painful to watch, but thanks to Walken's power as an
actor, he brings some joy into the scenes.  Which brings up another
point: for the life of me, I couldn't tell whether Perkins was a good
or a bad guy until about twenty minutes before the end.  Walken is
almost always an evil man in films, and to see him in a good role
confused me.
Excess Baggage has one main thing going for it: a talented cast.
Silverstone is pretty good as the rich brat, but her character is just
a cross between Cher from Clueless and Batgirl.  Del Toro (from The
Usual Suspects) shines in his role as the caring but slow-minded car
thief.  He is very entertaining and lights up the screen whenever he
appears.  Christopher Walken is extremely effective as Silverstone's
uncle.  It's nice to know he can play a good guy once in a while (even
if he looks mean).  Jack Thompson gives a believeable and rather
mean-spirited performance as the hard-hearted business father.  I was
just waiting for someone to punch him in the face.  Harry Connick, Jr.
is good in his underwritten role, but he isn't given very much to do.
This is purely Del Toro's film, with Silverstone doing nothing more
than she did in Clueless.
Excess Baggage is rated PG-13 for violence, drinking and sex-related
dialogue.  Director Marco Brambilla uses some nice storytelling
techniques, but I only wish he could have held that camera still
during some scenes.  Composer John Lurie creates a very nice musical
score to go along with this film.  In fact, I was even distracted
during some scenes by the wonderful music.  Excess Baggage is far from
the comedy and entertainment of Clueless, but with four different
writers, you think one of them might be able to come up with something
funny.  Excess Baggage is cute and light-weight, but don't expect to
laugh very often.
Reviewed by Respect of Respect's Movie Reviews
http://www.aros.net/~respect/movies.html
respect@aros.net

Title
Review for Alienł (1992)
Alien 3 (1992)
Rated R for strong violence and language, and for sex
----------  Out of 4 stars: ***1/2 (3 1/2 Stars)
Starring: Sigourney Weaver, Charles S. Dutton, Charles Dance, Pete Postlethwaite, Lance Henriksen
ALIEN 3 is the only Alien film I have seen in theaters.  I saw it when I was 13 years old, and I must admit
that I didn't like it.  Of course, I was expecting ALIENS again, and I believe this was my fault.  In order to
appreciate ALIEN 3, you need to see ALIENS, but you also have to wipe away all the expectations from its
predecessor.  James Cameron's ALIENS was an action film, and many people consider it the best in the series.
I am among that group, but ALIEN 3 is an extremely entertaining film, which critics have bashed for its
originality. Many thought the final chase scene went on for too long, and many others thought that the film
was too much dialogue and not enough action.  Both are untrue, because the film has quite a bit of action, and
the dialogue was essential and well-written.  As for the chase sequence, it was long, but not overly long,
creating quite a bit of suspense from confusion.
Perhaps watching ALIEN 3 on video helped.  On the big screen, I was
overwhelmed by something I normally didn't see.  It was a very dark
film, and the language was extremely harsh.  I had always figured the
Alien series to rely on smart dialogue instead of moronic profanities.
Don't get me wrong--I'm not saying films should eliminate swearing,
but when a film substitutes dialogue with these profane remarks, it
gets rather distracting.  However, since seeing it again, I realize
that the swearing is mainly just an aspect of the restrained hatred in
the characters.  As a result, ALIEN 3's only flaw (albeit a major one)
is the underdeveloped characters.  We never really care about any of
them, and I get the feeling that many scenes were cut in order to
shorten the length of the movie.  There were only two characters I
liked, and of course one was Lt. Ripley (Sigourney Weaver), although
we have gotten to know her through two other films.  The other
character was Dr. Clemens (Charles Dance), but because we like him,
the inevitable occurs.
ALIEN 3 begins exactly where ALIENS left off.  The prologue of ALIEN 3
is a pure cinematic achievement by director David Fincher, who had
only directed music videos before his chance with this Alien entry.
Without using a single line of dialogue (unless you count computer
warnings), Fincher sets up the entire film.  An impressive aspect of
this is that Fincher only shows a few seconds of film before cutting
to a title card.  We see Lt. Ripley and the little girl in their
cryogenic compartments... (title)... a shot of an alien egg...
(title)... alien legs stretch up into the air... (title)... and so on
and so on.  During these first ten minutes, I learned everything I had
to in order for ALIEN 3 to proceed.  It's quite a remarkable opening,
and one which will remain in my mind for a long time.
Because of this face-hugger which has been hatched aboard the vessel
from ALIENS, the hypersleep containers are sent into an escape pod,
and sent down to the nearest planet: Fiorina Fury-161, an ore refinery
which has been turned into a maximum security prison.  However, the
face-hugger managed to attach itself to one of the cryo-tubes, and is
sent down with the escape pod.  Unfortunately, during the landing, all
but one of the survivors from ALIENS is killed.  Ripley is discovered
by some of the inmates and taken back to the refinery.  Of course, you
need a carrier for this face-hugger, and it attachs itself to the dog
which came with the team of inmates.  Ripley is revived and asks to
see the ship.  After seeing a mysterious acid-eaten section, Ripley
asks to see the dead bodies, and then have them cremated.  This
cremation scene is one of the most powerful and impressive of all the
Alien films.  Featuring a monologue from Dillon (Charles S. Dutton), a
prisoner who has found God, the movie cuts back and forth from the
ceremony to the dog's demise.  It's one of the most memorable moments,
as the speech reflects exactly what is going on with the dog.
And this is where ALIEN 3 succeeds.  Fincher normally injects a lot of
symbolism into his films, and I can easily see him becoming the next
Stanley Kubrick or Alfred Hitchcock (in fact, he is the mixture of
both).  Fincher knows exactly what to film and how to film it, and I
figure that he will be one of the few directors with complete control
over his films.  ALIEN 3 is riddled with symbolic speeches and
metaphorical images.  By doing so, Fincher creates some of the best
scenes in the entire Alien franchise.  Many people have criticized
Fincher's filming of the death scene of Ripley (I reveal nothing by
saying this) as looking too fake, but I enjoy and relish in the
portrayal.  Showing Ripley fall in slow motion is a nice touch, but by
actually not showing her hit the vat of iron, a great deal of
symbolism is derived.  I feel that it would have spoiled the mood of
the entire film if they had actually shown her splash into the molten
iron.  However, most people seem to want to witness Ripley die (which
creates a paradox, as she is the character I didn't want to see die).
Why she is killed is one of the surprises of the film, and I don't
plan on spoiling that in this review.
>From every ALIEN film comes several memorable moments which seem to
stick with you forever.  In Alien, it was, of course, the moment the
alien burst out of Kane's stomach.  In ALIENS, it was the showdown
between alien and Ripley in a machine.  ALIEN 3 has several, but most
memorable is the terrific shot involving the alien and Ripley.  Ripley
is pushed up against a wall, and the alien stands inches away from
her.  Why it doesn't kill her is a shocker, which later leads to a
surprise ending.  Fincher apparently loves to use close-ups of actors'
faces (Michael Douglas and the clown face-off in THE GAME in the same
style), and by shaving off the actors' hair, the only thing we have to
look at is their faces.  Many critics didn't like all the actors being
bald, but it makes complete sense when taken in context of the plot.
Most of ALIEN 3 works when you take it in context of the story, but
when you try to compare it to its predecessors, Fincher's turn seems a
bit gloomy and dark, though that's not always a bad thing.
The plot is pretty much a rehash of the first two films, with some
major twists.  Again, we are setup with several different characters,
and one by one, they are picked off.  However, while the first two had
tons of arsenal (especially Cameron's film), ALIEN 3 takes place on a
planet devoid of human life except for this run-down prison.  As a
result, no weapons are to be found.  This creates a lot of tension,
although I must admit that Fincher could have added a lot more
suspense.  As an Alien film, ALIEN 3 is the worst of the series, but
by itself, it is an extremely well-made motion picture, with a lot
more merits than not.  The unfortunate thing surrounding this second
sequel is the one-dimensional characters.  I never was really
emotionally involved on screen because most of the characters are
hardcore criminals whom I really could care less about.  Despite this,
Ripley was the central figure, and that's what is important.  We care
for her, even though she began to act just like one of the guys.
Again, the technical side of this film is remarkable, and better than
the two previous versions.  While Cameron's version was a pumped up
action film with massive artillary, Fincher uses brilliant camera
angles, terrific lighting, and moody sets.  The cinematography, by
Alex Thomson, is very well done, with a terrific chase sequence
towards the end of the movie.  The confusion of the ending draws the
viewer in, as we are just as confused as the actors who are being
chased around.  The yellows, reds, and oranges of the lights create a
dark mood, and by themselves create a lot of suspense.  Shadows dance
on the walls, and yet those shadows could easily be the alien.  The
alien is different from its predecessors this time around, and the
swiftness of this alien is quite intense.  The camera likes to take up
the perspective of the alien, racing after the characters.  The sets
are quite incredible, which are reminiscient of the Nostromo from
ALIEN.  The narrow corridors and labrynthine hallways is well
constructed.  The sets appear to be in the future, but not too far in
the future.  One of the set pieces even aids in the destruction of the
alien (nothing surprising there).
Sigourney Weaver turns out yet another good performance, equaling her
portrayal of Ripley in ALIENS.  She was snubbed at the Oscars for this
one, mainly because the film was a critical bomb.  Her reactions are
far more realistic in this film, with her crying over the loss of the
little child she risked her life saving in her previous encounter.
It's quite touching really.  Charles S. Dutton is very strong in his
performance as one of the inmates, and I was on the brink of actually
caring for him.  Charles Dance turns in a nice low-key performance,
and as a result, I cared for him immediately.  Lance Henriksen makes a
brief appearance as Bishop II, but he was more entertaining in ALIENS.
The rest of the cast is pretty stale, though Pete Postlethwaite sticks
out due to his recent turns in THE USUAL SUSPECTS and THE LOST WORLD.
ALIEN 3 is rated R for strong violence and language, and sex.
Although it has its flaws, ALIEN 3 is highly entertaining with rich
symbolism.  This film reminds you how much fun it is to spot
metaphorical images throughout a movie.  While Kubrick may have a
moral message throughout his films, Fincher relies on cinematic
devices to bring his meanings out.  It's a film like Fincher's which
reminds us that it is okay for a film to sacrifice quality for
quantity (the final scene).  In fact, it tells us that we, as a
society, have become too critical of things which may happen to look a
little "fake."  Whenever something looks fake on screen, we
immediately point it out as a mistake.  But perhaps it isn't a
mistake.
Reviewed by Respect (respect@aros.net)
http://www.aros.net/~respect/movies.html

Title
Review for Species II (1998)
Species II (1998)
Rated R for strong sexuality, sci-fi violence/gore and language.
----------  Out of 4 stars: ***1/2 (3 1/2 Stars)
Starring: Michael Madsen, Marg Helgenberger, Natasha Henstridge, Justin
Lazard, James Cromwell, George Dzundza, Mykelti Williamson.
Here is a film that is so unexpected, so scary, and so original that it
caught me off guard and threw me for a loop.  Okay, it isn't quite
original, considering it is a sequel to the box office hit SPECIES, but
it certainly is smart.  Most films of this genre are reminiscent of
those cheesy B-horror films from the 50s and 60s, and some even become
them.  However, as we learned with the 1995 small-budget horror/sci-fi
film, sometimes expectations can be shattered.
A lot of criticism has gone against this film (from what I have read so
far, anyway--yep, all two reviews), and it makes me wonder why these
types of films are automatically dismissed as gory, laughable pieces of
trash.  But, the thing is, it isn't.  It's well made, well acted, and
quite intelligent.  I can see most of the critics now complaining about
the level of gore or the level of sexuality in the film.  But the
SPECIES series isn't about the lack of these elements.  It's about how
much it can get into one film.  And yet, behind it all, it has this
basic premise that allows it to get away with doing so.
SPECIES II begins in the present day, though it seems to be an alternate
universe.  Many films (especially sci-fi ones) create similar timelines
as our realistic one, but change it to fit the film's needs.  SPECIES II
begins with the arrival of an American spacecraft, the Excursion,
landing on the surface of Mars.  Aboard is Patrick Ross (Justin Lazard),
a very bright and very handsome astronaut.  Patrick is the son of
Senator Ross (James Cromwell), who just wants Patrick to succeed.  Well,
it would seem that he has succeeded.  Landing on the surface of Mars, he
is the first human being to ever do so.  Of course, he isn't the first
ever.
About a billion years ago, an alien species supposedly landed on Mars
and destroyed the perfect living conditions that were able to sustain
life.  Now, of course, the red planet is cold and rocky.  No life lives
on it.  That is, no visible life.  Patrick, upon leaving the spacecraft
and landing on the red soil, collects samples from the ground.   He
takes them aboard, and puts them in storage.  Unfortunately, one of the
samples contains a form of life, and it gets loose when it is heated
aboard the ship.  Just prior to heading back to Earth, this life form
creeps along the floor and inhabits the earthlings.  They pass out for
approximately seven minutes, and then shrug it off as nothing, because
they can't even remember.  They blame it on a technical malfunction.
Back on Earth, Patrick begins to have strong urges to mate with as many
women as possible.  As we know from the original, this is because the
alien wants to breed and take over the planet.  However, the children
that are bred are half-human, as their father is.  Patrick is really
looking for another alien to breed with, and he finds it in Eve (Natasha
Henstridge).  Eve was cloned from DNA taken from Sil, the original
alien.  However, this time around, most of her "alien" urges have been
either decreased dramatically, or lie dormant.  The project is led by
Dr. Laura Baker (Marg Helgenberger, reprising her role from SPECIES),
and her motives seem respectable.  Since she was involved with the
original alien attack, she wants to learn how to stop the alien should
it come again.  And it has.
Story-wise, SPECIES II is much stronger than its predecessor, but it is
also much stronger than, say, ALIENS (hey, I love the film, but you
can't tell me it was strong on story).  What surprised me the most with
this film was the incorporation of historical facts into the
screenplay.  In my Search For Extraterrestrial Intelligence course in
college, we learned about a piece of rock from Mars which landed in one
of the poles.  This piece of rock contained fossils which may have been
proof of life on Mars (later, it was proven that it was not a living
creature that created it).  The script uses this effectively, but also
manages to provide a well-balanced plot.  Beginning with the first man
on Mars (something I have always dreamed of seeing), I was hoping that
the film would turn this element into a useful starting point for the
movie.  And it does it quite well.  The characters are all smart, and
they know what to do and what not to do.  The only character that seems
a little cliched is the General (George Dzundza), and yet, he remains
logical in everything he does.
There are the obvious flaws of course, mostly lying in the technical
aspects.  The special effects are only mediocre, and some are just plain
bad.  But for the most part, they remain believable (I even noticed a
homage to the ALIEN series when the mothers gave birth to alien
children).  Also, the most realistic ones are usually the goriest,
ranging from people being torn open, or someone's head being blown off.
However, some plot elements also may elicit laughs from the audience,
including a menage a troi that is all but necessary.  Many people
dislike the SPECIES series because all it is is an excuse for sex,
nudity, and gory violence.  However, I tend to disagree.  What were the
ALIEN films about?  And, if an alien species ever did come to Earth, and
their sole purpose was to destroy us, wouldn't you mate as quickly as
possible with as many people as possible?  My only gripe with this is
during the scene where Patrick goes searching for a mate in a grocery
store.  I didn't realize that aliens were that picky on choosing women
to mate with (I just assume it is his part-human side looking for the
most beautiful one).
The acting is quite good for this kind of film.  It is a vast
improvement over the first film, at least.  The acting is the key
element to this film: if it was bad, it would have lowered itself into
camp; if it was good, it would have asked for comparison with films like
ALIENS.  Okay, so it isn't THAT good.  George Dzundza is probably the
most obvious mistake on casting, as his over-the-top impersonation of a
general makes him annoying and distracting.  Natasha Henstridge is
limited this time around, as she is usually enclosed in a cage.
However, she does manage a very impressive performance with this aspect
hindering any of her talent.  Oh yeah, and she's quite fun to just plain
watch.  Marg Helgenberger is immensely better this time around, and her
performance is probably the best in this film.  Michael Madsen is so-so,
but he isn't annoying, and he soon becomes rather appealing (with his
nice cynic personality).  James Cromwell has a small part, but he makes
it much better than what it could have been with a more incapable
actor.  As I say, any film with James Cromwell dramatically increases in
likeability.  Mykelti Williamson gives an enjoyable performance, and he
gives the film a more down-to-earth feel.  And, of course, Justin
Lazard.  Lazard has so far been ridiculed for his performance, but I
think he is effective.  Sure, he is wooden, but isn't that what his
character is like?  The moment when he touches the glass separating
Henstridge from him was extremely well done, due to the couple's acting.
SPECIES II is rated R for strong sexuality, sci-fi violence/gore and
language.  This is definitely an R rated film that young kids should not
see.  More than likely, they would probably have nightmares and never
have sex for the rest of their lives.  Hell, I don't even know if I
will.  What is sure to be a critically lambasted film turns out to be
the surprise film of the year.  I probably won't see another film where
I was expecting so little and got so much for quite a while.  Director
Peter Medak has crafted a very suspenseful, and sometimes very scary
movie out of a mediocre series.  Medak has also mastered the wonderful
"Jump!" moments, and has probably the second scariest moment I have ever
seen on film (SCREAM still has the first).  Strong acting, smart
dialogue, intelligent plotting, and a sure-handed director, SPECIES II
is exactly what these films should be: entertaining.
Reviewed by Respect (respect@aros.net)
http://venus.aros.net/~respect/movies.html

Title
Review for Aliens (1986)
Aliens (1986)
Rated R for strong violence and gore, language, and terror.
----------  Out of 4 stars: **** (4 Stars)
Starring: Sigourney Weaver, Paul Reiser, Lance Henriksen, Jenette Goldstein, Michael Biehn, Carrie Henn
With the success of the surprise hit ALIEN, directed by Ridley Scott,
a sequel was inevitable. In fact, after watching the first film, a
sequel was wanted, particularly by this reviewer. Handing over the
director's chair to recent box office gem James Cameron, who had only
made two films previous to this one (PIRAHNA II, a surprisingly dull
film, and TERMINATOR, making Cameron a household name), the ALIEN
series got a face-lift of immense proportions. Instead of being a
suspense/science fiction film, Cameron alters the series and changing
it into an action picture. What results is one of the most terrifying
films ever created.
A film like ALIENS comes along only once in a while, and when it does,
audiences are usually unprepared for it. I never saw this movie in
theaters, but I wish I could have. The terror and fright must have
been unimaginable, most likely with audiences members literally
shrieking in fear. ALIENS is an action film unlike any I have ever
seen. With a science fiction plot, Cameron gives ALIENS added
testosterone, pumping up the action and fire power from the original
film. In fact, ALIENS is one of those few sequels which tops the
original. Perhaps what makes the ALIEN series so impressive is the
hero--or heroine, as the case may be. Never have we had a more
sympathetic hero in an action film, and never have I seen such an
impressive acting job done by the main character. Sigourney Weaver is
possibly the only actress who could play this character and make her
realistic enough for us to care about. Placing a woman in these
situations would sometimes seem unusual, but because of Weaver's
presence, a woman is the only suitable hero.
ALIENS begins 57 years after ALIEN ended. Lieutenant Ellen Ripley
(Weaver) is discovered in hypersleep on the Nostromo and is
awakened. She explains how she is the only survivor of her past
encounter with the aliens, but "the company" is doubtful. They explain
that a colony of families is flourishing on the same planet from which
she just left. Despite stern warnings from Ripley, the company remains
rigid and won't call the families back.  However, when the company
loses contact with the colony, Ripley's story seems much more
feasible. One of the company's directors, Carter Burke (Paul Reiser),
wants to gather a team to travel to the planet. This team includes a
buff Private Vasquez (Jenette Goldstein), a questionable Corporal
Hicks (Michael Biehn), and a loyal android Bishop (Lance
Henriksen). Burke tags along with Ripley as they fly to the planet in
order to locate the members of the colony.
Arriving on the planet, the team finds most of the human life
extinguished in a cocoon-type environment. The only survivor is 12
year old Rebecca "Newt" Jorden (Carrie Henn). Ripley finds this a
chance to be the mother she never had the opportunity to become, and
she becomes Newt's surrogate mother. Ripley and Newt are the only ones
who knows what has happened, and soon, all hell breaks loose. ALIENS
not only multiplies the thrills and suspense from Scott's version, it
also multiplies the number of aliens in general. ALIEN focused on one
alien in particular which systematically killed each crew member,
except Ripley, who managed to jettison the alien out of the
Nostromo. ALIENS focuses on an entire race of these aliens, and as a
result, the chills are incredibly heightened. Then again, this is
James Cameron, the guy who has given us TRUE LIES and TERMINATOR 2:
JUDGMENT DAY. He is the best action director out there (topping Renny
Harlin, who directed CLIFFHANGER), and only he could create something
as terrifying as this film.
It seems that every ALIEN film seems to have some memorable scene or
scenes, and ALIENS has the motherload.  With perhaps one of the most
astonishing endings ever created for an action film, ALIENS climax
never seems to hit until the viewer is nearly pushed to extreme
exhaustion. I can't recall another film ever to sustain this level of
intensity throughout, never dropping for a moment. Just when you think
the movie is over, something else will occur, and it starts right back
up again. With a seemingly endless conclusion, ALIENS ends with one of
the greatest moments in film history. This scene is usually the one
remembered most from the film, as Lieutenant Ripley steps into one of
the lifting machines to fight the alien queen. Using flawless special
effects, the climax is exhausting, leaving any audience member drained
from extreme anxiety.
Of course, for a film of this genre to work properly, the technical
aspects must be realistic enough for us to believe what we see. ALIENS
is completely realistic, even a decade after its initial release. The
special effects are wonderfully seamless, with a terrifying alien to
go with them. One of the most overlooked aspects of this film is the
music, composed by Cameron-regular James Horner. Horner has created a
terrific score, receiving an Oscar nomination for his work. Not only
that, Horner has also created one of the best scores for any action
film, or science fiction film ever (and that includes 2001: A SPACE
ODYSSEY, which was mainly a compilation of well-known composers). In
fact, the climax music is also some of the most recognized of film
music. The production design is incredible, which also happened to
snag a nomination from the Academy. Dark corridors lit by red lights
are very impressive, but more impressive is the amount of terror which
arises from well-lit locations. Normally a film will be very dark in
order to scare a viewer; ALIENS uses lights to scare the viewer. Then,
of course, is the cinematography, which uses point of view shots,
along with video feeds in order to build suspense. Some of the
scariest scenes involve the perspective of Ripley.
Surprisingly, the acting is not only above average for this genre, but
some of the best. Sigourney Weaver received an Oscar nomination for
her portrayal of Ripley, incorporating the right amount of sympathy
into her hard-edged persona. Weaver soars above the rest in this film,
but she is supposed to. Carrie Henn gives an above average performance
for a child, developing a three-dimensional character from her quiet
attitude. Lance Henriksen is terrific as Bishop, showing that androids
don't always have to be flat characters. Jenette Goldstein shows a
fair amount of enthusiasm with her role, and steals several scenes of
her own (though her personality becomes slightly annoying when she
isn't fighting). Michael Biehn gives a very nice performance in the
most obligatory role of the film.  However, Biehn does a good job,
making it seem original again. Paul Reiser may seem like an odd choice
to play the sleazy corporate director, but Reiser manages to pull it
off quite well (however, I still see him as Paul on TV's "Mad About
You"). A very good cast (which also includes Bill Paxton and William
Hope) highlights this action film, making it stand out from others.
ALIENS is rightfully rated R for violence, gore, language, and
terror. ALIENS is sort of the redefining moment of the science fiction
genre, as ALIEN was more of a suspense/horror film. ALIENS pumps up
the stakes, and Cameron directs it with professional quality. Cameron
certainly knows how to make a good action film, but here he proves how
he can create some truly horrific moments on screen. Technically
astonishing, ALIENS' only flaw is small characters who are only there
to get killed. Aside from this, you probably won't experience anything
like ALIENS for quite a while.
Reviewed by Respect (respect@aros.net)
http://www.aros.net/~respect/movies.html

Title
Review for Peacemaker, The (1997)
Starring: George Clooney, Nicole Kidman, Marcel Iures, Armin Mueller-Stahl
The Peacemaker.  Such an ironic title for the subject matter tackled
in the film.  Perhaps that is the point... maybe that is one of the
themes the film uses.  Supposedly, the peacemakers of this movie are
the U.S. and U.K.'s governments.  But do those peacemakers cause more
carnage and bloodshed than the actual terrorists?  Well, upon
witnessing The Peacemaker, I would say no, but there is so much
mean-spiritedness behind the premise and conclusion that maybe we
aren't quite as peaceful as we would like to think.  Then again, the
novel probably handled these subjects very well because of the length
and detail a book can entail.  But this film, while running over two
hours in length, tries to shove all these themes down your throat
during its run, and instead of coming out as a thought-provoking
action film, it comes out as a jumbled, messy, but costly action
movie.
Beware of the ads for The Peacemaker.  They carry the one biggest
slogan which gets a lot of viewers in the seats, but also misinforms
the viewer.  "Based on the #1 Best Selling Novel!"  If you don't know,
this means that the book was a hit among readers.  Unfortunately, it
doesn't reveal what critics thought, nor how the movie version might
come out.  The Peacemaker is one of those films which tries hard to be
good, but then tries a little too hard.  The pace of this film is so
uneven that you may find yourself dozing off in some moments, while
easily enthralled in others.  Not many films can do this, and so it's
interesting to see one.  Fortunately, there are several elements of
The Peacemaker which can cause most viewers to stay awake, including a
couple of intense action pieces, as well as an intriguing prologue.
To sum up The Peacemaker in one sentence is easy: A bigger and louder
cat-and-mouse game.  The Game was another cat-and-mouse film, but
while the latter had visuals and an interesting story to draw in
viewers, the former has to rely on star power and action.  Star power
is one of the high points, with the exception of one major player.
The film begins with an exciting and entertaining action scene (as
most action films do), which involves a group of Russian military men
transporting ten nuclear warheads to sell to the government.  A simple
plan, until a mysterious train approaches the transport.  Aboard this
second train is a militia out to get back at the so-called
"peacemakers."  They hijack nine of the ten warheads, killing everyone
aboard, and then sending the train, with an armed warhead, on its way
to collide with a train carrying over 1500 people.  As you can
imagine, the film gets off with a bang (literally), but then slows to
a crawl, and almost to a stop.
I must admit that I was shocked at the overall mean-spiritedness,
especially coming from Dreamworks, the new production company of
Steven Spielberg, Jeffrey Katzenberg, and David Geffen.  Much of The
Peacemaker consists of Dr. Julia Kelly (Nicole Kidman) and Colonel
Devoe (George Clooney) running around trying to find the missing
warheads.  If done correctly, this sort of story can create a lot of
tension.  Director Mimi Leder, unfortunately, didn't find the right
tone for the film.  The screenplay by Michael Schiffer has many flaws
in it, including the humanization of villain Duson (Marcel Iures).  In
Cliffhanger, John Lithgow was a ruthless killer who would do anything
to get his money.  Duson, however, supposedly has a good side to his
persona, and many of these scenes are laughably bad.  We don't really
care if Duson lives or dies, mostly a result of the decision to give
him another side to his evil personality.  Instead of hating him and
hoping that Devoe kills him, we almost begin to wish both would die.
Kelly, on the other hand, is a very good character, though
underdeveloped to make room for Devoe.  Kidman has a very nice
presence on screen, and saves many of her films.  While she wasn't
able to save The Peacemaker, she provided some nice contrast to the
inhuman Clooney.  And as for Clooney, well, he still can't act.
Arguably the only reason to put him into the film is to draw female
viewers, but Clooney never really plays a character.  He plays Clooney
portraying a character.  The supporting cast fares much better.  Armin
Mueller-Stahl, as always, is terrific in his short role.  Iures, while
given many unnecessary scenes, has a certain look which gives those
unnecessary scenes a little depth.  While showing a good side, his
face portrays evil.  Kidman's scenes, however, are the best among the
film, especially where she cries over the loss of nine dead soldiers.
Her discussion with Clooney about nuclear warheads and their
possessors is cliched, but because of Kidman's graceful appearance,
the scene comes out haunting and thoughtful.
The main theme of The Peacemaker, if there is one, is whether or not
the peacemakers are as evil as the villains themselves.  In one scene,
Clooney and Kidman order a soldier to shoot Duson.  However, the
soldier keeps telling them that a little kid's head is in the way.
Nevertheless, they still tell him to take the shot.  Not only was I
shocked, but I realized that this one command contradicts the ethical
background of our government.  Perhaps this scene was supposed to draw
fear from viewers, but instead I wished that Duson would succeed and
nuke the city.  Maybe we aren't as peaceful as we would like to
believe.  However, many of the action scenes are exciting and not as
disturbing.  The chase through Venice is well done and actually quite
tense.  In Roger Ebert's review of Breakdown, he commented that when
Kathleen Quinlan finished off the villain, he was appalled that she
would do that to an unarmed man.  I had the same reaction during this
chase sequence when Clooney shoots one of the villains as he is dying
in the passenger seat.  So much for keeping the peace.
The Peacemaker is rated R for bloody and graphic violence, along with
a high body count.  No sex or nudity is present, and amazingly Kidman
and Clooney show no signs of romance on screen, with the exception of
the ending.  There is language, but the violence pretty much acquires
the R rating.  For her first time directing, Mimi Leder does an
amateurish job.  And for the Dreamworks' first feature film, I surely
hope they will do better next time.  Easily the most heartless film of
the year, The Peacemaker will most likely be forgotten during the rush
of Oscar-worthy films coming up in the next few months.
