Authors
John Schuurman
Number of Reviews
14

Title
Review for Jerry Maguire (1996)
Written and Directed by Cameron Crowe.
This film has a lot going for it. First, it is going to do
well commercially. It has all the right stuff. For starters,
it has Tom Cruise who is pretty AND he can act. (He is smart
too -- look for him to direct in a couple of years.) This
film is his finest achievement yet. Additionally, it is a
sports movie that actually works. (Most don't -- this one
does because it only incidentally includes sports.) Plus it
is a delightful love story and has an adorable kid.
But then this: it is also a serious and biting expose of one
of America's powerful sub-cultures. Like Robert Altman's
NASHVILLE, this film swoops in on a little fragment of
American life -- one  that has power far beyond itself --
and lays bare its inner workings, its cynicism, its greed,
and above all, its shameless exploitation of the ones about
whom it purports to care the most. This movie says to our
entertainment and sports crazed society, "Deceive yourselves
no longer. Your cherished notion of innocuous entertainment
is rubbish. This world is controlled by sharks." 
NASHVILLE and JERRY MAGUIRE are also alike in that neither
are content to confine their scrutiny to the sub-culture in
question. Both make searing commentary on the broad stream
of American culture that has made the aberrant sub-culture
possible in the first place. The movies are both about the
morally bereft society that has made gods (with clay feet)
out of a small handful of talented but otherwise mediocre
individuals.
In this regard, JERRY MAGUIRE is not nearly so cynical as
NASHVILLE and that is doubtless why it will succeed
commercially but also why it could be charged with naivete.
Given the world of power and cut-throat dealing in human
flesh that the film exposes, it is perhaps silly for
writer/director Crowe to suggest that a higher and better
way is possible in the sports management industry. But the
whole film is built on such a premise: Although greed and
exploitation have a lock on big time sports, there are rare
and precious occasions when  conscience awakes, truth means
something, commitments are kept, and something other than
power and money can win the day. It is a nice film that way.
If you like following professional sports, it lets you hope
some. (But watch yourself.)
The film also has a great device that runs throughout.
Jerry's mentor, an aging salesman, an old warrior of the
deal -- all smiles, all positive-thinking hype -- sits at
his desk and gives salesmanship lessons right out of the
latest self-help and motivational pap from the empowerment
circuit. You think of it as a running gag until his last bit
of advice: "Love your wife. Love your life. Be true. Be a
good person." This last bit hijacks the movie out of the
cynical and into the hopeful. 
Crowe has pulled off a substantial trick here. From within a
sub-culture very like the one he is examining, he has provided a
vehicle that will enjoy a successful run and will also (hopefully)
cause some much needed self-examination. 
for other reviews by John Schuurman see:
http://www.mcs.com/~wcrc/movies.html

Title
Review for Ghosts of Mississippi (1996)
"You are dealing with the past in Mississippi. That is not
where you want to be," so says State's Attorney Ed Peters
(Craig T. Nelson) to his assistant, Bobby DeLaughter (Alec
Baldwin). The utterance expresses the agony of both this story
and that of the "New South": You don't want to go back, because
it is shameful and painful back there, but sometimes you have
to go back; things change and if you don't go back, sometimes
you can't go anywhere. 
One such time was years 1989-1994 when the Medgar Evers murder
case of 1963 was revisited by the States Attorney's office of
Mississippi. THE GHOSTS OF MISSISSIPPI is the story of that
revisitation. 
Medgar Evers was a civil rights worker in Mississippi in the
early 1960's. He was shot in the back by a white supremacist,
Byron De La Beckwith (played with chilling accuracy by James
Woods). Beckwith had been tried before two all-white, all-male
juries in the 60's but both juries were divided and he went
free. 
Now, 30 years later, Evers' widow, (Whoopi Goldberg), after a
nearly solitary struggle to get the case reopened, has finally
managed to get a little bit of action out of the State's
Attorney's office. Bobby DeLaughter, assistant S.A., is
assigned to look into it again. DeLaughter, is a perfect
character to pick up this cross. He is a son of the Old South,
married to DIXIE De Laughter ("the daughter of the most racist
judge in Mississippi"), he puts his kids to bed by singing,
"Dixie," and he loves his home, his life and his state. 
According to this partly fictionalized movie, (some scenes and
dialogue were invented for dramatic effect), De Laughter's
looking into it and his developing passion for the case are
occasioned not so much by the facts that he uncovers -- the
evidence that Beckwith killed Evers was beyond dispute -- but
more by his reflection on the fact that a man, (like himself), 
with young children, (like his), was violently taken away from
those children. His moral outrage at the violation of those
children's right to their father is the engine that drives him
to stick with the case in spite of the hate mail, threats,
vandalism, and the  disapproval of his own family. When tempted
to abandon the painful old case that only the very few still
care about, he goes to the scene of the crime. He plays it over
in his mind and always there are the children. "No man has the
right to take a man away from his children." 
While flawed with energy lapses, and some writing that is more
than a little contrived, the film works pretty well on the
premise that we finally seek justice and redress of wrongs for
the sake of succeeding generations. All of our logic says, "Let
it go. No one cares anymore. Why stir up painful things?" A
glance at the trusting, upturned faces says, "Go back. Try
again. This is not about what is easy; it is about what is
right."
This movie is a great lesson in history and a Biblical
understanding of hope. We see the sinful past -- in this case
the sad and violent story of the Old South -- a South that
still can hurt and still thrashes around as if in death throws.
And then we see the future: there are the children and the
promise of the New South -- a New South that is already
blossoming and coming to life. As one character says, "This
whole case is one big resurrection." And --  as always -- we
stand at the crossroads with a burden on our shoulders and
decisions to make. 
Biblical hope is exactly like that: Fully (painfully) aware of
a shocking and shameful past, the hopeful one returns to it on
occasion for the sake of repentance. As De Laughter says, "We
never get even for the wrong we do." And then, having grown,
the hopeful, turns and starts living in a future that has
already begun. 
The ghosts of Mississippi will still come around -- there are more
defeats they have yet to suffer. But the future belongs to the
resurrection, to healing and to peace.

Title
Review for Mr. Holland's Opus (1995)
     Now I am not proud to say it, but I'll admit my eyes have welled
up with tears at "Little House on the Prairie" reruns and so you might
not want to take the following too seriously, but this movie had me
dabbing and daubing and wiping away from about fifteen minutes in.  I
don't know when I have been to a movie that had its way with me like
this one. A couple of hours removed, it seems a little silly to be
affected so, but I want to go once again and wait for the last scene.
     It is a "school movie" dealing as such movies do with the heaves
and hos of teaching. At the outset the viewer expects the usual formula
of an idealistic teacher arriving in a tough school and, after some
initial disappointments, working a wonder through that magical mixture
of pluck, toughness and tenderness. Well, only some of that is here.
Which parts aren't important. The parts of the formula that are not
here, are refreshingly absent.
     What is important about the movie is that it shows us the
essential truth that meaning in life comes through sacrifice and
faithfulness rather than individual dream pursuit. I am sorry for the
way that sounds and want to promise you that you will delight in the
movie despite that dreary sentence. But that it is about and you will
love it.
     This movie will make you want to search out and do something
gracious for those career teachers who could have made other choices
and who no doubt wanted to but didn't.
     Richard Dreyfuss gives a career performance.
for more reviews by John Schuurman
http://www.mcs.com/%7Esjvogel/wcrc/movies.html

Title
Review for Marvin's Room (1996)
Directed by Jerry Zaks
Screenplay by Scott Mcpherson, based on his play.
Why is this film called 'MARVIN'S ROOM'? At first glance it doesn't
make much sense. Marvin, (Hume Cronyn) just lies there. He is an
entirely dependent, way old, completely non-verbal, pathetically
incontinent bed-case. He is of no obvious use to himself and is a great
burden to others. In short, conventional wisdom says that the guy is a
perfect candidate for a brief visit with Jack Kervorkian. 
And yet the movie is named after him! Or more specifically his room.
This is -- MARVIN'S ROOM. But if Marvin is a nothing as a person, his
room is really a big zero. There is nothing unique or specific about it
at all. It is just a simple barren room with a hospital bed and the
hapless Marvin lying in it. In the stage play by the same title, you
don't even see inside the room or get to actually have a look at
Marvin. You only hear his moans and see his silhouette through the
glass block wall. 
So why "Marvin's Room"? Instead of Marvin or his room the action seems
to center on his two grown daughters, Bessie (Diane Keaton) and Lee,
(Meryl Streep), and their fractured relationship. The two have had
little to do with each other for the last twenty years. It seems there
was a big disagreement and they went their separate ways. Lee, not
wanting to "waste her life,"  went off to experience various adventures
of romance and self-improvement (all of which fail). And Bessie stayed
at home tending the ailing Marvin whom she says "has been dying for
twenty years -- slowly, so that I won't miss anything."  
It seems that everybody has been wasting their life with depressing
regularity here. 
But now, Lee has come home with her two sons. She has come because
Bessie has been diagnosed with Leukemia and there is a possibility that
either Lee or one of the boys might be a good match for a bone marrow
transplant. So it is understandable if we should conclude  that the
movie's theme concerns Lee and Bessie and their relationship made fresh
through the quest for a donor. But this is MARVIN'S ROOM. 
Another issue that captures a lot of our attention is the situation of
Lee's eldest son Hank (Leonardo DiCaprio). He has "always been a
problem" for Lee and when we first meet him he is in the act of burning
her house down. Throughout the movie we watch this troubled lad come to
a measure of insight about himself and his mother and so here might be
a fruitful center for the movie. But, again,  this is MARVIN'S ROOM
What makes it MARVIN'S ROOM? Let me ask it this way: What makes for a
life of worth? And what makes for a life that is wasted? Those are the
root questions of MARVIN'S ROOM. 
In the room lies the pathetic Marvin in a situation that all people
dread. We pray, "Please God, take me before I get like that." And,
"Lord, I don't think I could cope with someone like that." 
What lies in the room gives us the shudders. And then question comes:
Is it worth anything? Would it be a waste to invest a life in caring
for this? 
I delight to tell you that the movie's answer is clear and unequivocal.
In Marvin's room, lies the person Marvin --  someone who, though
capable of producing only body fluids and guttural noise -- is
eminently capable of BEING loved. The issue is not that he is able to
love in return. That is specifically rejected as any sort of a motive.
No, Bessie says, "I've been so lucky to have been able to love someone
so much." 
What makes for a life of worth? This film says that Bessie has such a
life. She has loved a love that expected nothing and received much. It
is enough. 
For an early hint at the driving theme of the film, check out the
opening credits. While the names role we see medicine bottles, hundreds
of them, along with syringes, thermometers, water bottles, and hand
wipes  all lovingly arranged and bathed in a soft and nostalgic golden
light. It is as if the the camera were panning Christmas tree ornaments
in the most sentimental of possible treatments. But there is no
sentimentalism in this movie, it is rather a combination of brute
realism and some of the great folk that enoble the rest of us. 
Go see this truly wonderful film about the greatness of those who love
sacrificially. It will help you look afresh at who life's real heros
are.
for more reviews by John Schuurman see
http://www.mcs.com/~wcrc/movies.html

Title
Review for Black Robe (1991)
     THE BLACK ROBE, a disturbingly brutal movie, marks for Australian
Bruce Beresford a move from realism into the darker realm of
naturalism.  His movies have always been noted for their honest,
matter-of-fact approach.  He also has consistently dealt withmatters of
ultimate value, never being shy of probing the vulnerable spots of the
human condition, but this film marks for him a significant and
courageous move towards something really dark, and, as I hope to show,
amazingly light.  In his other fine films, "Driving MissDaisy",
"Tender Mercies", "Breaker Morant", and "Crimes of the Heart" to name
but a few, Beresford pokes around tender spots but does so with some
tenderness of his own.  Here -- no more.  This is a move from innocuous
realism to brute naturalism.
     In this film, nature is primitive and savage.  Even the
"beautiful" scenery in truth is foreboding and full of threat.  There
is no romanticizing of nature as in "Dances with Wolves" or so many
American films.  No wispy clouds or sunlit days.  As I think back on
the film, I can not recall anything other than low, grey, forbidding
skies.  Perhaps there was some sunshine.  I doubt it.
     The most stark contrast between "Dances with Wolves" and this
movie is of course the portrayal of the Native Americans.  "Dances" was
politically correct of course but ridden with cliches and wholly
dishonest to anyone who has even a passing awareness of NativeAmerican
cultures.  Red men were not nearly so noble nor white men nearly such
blackguards.  Conversely, "Black Robe" is perhaps excessive in making
its point of the brutality of unredeemed natural man.  But the indians,
for all the barbarism are fully human. We see many moments of their
tenderness and humor.  Even the most savage of them areshown not to
engage in cruelty for its own sake but rather for the sake of their
gods. (Witness the Iroquois chiefs in the sweat lodge debating the fate
of their prisoners.)  For them, the way of the war club was their faith
and the sacrifice of flesh a sacrament, (a profound pa rallel to that
"other" faith).
     The whites too were shown "warts and all".  Beresford's point,
"There, but for the grace of God, go I" is shown in the opening scenes
in Champlain's New France.  The French too are filthy and vulgar -- one
can easily suppose that they would be as brutal as the indians given a
different set of accidents of time and place and birth.  The priest's
interactions with the fur trader who gives whiskey to the natives and
the rude builders are cases in point.  This cultural relativism is most
meaningfully shown in the dance and processional scenes near the
beginning of the film.  In this striking juxtaposition of cultures it
seems that both are equally superstitious, equally impressed with a
show, and equally silly about how the spiritual interacts with the
physical.
     This point is made constantly throughout the film: The delight of
the indians and the revulsion of the priest as he moves his bowels over
the side of the canoe; the unearthly view of "paradise" that the priest
has, (no food, no tobbacco, no sexuality, only God); and
thebelievability given to the whole cult of dreams.
     In sum, the movie would fall sloppily into the long stream of
pluralism movies and be little more than an exercise in the relativity
of cultures -- up to a crucial point, and that is where this film parts
company with the others and becomes something quite remarkable.  

Like "Chariots of Fire", this movie takes two world views and compares
them. Whether it be two reasons for running competitively, or two views
of man's religious motives, the two movies facilitate an exchange
between the two world views and finds them equallyHUMAN.  In the case
of Chariots they are found equally sympathetic.   In Robe equally
vulgar and superstitious.  But then having done that, deftly and
without blinking both films show that one is darkness and the other
light.
     The evidence for this is seen first of all in the priest, who
though very much the arrogant Jesuit, (a remarkably accurate portrayal
of that "Society of Jesus,"); and though he is possessed of all the
medieval tom-foolery about a mystical paradise, yet truly is moved by
acompassion that is not human, (in truth it is divine).  His motive
comes from somewhere else. Like Eric Liddle in Chariots of Fire, his
*modus operandi* is the Biblically informed, Holy Spirit enlightened
world view of the Christian.  At the end when the Huron chief moved
bysuperstition to request baptism, asks, "Do you love us?" we see a
quick parade of the faces we have come to know, fear, and respect in
the film; primarily we see people, -- neither straw men nor beasts --
whom the priest really does love, with a love that transcends cultural
andethnic barriers -- a love that is Christianity's unique innovation
in the world.
     The other evidence for the "Christian=light/ aboriginal=dark"
theme in this work is the eyes of the young Frenchman who travels with
the priest.  Most of the movie is seen through his eyes.  He goes
through all of the enchantment with the primitive that we would expect
of idealistic youth.  He struggles with all of the questions as to
"what makes us think we have a better answer than they do?"  And then
in the torture chamber of the Iroquois after all the savagery, hears a
terrible truth from his friend the magnificent Algonquian chief:
Chief:  "Now what do you think?  Do you still want to be one of us?"
Youth:  "They are Iroquois They are animals."    Chief: "Don't be a
fool.  We would have done the same thing." At the end, the youth, (our
eyes), finally a believer, wants to continue on with the priest to the
Huron village.  The priest sends him back with the girl.  "We have
taken everything she has," a statement filled with the sadness that
such conquests of pagan culture are necessary.
     The epilogue states that the Hurons having accepted Christianity
were massacred 15 years later.  That sort of thing has indeed happened
to many Indian tribes that gave up the religion of the war club for
that of the cross.  Those "failures" might well be seen as
thedefinitive proof that the white man's religion was a curse upon
everyone it touched.  But the death of the martyr has always been a
part of the Christian story.  "The blood of the martyrs is the seed of
the church," and all of that.
for more reviews by John Schuurman see
http://www.mcs.com/&7Esjvogel/wcrc/movies.html

Title
Review for Restoration (1995)
     In 1660 England awakens to a "New Age." What the Cavaliers like to
call "Enlightenment" returns after a dismal rule of a dozen or so years
by Cromwell and his gloomy Puritans. Now, at last, "rich men can go to
heaven agai n." The charming Charles II is restored to the throne and
sets up what has long been regarded as England's most decadent court.
Megalomaniac that he is, he also makes plans for one of the most
ambitious building projects ever known to man, a tribute to his royal
person.
     But not everything is so "enlightened" and free of shadow. Not all
flesh delights. For there still lingers in the land the superstitions
of the masses and the unctuous airs of the religious; but more than
them all, the Bl ack Plague, that indiscriminate killer of millions, is
rumored to be lurking again. As the fun guy Charles II says in one of
his reflective moments, "The plague rouses men from their sleep."
     RESTORATION is a fine film surrounded by this conflicted world.
Michael Hoffman and his army of technical and research people, have
restored to us this time and place. We have seen a lot of cinematic
treatments of various periods of English history of late, "Brave
Heart," "Rob Roy," "Sense and Sensibility," and "Persuasion," to name
but a few, but I don't recall one so careful and so splendid. This is
painstaking film-making at its very best.
     RESTORATION is what the industry calls "A Coming of Age" film. But
it is not as innocuous a coming of age as most of Hollywood's fare. A
sign on the doorpost of a Quaker asylum for the mentally ill quotes
Isaiah 48:10 "Be hold, I have refined thee in the furnace of
affliction." We can watch the burning away of the character's baser
elements on several levels.
     Walking us through the tumultuous time and countryside is a gifted
but licentious young physician, Rowe Merivel. His life is in disarray
from the outset because of his philandering; his taste for women even
gets him into trouble in the court of Charles. As we travel with Rowe,
we marvel and wonder at the sumptuous life. We also share the
consternation of his good friend and fellow physician, John Pierce, a
quiet (and not at all unctuous) Quaker. John sees in Rowe someone that
God has uniquely gifted with a surgeon's heart and hands. We, with
John, hate it when we see Rowe waste the gift. But as tumult moves into
ever greater tumult, we see Rowe "come of age." With each new trouble,
we see more of the man, less of the baser nature. There is within him
something we hoped we would see and at the end he is responsible,
respected and (probably) chaste.
     Something similar happens to Charles, and, (since the king is the
microcosm of the country), to merry old England herself, (you can do
this kind of thing in the movies). As the plague creeps in and attacks
the kingdom and the royal household, Charles and England experience
refinment in the furnace of affliction too. The great fire of London in
1666 is what it takes to purge the city of the plague. It also purges
Charles of his grand desig ns. At the end, we see the two of them
chastened (if not chaste)
For more reviews by John Schuurman see: 
http://www.mcs.com/%7Esjvogel/wcrc/movies.html

Title
Review for Spitfire Grill, The (1996)
Written and Directed by Lee David Zlotoff
I am encouraged. After the dreadful dearth of quality popular movies (I
hear "Lone Star," "Emma," and "Trainspotting" are exceptions) in the
summer of '96, at last there are some new films emerging for the autumn
season that will get me out to the theater again. 
"The Spitfire Grill" was well worth the time and money. Set in a
wonderful little backwoods town in Maine called Gilead the film does
much with references to its Biblical namesake. In the Bible, Gilead is
the region to the east of the Jordan river, noted for the soothing
"balm" or ointment gleaned from its woodlands. One of the hopes for
modern Gilead's future is that such a substance (for healing purposes)
has been discovered in the forests of the region that had long been
thought ruined and useless. The Biblical Gilead was also a refuge for
fugitives. Among those who sought refuge in Gilead were Jacob when he
fled before Laban (Gn. 31:21-55), the Israelites who feared the
Philistines in Saul's time (1 Sa. 13:7), Ishbosheth (2 Sa. 2:8-9) and
David during Absalom's revolt (2 Sa. 17:22ff.) 
Gilead provides such a refuge for Percy, a young woman recently
released from prison. She finds healing and purpose in Gilead (although
not without notable obstacles). Ultimately, she loses her life there,
but in the losi
ng, provides a Gilead of her own for some significant others. The old
spiritual goes,  "There is a Balm in Gilead to make the wounded
whole"(Jer 8:22),  and it provides the theme for this grand movie. The
place becomes a haven of hope and healing.  
Some other reasons to attend: The movie is beautifully shot in rural
New England, the acting over all is first-rate, and writer-director Lee
David Zlotoff has brought a wonderful ensemble together of Ellen
Burstyn, Marcia Gay Harden and Alison Elliott. 
And then some new territory too: I am not usually grateful for the long
run of suspense and action dramas that compose such a large portion of
the menu provided by American film makers. The cliche:
"menacing-music-followed-by-bad-things-happening-suddenly" is so
overworked that, like a grouchy cat, I grow weary of being played with,
and so I hiss and huff and hide under the chair. But sometimes I am
grateful because all of those suspense movies and TV shows that torment
us with menacing music as we wait for the sudden horror to bust into
the screen have built a vocabulary and a context for viewing in which a
movie like this one can come along -- and playing off of that context
-- become something all together different. The point is, I don't think
this move works without all of the suspenseful nailbiters to provide a
counter-point. 
But it works well. "Tender Mercies" was like that. Bruce Beresford,
director of "Tender Mercies" and Zlotoff continually serve up
situations that are full of threat which then prove to be innocent or
even helpful. 
It happens this way, (you have learned to see these things coming): It
is about time for the plot to take a twist. Ominous things are afoot.
The sub-terranian music of fore-boding softly growls several layers
deep. A car full of men pulls up or a child steps out into the street
or you see a movement in the shadows. But then, "Fooled 'ya!; it's OK;
no harm intended here; rape, murder, mayhem didn't even cross our
mind." 
Well, we know it is not true but we love the relief. The unsavory
characters smile and don't make any sudden moves; the child simply
makes it to the other side of the street, the man lurking in the trees
proves to be an angel.
This technique works wonderfully well in "Spitfire." The movie is not
without "bad things happening" and there is enough suspense for the
movie to work. But the film does tighten and release its grip on us
repeatedly until we are relaxed and softened up for the occasion when
it does want to really squeeze us.
One last thing: Zlotoff has the courage to have the bad guy of the
movie restored at the end. This is risky film making. Nahum, the
close-minded towny scoundrel  is someone we have found it easy to hate
when the time comes to close the film. And our blood lust would have
been satisfied had he come to a wretched end. But we are not allowed
that catharsis. The man does a righteous thing. And though he is
damaged goods, and though we are reluctant to bless and not curse him,
we see him restored. In addition to being the most accurate
demonstration of the Christian doctrine of grace I have seen in recent
memory, it is one of the most risky film making choices I have
witnessed in a long while. 
for other reviews by John Schuurman see:
http://www.mcs.com/~sjvogel/wcrc/movies.html

Title
Review for Shine (1996)
This movie is about fathers and sons and the pain we pass along as the
generations go by. The film is based on the true story of Australian
pianist David Helfgott (Geoffrey Rush). In it we never actually meet
Helfgott's father's father. All we see is his severe portrait on the
wall (a portrait that is virtually a character in the film judging by
the furtive way the camera and the characters give it worried glances).
And all we hear is the one story about him -- told several times. The
story is told as a ritual exchange between David and his father, Peter
Helfgott. Peter (Armin Mueller-Stahl) tells the story. It seems that he
loved music as a boy. He saved and saved his money and bought a
wonderful violin. He asks his son: "But what happened to my violin?" 
David's ritual answer, "The father smashed it."  
"You are a very lucky boy, David. A very lucky boy. Say it."
Presumably, this exchange is to impress David with how much different
(and better) his father is than his grandfather was. But we don't
believe it. This is the sins of the father visited upon the children to
the next generations. This is just smashing of another sort. 
The defining moment in this exquisitely painful and hopeful movie is
when this story ritual is broken by David. He refuses to furnish the
expected answer -- instead he turns away, the father slumps off -- and
the cruel cycle is stopped. 
This is how it happens: David (played beautifully by Alex Rafalowicz as
the boy and by  Noah Taylor as the teenager), the son of Peter
Helfgott, the son of his father Helfgott, possesses a prodigious gift
for playing the piano. But he is also possessed by his father and is as
smashed by the father's monstrous love as was the storied violin. 
Peter is a Polish-Jew who survived but lost all of his family in the
concentration camps of the Holocaust. Both a child of that dark night
and of his father, Peter is now driven by the demons of fear and pride
and sorrow.
The universal cry of survivors of the Holocaust is "Never Again!" Peter
Helfgott lives out that wail in an oppressive and feverish attempt to
never again lose his family. And yet, pride and anger drive him to try
to conquer the very world to which he fears losing them. He rants, he
bellows, he loves far too deeply. He hugs and he beats his son with the
same sad but ferocious ineptitude. He at once drives the young David to
"Win, you must always win, David," and at the same time when
opportunities come for the boy to study abroad in the great music
schools, he denies his permission and blessing. Finally, when David
determines to go despite Peter's threats of eternal punishment, he
disowns David and bans him from any further contact with the family.
And all the while David is going quite mad. He goes to the Royal
College of Music on scholarship where his genius further emerges under
the care of his tutor, played joyously by the ninety-two year old Lord
John Gielgud. While at the Royal College he takes on the riotous "Rach
3", Rachmaninoff's Third Concerto for Piano in D minor. That massive
piece proves his glory and his undoing. He collapses and breaks down
while in performance of it. 
When we see him as an adult. He is back in Australia, his speech is
full of chattering non-sequiturs, his behavior is bizarre but disarming
(if you don't have to clean house after him), and though quite
harmless, he has been institutionalized for years (no family). 
It is only after twenty or more years of estrangement that his father
Peter enters his life one last time. He again tries to exert the old
control, again the suffocating embrace, and again the story of the
violin. "You are a very lucky boy, David. Do you know what happened to
my violin?"
Averted eyes. Silence. And a turn away. And only then David can begin
anew. Still crazy, but with some understanding women, able to put
together a life. 
David chatters throughout the film about his "ridiculous tragedy." 
I guess it is both ridiculous and a tragedy. But it is a very old one
-- and dug in very deep. It is one that makes me tremble. The sins of
the fathers handed down. Fathers to sons. Fathers to sons. How to stop
the cycle? What can arrest the methodical twists of this history? Can
we really change? 
David's surname "Helfgott" means, "With the help of God." David calls
it a ridiculous name. It seems to me it is our only hope.
For more reviews by John Schuurman see
http://www.mcs.com/~wcrc/movies.html 

Title
Review for Secrets & Lies (1996)
"O what a tangled web we weave when first we practice to deceive!" Sir
Walter Scott first wrote it --  Mike Leigh and his superb movie have
shown us the truth of it. 
This is (appropriately) a complicated movie; guile and duplicity have
made it so. The story unfolds with evidence of the tendrils and shoots
of deceit cast all about and we need to have our wits about us as we
watch. The film does not make unreasonable demands on us but the
attuned observer will quickly become aware that there is a lot of
submerged hurt lying around. The main action of the movie is to take us
through a marvelous and simplifying exercise in unearthing the pack of
lies that make for pain. From cemeteries and slums; from secrecy and
deceit the hurt is nudged and beckoned to the surface and in the end we
say with the characters, "This is the life ain't it?" "Yeah....Yeah." 
Ironically, the integrity of it all is the most compelling thing.
Writer/Director Leigh has drawn his characters so fully and so candidly
that he makes us forget it is a movie about lies. Indeed, the great
accomplishment here is that we forget that it is a movie at all. I
can't remember a film that called me into it quite so thoroughly. 
It is a movie that shows people all fouled-up with misunderstanding --
of both their own and others doing -- slowly coming to terms. Despite
their inherent dimness of soul, they slowly turn up shiny. 
Me too. It was something like a earnestly said and deeply felt service
of confession and reconciliation in a church service: I felt clean as I
walked away. 
for other reviews by John Schuurman see:
http://www.mcs.com/~wcrc/movies.html

Title
Review for Fargo (1996)
I've tried hard not to take it personally but I'm very
unhappy with what the Coen brothers think of me. It's
just not flattering -- not at all. And I don't think
its only me. Believe it -- these two are misanthropes.
Their new movie proves,(as if "Blood Simple," "Raising
Arizona," "Miller's Crossing," and "Barton Fink" were
not enough), that the Brothers Coen don't like anybody
very much. They have employed their considerable powers
of cinematic storytelling to say so.
That they possess genius can not be denied. This film
will be studied in film arts classes for years. "Fargo"
is a beauty. It is rich, rich -- and powerful too. Some
of the images of the film continue to linger with me
now a week removed from seeing it. But I have found
little to cheer about here. I can urge no one to see it
other than film scholars and those theologians who
would like to see Romans 3:12-17 displayed on a big
screen: "They have together become worthless; there is
no one who does good, not even one. Their throats are
open graves .... Their feet are swift to shed blood;
ruin and misery mark their ways, and the way of peace
they do not know."
Joel and Ethan Coen have given us a humanity bereft of
any sign of a superior order. Their movie is a savage
comedy about the darkness/stupidity within. You laugh
and laugh at the dumb mid-westerners with their
befuddled look at life, (no doubt by necessity because
they are so numb with the cold of the frozen north). Or
else you are chilled with terror at the evil of which
they are capable. There is little difference between
"good" guys and "bad" guys. Everybody is stupid or
worse, rarely better. 
Even seven-months-pregnant Police Chief Marge
Gunderson, cheery and chirpy and the best of the lot,
while smart enough to do respectable police work and
get her man in the end, is more laughed at than loved.
She captures the malevolent Grimsrud -- as lethal a
character as we have seen in some time, (and boy is
THAT saying something!) -- and while driving him to a
lock up lectures him on niceness and on how money never
really makes anybody happy. 
Through the caustic hand of these film makers the moral
universe of which Marge is a relic is rendered inane.
She is the lone hint in this degrading film that there
is perhaps some sort of moral presence somewhere but
there is no cohesion to it and it comes off as cute
home town nostalgia. "No kidding. There really are
people who think like this too yet."
One more bizarre thing in an odd and troubling movie.
At the opening credits we are told that the following
is an entirely true story. It happened in Minnesota in
1987. "At the request of those living, the names have
been changed. Out of respect for the dead, it is told
exactly as it occurred." But then at the very end of
the credits at the conclusion we have the typical movie
disclaimer, stating that the film is entirely fiction,
that any resemblance to real people living or dead is
wholly accidental. It is one last thumb in the eye for
you from the Coen brothers. 

Title
Review for Jerry Maguire (1996)
This film has a lot going for it. First, it is going to do
well commercially. It has all the right stuff. For starters,
it has Tom Cruise who is pretty AND he can act. (He is smart
too -- look for him to direct in a couple of years.) This
film is his finest achievement yet. Additionally, it is a
sports movie that actually works. (Most don't -- this one
does because it only incidentally includes sports.) Plus it
is a delightful love story and has an adoreable kid.
But then this: it is also a serious and biting expose of one
of America's powerful sub-cultures. Like Robert Altman's
NASHVILLE, this film swoops in on a little fragment of
American life -- one  that has power far beyond itself -- and
lays bare its inner workings, its cynicism, its greed, and
above all, its shameless exploitation of the ones about whom
it purports to care the most. This movie says to our
entertainment and sports crazed society, "Deceive yourselves
no longer. Your cherished notion of innocuous entertainment
is rubbish. This world is controlled by sharks." 
NASHVILLE and JERRY MAGUIRE are also alike in that neither
are content to confine their scrutiny to the sub-culture in
question. Both make searing commentary on the broad stream of
American culture that has made the aberrant sub-culture
possilble in the first place. The movies are both about the
morally bereft society that has made gods (with clay feet)
out of a small handful of talented but otherwise mediocre
individuals.
In this regard, JERRY MAGUIRE is not nearly so cynical as
NASHVILLE and that is doubtless why it will succeed
commercially but also why it could be charged with naivete.
Given the world of power and cut-throat dealing in human
flesh that the film exposes, it is perhaps silly for
writer/director Crowe to suggest that a higher and better way
is possible in the sports management industry. But the whole
film is built on such a premise: Although greed and
exploitation have a lock on big time sports, there are rare
and precious occasions when  conscience awakes, truth means
something, committments are kept, and something other than
power and money can win the day. It is a nice film that way.
If you like following professional sports, it lets you hope
some. (But watch yourself.)
The film also has a great device that runs throughout.
Jerry's mentor, an aging salesman, an old warrior of the deal
-- all smiles, all positive-thinking hype -- sits at his desk
and gives salesmanship lessons right out of the latest
self-help and motivational pap from the empowerment circuit.
You think of it as a running gag until his last bit of
advice: "Love your wife. Love your life. Be true. Be a good
preson." This last bit hijacks the movie out of the cynical
and into the hopeful. 
Crowe has pulled off a substantil trick here. From within a
sub-culture very like the one he is examining, he has
provided a vehicle that will enjoy a successful run and will also
(hopefully) cause some much needed self-examination. 
for other reviews by John Schuurman see:
http://www.mcs.com/~wcrc/movies.html

Title
Review for Dead Man Walking (1995)
     Sometimes, at the end of a film, watching the credits, hoping for
one of those surprises with which they sometimes reward you for staying
to the end, you have the sense that you'd like to stay even longer.
Fundamental things have roiled up in the last coupleof hours and you
know that setting your face towards the exit will somehow cause them to
subside. (It has happened before.) So you linger.
     That happened to me when I saw *Schindler's List* and when I
saw*The Black Robe* to name but a couple recent examples. Today, again,
as I sat and watched the credits of *Dead Man Walking* I tried to
retain somehow a bit of the essence of what this experience was.
     For me, it is more than having an encounter with a great piece of
cinematic art. High quality, of course, has to be there, but there are
many superb examples of the film maker's art available. Sometimes,
there is something more -- another dimension. Call it"close
encounters," call it "chemistry." I call it "beyond art" or something
very like it: "faith tested and proven."
     *Dead Man Walking* is ("inspired by" rather than based on) a book
by the same title written by Sister Helen Prejean, a progressive nun in
Louisiana. The movie concerns Sister Helen and her attempts to stop the
execution of Matthew Poncelet, a particularly vicious punk who along
with an accomplice, killed and raped a teenage girl along with her
boyfriend. I have seen some ads for the movie with an 'R' rating and
some with a 'PG-13.' There is no question that it ought to get the
former.
     Most critics have only laudatory things to say about *Dead
ManWalking*.  I join them. Common to the reviews is the marvel that the
well-known 'Hollywood Liberal' Tim Robbins was willing to simply be
honest in telling this anti-capital punishment story.It *is* no small
accomplishment, (one shudders to think what this movie would look like
if Kevin Costner had made it). The movie is full of integrity "that
way." There is no romanticizing of the killer or dismissing the crime,
(in frequent flashbacks the vicious act is shown without blinking). The
anguished parents of the killer's victims are not monstrous or even
unreasonable when they cry out for vengeance.  Even the sanctimonious
prison chaplain is human.
     And, making this film really unique is it's departure from the
conventions of current film making in that people of faith and their
beliefs are respected throughout. In fact there are no easy stereotypes
-- humans and our ambiguous situations all around.Therein lies the
film's power.
     But what is especially worthy of comment is the path of redemption
the movie shows us. When Sister Helen (Susan Sarandon)agrees to serve
as the condemned's (Sean Penn) spiritual counselor during his last
days, the chaplain of the prison tries to dissuade her from a task for
which he judges her too soft. Hereminds her that sympathy and her
compassionate nature have no place among the condemned. What is needed
to usher him into paradise is having the sacrament administered in his
last hour. Sister Helen sees redemption made of more sturdy stuff:
confession and forgiveness. As the clock moves relentlessly towards the
midnight hour, the condemned, prompted by her stubborn love, finally
owns up to what he has done. His shell of victim-hood cracks and we
believe her when she calls him a childof God.
     Most powerful scene: Sister Helen's anguished prayer in the
bathroom just before he dies. Desperate for strength so that she can be
strong for him, she storms heaven and receives strength.
     The film clearly has its anti-capital punishment bias, "Kill'n 's
wrong, no matter who's do'n it." We do shudder at the cool procedure
with which the state processes the condemned.
     But then this: We see that it is the urgency of the looming hour
of death that both brings the killer's confession to the surface *and*
has Sister Helen so constantly at his side in the firstplace. It is
fair to wonder out loud: Is it the state and it'skilling of the killer
that is the needed catalytic agent to restore Biblical peace?  Integral
to the Biblical view of shalom or peace is balance. When injustice is
perpetrated, a correctivemust be applied, (most often in kind).
For more reviews by John Schuurman
http://www.mcs.com/%7Esjvogel/wcrc/movies.html

Title
Review for Cry, the Beloved Country (1995)
     The only bad thing about *Cry, the Beloved Country* is that its
run in the "big houses" has been so very short. It ran in Chicago a
scant two weeks. Doubtless the film has lost money for Miramax. One has
to wonder  why the studio decided to make the investment at all, what
with apartheid in South Africa being dismantled and all. It seems that
for a  movie whose prominent feature is a hated political system to
succeed,  the politics have to be current. But there is the rub. In my
eyes, the  thing that makes the movie work is that the cruel system of
oppression  is now a fresh but receding memory. Had the system been
current, the  movie would have been much more harsh and strident. The
political  agenda to break the hated system would have dominated (and
destroyed)  this work as a film.
     Now, given a small buffer of time since the real thing, it can
concentrate on being a redemption story set in a beautiful but
treacherous place. The memory of apartheid is fresh enough that it
doesn't have to be explained, it simply is the great pall that hangs
over the whole. The action of the movie then gets its poignancy and
becomes all the more refreshing as you see convergence and healing and
forgiveness take place under this shroud.
     "Cry" is a faithful remake of Alan Paton's great novel by the same
name. Rev. Stephen Kumalo, (a simple Zulu pastor given heroic
dimensions by the incomparable James Earl Jones) receives news that he
must go to the great and frightening city of Johannesburg to try to
rescue his sister and his son. He finds only tragedy. His sister is
reduced to the life of a prostitute and his son kills a man in a
botched robbery attempt.
     The fascinating thing of the movie is watching Kumalo put one
faithful foot after the other, never failing in his trust, always in
the scriptures or in prayer, looking to the Lord. Imagine a character
about whom a fellow pastor says, "There goes the only truly good man I
have ever known."
     Jones' portrayal of Kumalo is so good and moving he deserves the
big awards for the work. It is sad that he probably won't even be
noticed because of the failed economy of the thing.
     The great moments are the reconciliation moments between James
Jarvis (Richard Harris) a wealthy white racist landowner and Kumalo. As
the pious pastor and the supremacist farmer encounter each other, and
Kumalo tells Jarvis that it is his son who has killed Jarvis' boy, we
watch as recognition, hatred, and forgiveness are processed. That such
process can happen is our audacious hope in the face of our
post-apartheid, post-OJ, post million-man-march angst. This is a deeply
spiritual movie that  has come at just the right time. Too bad most
folks won't see it.
for more reviews by  John Schuurman see
http://www.mcs.com./%7Esjvogel/wcrc/movies.html

Title
Review for Family Thing, A (1996)
     Alright, there is one mighty stretch of credulity that we viewers
must make if we are to become fully engaged with this movie. The film
asks a lot in this one regard but once the concession is made we are
pleased we have made it and congratulations are in order. If we can do
this -- suspend our native skepticism -- this fine film and America's
two best actors take over and provide a wonderful encounter with that
which is best in the human condition.
     OK, here is what you have to get around: Robert Duvall and James
Earl Jones as biological half-brothers. Of course, not in a million
years. So we all agree. But then we can get back to the movie.
     The story takes place in modern day America. It is a simple story
and one gives nothing away by telling some of it. Earl Pilcher (Duvall)
a deeply Southern man from a thoroughly Southern place learns that
though he was brought up white and though he looks white and acts
white, he is in fact half black.  It seems that his biological father
forced sexual relations on a black woman who worked for the family.
The woman became pregnant and died while giving birth to little Earl.
The child is light skinned and is then brought up in his father's home
under the ruse of being the natural son of two white parents.
     The movie begins with Earl being told the truth about his origins
and composition. He is also made aware that there is a brother, a
half-brother named Ray Murdock (Jones), a policeman who lives in
Chicago.  The rest of the film is a dance between these two -- a
sometimes painful, often angry, deeply touching, frequently humorous
dance -- through the minefield of contemporary race relations.
     The partners, Earl and Ray, move across the screen toward each
other. Carrying all the baggage of their respective cultures, they are
wary and suspicious, even hateful at the outset. But the music of --
biology? duty? decency? -- slowly draws them towards one another and
they become friends and at the end of the dance, we think they find the
special love *phileo* of brothers.
     Assisting them, (and arguably the music personified), is  blind
Aunt T. in an inspired performance by Chicago stage actress Irma P.
Hall. Go see this movie just for Aunt T. She steals the show. Since she
can't see, she tells us that she no longer "has the benefit of being
able to judge between people on the way they look." But blind Aunt T.
is the catalyst that brings the best out of her two reluctant dancers.
     As I watched, I was at once frightened and hopeful for the rest of
us. If a suspension of disbelief is necessary to view Duvall and Jones
as half-brothers, no such act is asked of us to believe that we are in
a terrible and frightening crisis of racism in America. Self-evident
though that is, this film made my heart quake over the vastness of the
gulf between cultures.
     And yet, here we saw one relationship in which healing occured. It
was just one, (and the movie is not silly or so naive as to suggest
that something so vast and unwieldly as the contemporary racial gulf is
fixable), but it was one sign that there IS something better than
racial divide. Such relationships can happen and as a sign, this was
for the moment -- enough.
for more reviews by John see:
http://www.mcs.com/~sjvogel/wcrc/movies.html
