Authors
Phil Brady
Number of Reviews
18

Title
Review for Event Horizon (1997)
The year is 2047, and spaceship Lewis & Clark is on its way to
Neptune. Upon arrival, the search-and rescue crew finds out that they
are looking for the Event Horizon, an exploration vessel that supposedly
exploded seven years earlier. A tag-along scientist who built that ship
explains that the cover story concealed the ships's sudden
disappearance..it was actually an experiment in faster-than-light
travel. Now radio signals from Neptune suggest it's back.
The ship is found in a decaying orbit, and things don't look good.
The inside temperature is too cold to support the crew, and scans for
life prove inconclusive. Boarding the ship, the rescue crew finds grisly
remains of a few EH crewmen, but the rest is a mystery. Soon, the
hallucinations start, attacking the deepest fears of the rescuers. Now
the evanescent life readings make sense: this spaceship is alive, and
it's  not clear whether it is scaring them off or playing with them. The
Event Horizon proves to be a more malevolent cousin of the Hotel
Overlook, from The Shining.
"Infinite Space, Infinite Terror." That's your basic setup..the movie
starts like Alien or 2001, but finishes like The Shining or Hellraiser.
Along the way, you can see borrowings from those films and others. That
could show a lack of originality, but director Paul Anderson shows that
he has learned from those movies, and he has crafted something
altogether his own. The production shows great imagination and the art
direction is nothing short of brilliant.
The Event Horizon has an odd look, like something out of Jules Verne
in the 19th century. The interiors appear medieval (in fact, much of it
was copied from the ancient cathedral of Notre Dame). Surfaces look like
they are made of unfinished iron, and the engine room has ugly studs and
spikes..this ship can hurt you. The cross shape of the ship doesn't look
like a crucifix, because "elbows" make the ship look more like the
victim of a crucifixion.
Laurence Fishburne does a good job as the hard-nosed captain of the
rescuers. Both he and Kathleen Quinlan (as a medical tech) are making
their first sci-fi film and their first horror film. Sam Neill was a
good choice for the enigmatic scientist. He was the center of 1995's
Lovecraftian "In the Mouth of Madness." His intelligent, dark look keeps
you guessing. You never quite know what secrets (and/or madness) are
rattling around in there. The rest of the cast is filled out with other
capable actors who make their characters distinct, much like the Alien
ensemble. And I have to say that I wasn't distracted by any of the
normal idiocies, where a character does something incredibly stupid,
just to advance the plot. Only the most compelling illusions drive them
to their demise. 
With all this in the plus column, the movie is something of a dud.
The sci-fi front end would have looked cool on a real sci-fi story, like
Stormship Troopers, but we go to all the way to Neptune for what?
Another visit with Hellraiser's Pinhead. Why bother? What's wrong with
rending good old Terran flesh? Tarantino's Dusk 'til Dawn did a better
job, merging bankrobber killers with a vampire flick. For me, Event
Horizon just didn't deliver.

Title
Review for Alien: Resurrection (1997)
When we last saw Ellen Ripley, she was.. Dead!  And she took the alien
with her.  This was not a good business decision for a promising
franchise.  Director David Fincher (Seven, The Game) had been undercut
by the Fox studio, and his Alien3 was not up to expectations.  At that
point, wrapping it up may have seemed like a good idea to all
concerned.  But, much like the Frankenstein monster, the Alien character
was too compelling to just fade away.  Many Alien graphic novels
continued to flourish, showing that the faithful were out there,
betrayed, but waiting patiently.   Scripts with and without Ripley were
tossed around, and one story finally emerged, resurrecting the franchise
AND Ripley.  You sorta have to look the other way when they clone
Ripley, but hey, it's a small price to get our story back on track.
        The movie opens 200 years later, when the evil Weyland-Utani
corporation has turned everything over to the military.  On a special
lab-spaceship, a secret team of doctors is trying to clone Ripley. 
Using a blood sample taken back on the prison planet in Alien3, they
bring back Ellen AND the Alien, so that they can harvest the Alien. 
This is fast-and-loose Sci-Fi science, so why not let Ripley retain
memories, too?  The scientists get their alien queen specimen, and
busily start to bring about their own demise.  The Ripley clone is kept
as a curiosity, and indeed she is.  With some alien DNA in her, she has
uncommon strength, her blood is caustic acid, and she has an eerie,
alert demeanor.  It is probably formed as much by predator instincts as
by the condescending treatment from the doctors.  She maintains her
alien-fighting chops, but also displays a disturbing empathy with the
beasts.  
         A cargo of human victims is acquired from some space pirates, who sell
the cryo-tubes from a hijacked ship.  These colorful characters are
still aboard when the aliens predictably break loose and overrun the
ship.   Lots of military-types are killed and many get away in escape
pods.  This leaves Ripley, the pirates, one evil scientist, and one
impregnated victim - embarking on their own Poseidon Adventure to get
back to the pirates' ship.  Additional urgency is added by the fact that
the lab-ship is programmed to return to Earth in an emergency.  This
last detail is unnecessary to the story, but essential to the set-up for
Alien 5.
        Nigel Phelps' production design is good, retaining the grungy, lived-in
look for the spaceships.  The casting is quirky.  Winona Ryder seems out
of place, but her character deserves more attention as the story
develops.  Director Jean-Pierre Jeunet brought along his two stars from
City of Lost Children:  Ron Perlman is colorful playing an pirate bully,
and Dominique Pinon adds a lot as a resourceful paraplegic.  Dan Hedaya
does a good job as the pragmatic military commander.  He runs a tight
ship but comfortably deals with the pirates under the table.  B-movie
ghoul Brad Dourif gets an A-movie, but they saddle him with a lot of the
embarrassing scientific explanations.
        Successful sequels need to reprise signature elements, but they must
improve them to justify the effort. We get Sigourney Weaver back, but
she's not really Ripley.  The pirates are certainly more colorful than
the prisoners from Alien3.  Much of the action is obligatory and
predictable.  There's some new stuff showing a swimming alien, and the
puzzling addition of a new, mammalian alien.  Other alien appearances
are mostly head and teeth, rarely showing us the exquisitely grotesque
creature designed by H. R. Giger (who is more than a little miffed by
not being mentioned in the credits).
        Individual evaluation of these offerings will vary widely.  Those
hungry for another episode will be happy enough, especially when they
see the built-in Alien5 potential.  Skeptics worried about the mercenary
motives of the producers may be less patient.  Newcomers may be lost,
since the screenplay does not provide them enough exposition.  Alien3
has had the impact of a baseball strike.  The franchise may recover, but
Wynona Ryder is no Ken Griffey Jr.

Title
Review for L.A. Confidential (1997)
Film Noir - I am beginning to suspect that this term is alienating
casual moviegoers who think this is an artsy-fartsy term for some type
of (grit your teeth!) art film. This is the only way I can accept the
lukewarm box office numbers for L.A.Confidential, easily one of the best
pictures of the year. Well, folks, that four-letter French word just
means "dark," and, whatever its origins, film noir is a most American
form of movie. Humphrey Bogart in "Maltese Falcon," Robert Mitchum in
"Night of the Hunter," Orson Welles in "Touch of Evil," Jack Nicholson
in "Chinatown".. have I got any takers yet? The darkness is the menace,
or evil that threatens to overtake our protagonists, who frequently have
a darkness all their own to justify their plight. Coupled with many dark
night scenes, such movies portray seamy lives, on the edge. The main
character is usually a private detective or criminal, but the heavy
drama works just as well for cops, and so it is in L.A. Confidential.
The movie takes place a very movie-style Los Angeles, when the initials
LA still had the periods for punctuation. The LA cops in this post-war,
pre-Miranda world were not corrupted by money, but they had little use
for civil rights. As the film opens, crime boss Mickey Cohen is being
sent up for the same tax dodge that nailed Capone. This creates a vacuum
in the underworld leadership, and hoods are getting bumped off
regularly. Squads of LAPD muscle intercept any new gangsters, beat them
up, and send them back East. Our story swirls around four policemen.
 Captain Dudley Smith (James Cromwell) is father figure to three
officers: Jack Vincennes (Kevin Spacey) loves the media attention from
his technical adviser role on Dragnet, and his pot bust of Robert
Mitchum. All his celebrity arrests are written up (and staged) by a
sleazeball reporter played by Danny DeVito. Bud White (Russel Crowe,
Virtuosity) is your basic thug with a badge. He only roughs up real
criminals, so the captain appreciates his `adherence to violence as an
adjunct to the job.' With 50 pounds less muscle, we have Ed Exley (Guy
Pearce), a Dudley-Doright with wire-rimmed glasses. He's due for
promotion to lieutenant, but Smith cautions him against his ambition to
become a detective. "Are you willing to create evidence to convict a man
you know is guilty? Will you give false testimony to put him away?" he
asks. "If not, you haven't got what it takes for detective work, boy-o."
Early on, Exley breaks the code of silence and testifies against White's
partner, throwing him off the force. These two who had nothing in common
now have a grudge. Exley survives the snub of his peers by displaying a
political savvy that exceeds that of his admiring captain.
When a botched holdup leaves an all-night diner stacked with bodies,
things get interesting. One of the victims was White's disgraced
partner, and another was a high-class hooker he had encountered. Exley
becomes a hero when he finds the suspects, gets their confessions, and,
after they escape, hunts them down and wins the shootout. Even though
he's accepted again, Exley has doubts about the whole case, and so does
White, for different reasons. Vincennes finds his own tie-in, and the
improbable trio independently do some digging. They all find puzzling
resistance, but they keep their resolve by re-examining their motives
for joining the force in the first place. The truth that comes out lays
bare the corrupt underbelly of LA, much as Chinatown did.
Although L.A. Confidential doesn't borrow from that script, the
cinematography owes it something. Many brilliant sunwashed scenes
contrast not only with the night, but also to the dark reality that
awaits. Director Curtis Hanson keeps things moving right along, and just
when it promises to get heavy, he throws in a small mistaken identity
scene to give everybody a good chuckle. Kevin Spacey is as smarmy and
watchable as ever, being interesting without really stealing any scenes.
James Cromwell was ready to quit acting a couple of years back, but Babe
and First Contact have him back on the short list, and he delivers again
here. Kim Basinger has one of her best roles, as a hooker with dubious
connections to the investigation. The always-underappreciated David
Strathairn plays her boss, running a stable of celebrity lookalike
escorts. The breakout stars, however, are Australians Guy Pearce and
Russel Crowe. Our unfamiliarity with them makes it easier to get
involved in their plight, in a way we couldn't with, say, Tom Cruise and
Bruce Willis. Both give compelling performances that should stick in
your memory.
Another thing I should mention about film noir -- no computer graphics,
no big explosions. The producers fall back on that old dodge of good
actors and a good script. No wonder  we don't see more film noir.

Title
Review for Lost World: Jurassic Park, The (1997)
Well, on the good news side, the dinos are back..more dinosaurs,
better than ever. While Jurassic Park introduced us to "real live"
dinosaurs, the FX crew has had time to become acquainted with their
cutting-edge technology. They have produced much more lifelike
creatures, and the action is not stingy. One corollary  to this is: more
killing. The body count in Lost World rivals the numbers racked up by
Sly and Arnie. You can judge for yourself whether it's good or bad news
that Jeff Goldblum is actually the star of this film, as opposed to just
attending Jurassic Park and ID4. But the big disappointment is Steven
Spielberg's backslide into mindless action/horror cliches. He, better
than most understands how to do it right. How could he let this happen? 
The story opens with a good scene of a shore party coming upon some
small dinos that are not as cute as they look. Cut to Jeff Goldblum
being persuaded to go back to "Site B". It goes against all his
instincts, but his palentologist girlfriend (Julianne Moore) is already
there, so he must follow her to get her to safety. She's having none of
that..this is an opportunity of a lifetime, and besides, it's her job to
move the plot along by getting everybody into trouble! Spielberg lets
her character alternate between trying to preserve natural habitats and
trying to disrupt them.
As soon as we meet her, she rattles off a bunch of observations about
the stegosuarus family structure, then she walks up to a nest with a
baby steg, and pets it! Even modern-day birds would abandon a chick with
a human scent; the only reason to touch the baby is so we can see her
imperiled by the angry parents. Later, she comes across a baby T-rex
with a broken leg, and she decides to carry it back (200 lb, easy) to
the base camp, to set a splint. What a surprise that the parents show up
and trash the camp! The ensuing FX are very good, but Spielberg has
gotten flabby, letting these totally impossible actions move the story.
Would it have been so tough to have a baby killed by another dino, and
have the vengeful parent mistake something left by the humans as a scent
clue? Okay, you need the baby later in the movie, so make the T-rex
brood have two babies. How tough would that have been?
Later, corporate mercenaries round up some dinos for sale to zoos.
Their Hatari!-inspired techniques are exciting. Our heroes sneak into
the camp and break open the cages of these not-so-fuzzy creatures. A
melee follows, destroying the camp..seems to me that they would be found
guilty of murder, or manslaughter, at the least. Not a good lesson for
the kids, but you don't want your kids to see this anyway. Way too many
scenes seem to have been designed to inspire nightmares in youngsters.
Spielberg tops his own lawyer-chomping scene by having two T-rex's "make
a wish." Late in the film, A captured T-rex breaks loose, Kong-style, in
San Diego. This lets us see some Godzilla scenes in a residential area.
Spielberg punctuates his homage by having one streetful of fleeing
pedestrians all Asian.
There's lotsa good stuff packed into this movie. Pete Posthelwaite,
always a plus, plays a Great White Hunter leading the corporate team.
And the action scenes are so good, I'll probably have to see the movie
at least two more times. I doubt that Spielberg could have topped the
original, but sometimes it looked like he wasn't even trying. I remember
adolescence, when one friend after another drifted away from the group,
as they got interested in sports, girls, or whatever. The super-child
Steven doesn't want to come out and play anymore..Say it ain't so,
Steven.

Title
Review for Hercules (1997)
Well, I had ducked both Pocohantas and The Lion King, so continued
U.S. citizenship required that I go see the latest Disney animation,
Hercules. Not that I wasn't looking forward to it..the promos made it
clear that this was much lighter fare than recent Mouse droppings. And a
happy film it is. An opening scan of  Grecian urns is accompanied by the
grave tones of  a Charlton Heston voiceover, but before he gets into it,
he is interrupted. "Too boring!", says a group of Muses, stepping down
from their picture on an urn. Graciously, Chuck accedes to our new
narrators, who form a rockin' Greek chorus (and anyone who's seen The
Little Shop of Horrors can tell you: hip black chicks make the very best
Greek choruses).
The basic story is normal for this franchise: coming-of-age for a
not-so-typical youth. Greek mythology meets Damn Yankees is the
high-concept blurb. Herc's quest to become a hero and return to Olympus
is thwarted by the plotting Hades and Meg(ara), but you can see Joe, Mr.
Applegate and Lola quite clearly. Meg works for Hades, in a standard
seduction/soul-acquisition gig, but as she brings down Hercules, she
falls in love with him. With apologies to Ray Walston, James Woods makes
a much funnier Hades.  Memorable for playing many jittery, dangerous
heavies, Jimmy's real persona is funny, and very close to the Hades
character, and Hades is played as a stand-up comic trying to take over
the universe. "What is this, a crowd or a mosaic?", he asks when his
opening joke bombs. His sarcastic exasperations over his minions'
failures are very funny, and it's nice to see that Bobcat Goldthwait has
found his niche, as a wretched goblin in service to Hades.
Additional casting gems are Danny DeVito as a not-so-Yoda mentor to
young Hercules, and Rip Torn as Zeus. The movie makes a parody of its
own genre, showing merchandising run rampant when Hercules becomes
famous. When Zeus tells Herc that he isn't a hero yet, he protests: "But
I'm an action-figure!" Priceless is a scene where an incredulous Hades
notices that Bobcat is wearing "Herc-Air" sandals. Can't say much about
the music, though. It gets us from this scene to that scene, but all of
it was forgotten ten seconds later. They shoulda stolen some of the Damn
Yankees' music, too. The designated single, "Go the Distance," meanders
around, bumping into things. Michael Bolton does a cover over the
closing credits, but methinks the coast is clear for a non-Disney Oscar
in the music category.
Hercules was a very enjoyable film, and although I didn't leave the
theater humming the music, I can sing its praises.

Title
Review for Men in Black (1997)
Men in Black is a really good idea for a summer movie. First, it
rides the crest of the X-Files/Roswell mystique, letting their publicity
sell the film. Conflicts with aliens means space ships, explosions, and
creature special effects, perfect for summer repeat business.  Add the
cachet of a graphic novel `comic book,' and you have an off-the-rack
winner. Mercifully, this property fell into the right hands (Spielberg's
Amblin), and didn't end up in the Hollywood sausage grinder. Barry
Sonnenfeld was a good choice as director. He had previously done the
Addams Family movies and Get Shorty. These films had their own peculiar
attitude as their primary strength, and Barry delivered them to the
screen intact. MIB has its own tude,  helped along by those box office
titans..Smith and Jones?
I wonder if the generic nature of the stars' names is a mere
coincidence, given that they play imperturbable, implacable cyphers.
Fact is, Tommy Lee Jones and Will Smith both bring a lot of  talent and
charisma to their roles. Will Smith showed us his action/humor chops in
ID4, and he solidifies his ascendency here. Tommy doing comedy is a
surprise to some, but I don't know why. Comedy acting requires a
conviction to the story, letting the comedy come from the material, not
the actor's manner. Check out Tommy's Oscar-nominated turn in JFK, and
Oscar-winning role in The Fugitive.
Will plays a NYPD cop who falls down the rabbit-hole, into the
super-secret world of the MIB. These guys police the traffic of hundreds
of otherworld aliens that live here amongst us, and MIB hides them from
the locals. Earth is sort of a neutral port: `Think of  the movie
Casablanca,' Jones tells Will, `without the Nazis.' Jones becomes Will's
partner/mentor, dead serious as an MIB, but he betrays a capricious
sense of humor in the way he tosses Will into mind-blowing situations.
Tommy and boss Rip Torn never blink an eye as they matter-of-factly
discuss the latest end-of-Earth scenario. Their un-sensationalistic
manner is the implicit smirk that gives the movie its charm. It gives
contrast to Will's comic takes, as he and the audience find out that Sly
Stallone and Newt Gingrich, among others, are really aliens (Elvis,
too). And the MIB agency is autonomous, getting funding from its patents
on such borrowed alien technology as Velcro.
The main bug hunt involves an assassin sent to Earth to kill alien
royalty and capture a bauble he is guarding. Vincent D'Onofrio has a
great time playing the assassin, struggling to move about in the skin of
a farmer, who didn't look too good before the bug killed him. Imagine:
Terminator meets My Left Foot. As bodies pile up, they end in the
morgue, where Linda Fiorentino plays a coroner, puzzled by cadavers that
only appear to be human. Not the first time for her, but prior occasions
have been wiped from her memory by the neuralyzer, an MIB device that
erases the recent memories of people who witness alien events. This
little doodad gets a real workout in the MIB's normal day, and it gets
to be an anticipated punchline as the squares get corraled toward the
end of a scene.
Further humor ensues when Will lobbies Tommy not to use the
neuralyzer on the coroner yet again, fearing repeated use could be
harmful. Actually, he's kind of attracted to her, what with her being
Linda Fiorentino, and he doesn't want her to forget him, again. Turns
out that she unknowingly has possession  of the aforementioned bauble,
so she ends up drawn into a Kong-scales-the-Empire-State-Building ending
anyway. Not to worry. The bug is stopped, Earth is saved, and all
elements are in place for MIB II.
Men in Black delivers, probably better than any summer movie for this
year. The talented Smith and Jones boys solidify their box office
appeal, and Sonnenfeld answers the question `Who you gonna call?' for
offbeat stories that need a sympathetic director. Creature-meister Rick
Baker and Industrial Lights and Magic did their usual superlative job.
Betcha can't see it just once.

Title
Review for Truman Show, The (1998)
Truman Burbank (Jim Carrey) is the star of The Truman Show, one of the
most popular TV shows on the planet. People around the world watch
Truman's life as an insurance executive in the coastal town of Seahaven.
Although Truman is a popular member of  the community, he is the only
one who isn't paid to live there - because everyone else is an actor.
Thousands of strategically-placed cameras follow Truman's every move, as
he interacts with hundreds of people who are following the orders of a
TV director, high in the sky.
This massive conspiracy was conceived decades ago, when Truman was
chosen from several unwanted babies. Adopted by a corporation, Truman
became the object of a fantastic experiment to televise an entire life
-- the ultimate reality show. There's no script for Truman, but everyone
else in town has a role to play, while only some have speaking parts.
Others just play "extras," pretending to be about their lives, providing
a natural traffic for Truman's world.
The deception is most cruel in that his wife (Laura Linney), his best
friend (Noah Emmerich), and his parents are not only acting their
affection, but they are subtly steering Truman in his choices. From
childhood, his wanderlust was pooh-poohed by those around him, and the
customized media that he sees is styled to induce fear of travel. As a
teenager, he was attracted to the wrong girl - an "extra." The producers
whisked her (Natascha McElhone) away, so that he would marry Meryl. 
But that incident and others left Truman confused. In a 24-hour
production day, many things could go wrong, and incidents build up. We
see a few overt miscues, and Truman is awakened from his non-questioning
complaisance.  His new awareness and his canny attempt to get to the
truth makes for an exciting story.
This is the perfect role for Jim Carrey, especially at this stage of his
career. His comedy genius has charmed millions of ticket-buyers, but
there is a handsome leading man hiding in there. We know it, but he
is a rare talent, and we don't want to lose him like we lost Spielberg.
The Cable Guy showed us that our fears were well founded, but Truman
provides the perfect vehicle. Carrey is still permitted to amuse us with
little fantasy scenes that Truman has in front of his bathroom mirror. I
doubt that any were scripted.
Delivering this transitional gem is reason enough to praise director
Peter Weir (Witness). The material speaks so clearly that I doubt he had
any trouble reigning in Jim's wild ways. Ed Harris is stuck with the
non-role of Cristof, director of the Truman Show. Dennis Hopper bailed,
and Ed replaced him, but  maybe Dennis had the right idea. The
Uber-director and the constructed dome/studio seemed like plot devices.
Their artificiality was in stark contrast to Carrey's beautifully
natural performance.
Waytogo, Jim!

Title
Review for Godzilla (1998)
        We were warned. The trailer for Godzilla had a little man cast his
fishing line off a pier in N.Y. harbor. He gets a bite, and then the
water starts to swell -- hundreds of  yards away. The swell heads right
for his spot, explosively destroying the pier as the man runs for his
life. What did we just see? Godzilla was clearly beyond the range of the
fisherman, and why would the creature choose to bulldoze the pier,
shoving his face into the wooden pilings? The whole scene was staged so
we could see the baggy-pants comic figure run from a special effect. It
makes no sense. Now imagine two hours like that.
        The movie starts with a trawler being attacked in the South Pacific.
Later, the lone survivor lies in shock in a hospital. With a match waved
in his face, the the old Japanese man weakly says: "Gojira, Gojira."
This is a poor version of the "Keyser Soze" scene from The Usual
Suspects, but the film editors like it enough to reprise the video tape
a couple of  times. Later, in Panama, huge footprints are found,
crossing a plain in an unnatural, cookie-cutter manner. Next thing we
know, it's closing in on New York. Showdown time, right? Wrong. A better
paced film would stage skirmishes in several places, leading to a big
climax in Gotham, but our boy gets there in the first half hour. The
last ninety minutes cannot be non-stop action, so what do we do?
        The lizard gets to stomp around a bit, in a classically Godzilla
fashion, but then the military loses him. Yes, a twenty-story dinosaur
just steps in off the street, "hiding" in some buildings. Think that's
bad? He also gets to move around in underground tunnels. Hellooooo!?
Suspension of disbelief  is necessary in many Sci-Fi films, but this is
a bit much. The design of the creature is pretty impossible, too, but I
do not think the producers care about alienating the bio-engineers the
audience. Okay, okay, who cares? We all just want to see the special
effects. Good news, bad news.
        There is a reasonable amount of screen time devoted to creature
effects, but a lot of them are repetitive. Seeing Godzilla lope down
Manhattan streets is entertaining, but we just get to see more similar
scenes of Godzilla zipping around town like he was marching through
K-Mart. Other scenes have a staged awkwardness about them. Some variety
is provided by the little godzillas that hatch later in the film. They
behave much like Spielberg's raptors, but their stalking gets overused,
too. Enough action, but not much interaction.
        There are some decent actors who may not welcome this entry on their
resume, so let me just mention Hank Azaria, who has been doing a fine
job for years, most notably in The Birdcage. His character here is a
little more alive than the rest, so maybe people will learn his name. In
closing, I leave you with one thought: We have been told that we get the
government we deserve, and that may be true. But we certainly get the
movies we deserve -- if enough people buy tickets, Hollywood does it
again. The end of Godzilla has a setup for a sequel. Godzilla may be
worth checking out, just to see what it looks like, but repeat viewing
will send the producers the message that you are ready for that sequel.
Think about it.

Title
Review for Game, The (1997)
Michael Douglas plays Nicholas van Orton, a powerful businessman who
lives alone in a huge family mansion. Flashbacks show us his stiff,
humorless father, who took his life at age 48. Today is Nicholas' 48th
birthday, and we see him conduct his affairs with a cold efficiency. The
flashbacks show that he is comparing his empty life with that of his
father. Could he succumb to the same fate?  Conrad, his not-so-stable
brother (an easy role for Sean Penn) begs a lunch date, and then offers
his birthday present: an "experience," bought and paid for from a
cryptic company named Creative Recreational Services. "It will change
your life," Connie promises.
   Skeptical, Nicholas drops by their offices, where he meets a Mr.
Feingold (James Rebhorn, who was the CIA guy fired in ID4). Feingold, a
very un-slick salesman, explains CRS as an "experience-of-the-month"
club. After completing a battery of medical and psychological tests,
Nicholas is told only that his game will start soon. And an eerie start
it is. That night at home, TV newsman Daniel Schorr departs from his
copy to engage Nicholas in a conversation..from the TV screen! The next
day, Nicholas has a few unaccountable mishaps, and when he gets a
waitress fired for spilling a drink on him, he gets a message saying
"Don't let her get away!" And we're off.
An ambulance, a stalled elevator, and broken fire escape make for a
harrowing night on the town. Next day, Connie shows up, paranoid about
CRS, and then he disappears into the night. Stranded when his car breaks
down, Nicholas takes a cab, whose driver plunges the car into the bay.
It's getting a little rough. Reality is sliding, and Nicholas' only
clues are the ubiquitous CRS initials that keep popping up.
This movie's setup seemed like a good idea, and the first half  went
pretty well. Once the real action started, however, it was impossible
for director David Fincher to keep the illusion going. The incidents
were too free-form to have been staged, and there were instances when
someone playing for real could have killed someone. Nicholas was given
an 800 number that would let him call off the game, but he never even
considers using it. One elaborate break-in at his house could not have
been pulled off without the complicity of the housekeeper, but early
scenes showed that Nicholas was not the sort of employer to forgive such
a betrayal. In fact, he was way too reserved to fill out that
psychological questionnaire in the first place. 
There is one clever scene that takes place in a cafeteria, but it is
canceled out by an ending that would offend fans of the TV show, Dallas.
Michael Douglas does a good job with his part, and other character
actors fill in ably, but implausibility renders this effort stillborn.

Title
Review for Trial and Error (1997)
When I first heard the setup for Trial and Error, I registered a
small wince. It sounded like "My Cousin Kramer," and I'm sure that easy
dismissal will pop up in many reviews. "My Cousin Vinny" had Joe Pesci,
Marisa Tomei, and Fred Gwynne, all perfectly cast for their roles. The
story was cute, and it looked like its premise had been copied as a
vehicle for Michael Richards. Lightning was unlikely to strike twice,
and I have a rooting interest in Richards. I had learned his name before
Seinfeld, when he was the only good thing in the movie "UHF" (1989 -
Weird Al Yankovic was the "star"..'nuff said). Well it works just fine.
Richards, Jeff Daniels and Austin Pendleton are just as well cast, and
actresses Charlize Theron and Jessica Steen are very right for their
roles, too.
Daniels plays a fast-track lawyer. He's a new partner, about to
marry the boss' daughter when that boss sends him on a short errand in
Nevada. A brief continuance request is rejected, and now he must defend
a guilty-as-sin swindler Rip Torn. Rip doesn't steal any scenes, but
they do allow him with a neat piece testifying on the stand in his own
defense. Where does Richards fit in? Well, it seems he engineered a
bachelor's party the night before, and Jeff is unable to even stand up.
Richards, playing an unsucessful actor, takes it upon himself to
impersonate his buddy for a "one-line walk-on." When the continuance is
denied, he's stuck with the case, unless he wants to admit to violating
all kinds of laws.
Early in the movie, we get a lot of Richards' physical comedy, very
good bits, but they won't carry a movie. Midway through, these schticks
drop away, and we see capable acting carry him through the rest of the
film. Daniels serves as more than just a foil for Richards, coming to
terms with his marriage to a woman he doesn't love. The reality that
jolts him out of it is Theron's radiant barmaid. She could jolt quite a
few men with her sweet manner, knit tops and cutoff jeans..oh, where was
I? Daniels and Theron have quite a few good scenes away from the
courtroom (did I mention she was blonde?).
The primary job of reacting to Richards belongs to Pendleton, as the
bemused judge, and Steen as the incredulous prosecuting attorney. They
do so well that we easily brush aside any concerns about how far real
courtroom types would put up with Richards' disorderly ineptitude. The
screenplay spreads the humor out well, physical comedy here, wordplay
there, with situations and reaction shots providing a balanced attack.
All my fears were unwarranted. Its not fair to compare this film
with "Vinny," since both are excellent comedies. Richards does the big
screen thing well, and Daniels' career as an ack-TORE is further
derailed by another brilliant comedy outing. Don't miss this one.

Title
Review for G.I. Jane (1997)
Demi Moore plays a  Lt. O'Neil, a talented Naval Intelligence
officer whose career is thwarted by the male/female double standard: No
advancement without operational experience (combat), and few  openings
in the field for women. Ann Bancroft plays a US Senator who is staging a
re-election campaign. Chairing a defense oversight committee, she sees
an opportunity make an issue of women in the military. Threatening to
withhold an appointment of a Defense Secretary, she gets a carte blanche
concession. Any woman who measures up can have any job. Testing that
assurance, the senator opts to recruit a woman for the toughest duty of
all: Navy Seal training. O'Neil is picked, as much for her looks as her
resume.
Seal training was a poor choice. Only the best of the best need
apply, but this is less like Top Gun, and more like the Bataan death
march, interrupted by lessons in weapons and tactics. It is expected
that 60% of the enrollees will drop out. The intent is to cull out the
hardiest soldiers for the toughest insurgence and rescue operations.
Only the Pete Rose/Lenny Dykstra types need apply.  Many will need to
stoke up their strongest machismo just to grit it out. Into this ordeal,
Lt. O'Neil is thrown.
But O'Neil feels up to the challenge. She has the drive, and she is
in exceptional physical shape. A big question is whether the brass will
thwart her, and whether her fellow trainees will accept her. These
issues make up the real story of the movie. Those in command are just as
apprehensive about the dangerous political position this puts them in.
With no precedents, they try their best to accommodate O'Neil, but
separate quarters and different pass/fail requirements end up
embarrassing her and alienating her from those she needs to bond with.
That buzz-cut you see in the promos is her idea, and when she insists on
bunking with boys, the stakes go up.
Much of O'Neil's struggle is defined by her relation with the head
instructor, Master Chief Urgayle  (Viggo Mortensen in a good, complex
role). Urgayle is an expert in this rarefied survival environment, and
he is a fair man in a program where nothing is fair. He truly feels that
the presence of a woman in combat makes the rest of the soldiers more
vulnerable. When he puts O'Neil through her toughest test, he is also
brought to his limits. The best scenes in this movie include O'Neil and
Urgayle.
Director Ridley Scott remains one of my favorites. This time, he
didn't get much chance to sneak  in  his trademark art direction, but he
delivers O'Neil's story well. Demi Moore has had her ups and downs in
this business, the downs coming when she misjudges the true nature of
her appeal. It looks as if she got this one right. O'Neil's drive and
feistiness mirrors Moore's willingness to throw herself into one unsafe
role after another. The audience may  find themselves waffling between
rooting for character O'Neil and actress Moore. It's always nice to see
Ann Bancroft in a movie. She doesn't work enough to suit me, so I
cherish little cameos like the one she did in Love Potion No. 9. When
G.I. Jane was over, I had found a new actor to follow. Viggo Mortensen
was a name I had often noticed when the credits listed all the
background supporting roles, but this is the first time I got to see him
featured. I am looking forward to the next time.

Title
Review for Fifth Element, The (1997)
Blade Runner gets referred to frequently by people discussing The
Fifth Element. I suppose they are trying to articulate that both movies
give us a vivid image of the future, and this rendering becomes a major
character in the film. But while BR is a gritty exploration of "what is
a man?," Fifth Element just a headlong rush into fun. And just for fun,
replicant alumni Brion James  shows up in 5E as a not-so-bright general.
Actually, nobody comes off looking very clever, so we know early we're
in for a goofy time.
The setup is that EVIL shows up every 5000 years to take another shot
at us, but we are protected by four stones, representing the ancient
elements: earth, air, fire and water. They are actuated by a fifth
element - a "perfect being" that channels their power. They have a small
priesthood here on earth, but the true stewards are an otherworld race
best described as muppets made out of tuba parts. It's now the 23rd
century, and guess who's coming to dinner?
They got Bruce Willis to play the Bruce Willis part: an ex-marine
cabby down on his luck, lamenting to a friend that he hasn't met the
perfect woman. The savior being is cloned into a space babe played by
Milla Jovovich. Hmmm..what are the chances? In short order, she drops
literally into his lap while fleeing police goons. Bruce shakes the heat
and delivers her to the priest (Ian Holm) who knows what to do (but he's
not very good at it). The stones need to be retrieved from an opera diva
on a cruise-spaceship, and there's competition from a villain that wants
EVIL to win. Gary Oldman plays an addled industrialist who thinks that
he can sell more products in the chaos that follows total annihilation
(I DID say addled).
The Government pulls Bruce back in, and some good humor comes off as
all the principals converge on the stones. Bruce runs into a super-emcee
named Ruby Rhod (played by Chris Tucker). It's a fantastic character, an
amalgam of Prince, Dennis Rodman and Joan Rivers, but director Besson
commits the fatal Dom Deluise error. Dom can be a good addition to a
movie, but after two minutes, it's a case of diminishing returns. Ruby
gets to hang out with Bruce for the rest of the film, whining and
distracting the audience (that's the Joan Rivers part). I know Besson
falls in love with his leading ladies, as he did with Milla, but I can
only assume he was sleeping with Tucker as well.
So, anyway, Bruce gets the stones, saves the planet and gets the
girl. Ho-hum. I have yet to remark on the main character, Besson's
version of the future. I have seen this world before, as has anyone
reading Heavy Metal magazine for the last twenty years. The two art
directors are frequent contributors to that graphic novel collection,
and their vision is treated kindly by the special effects. The
three-dimensional gridlock in Gotham is well done, but more fun is
Bruce's apartment/cell. Ripley had a more comfortable cubicle in Aliens,
and Bruce's lesser appointments allow for some good sight gags. One that
tickled me was an homage to the opening scene in Blade Runner. Bruce is
also snacking and chatting with an Asian street vendor, but a pullback
shows that the lunch wagon is hovering outside the window panel in
Bruce's cube! Cute.
Hopefully, the blurbmeisters have not raised your expectations too
high and the non-SF types have not discouraged you. The Fifth Element is
a real eyeful, and a lot of fun. This movie is meant to tickle those
faithful to the SF genre, but it is a bit too far out there to hook many
converts.

Title
Review for Air Force One (1997)
Jim Croce died entirely too young, so he can be forgiven for not
including Harrison Ford in the above lyric. How dumb a terrorist to you
have to be to take on Harrison Ford? Most people don't mind seeing Die
Hard VII, as long as our most stalwart hero plays the lead. The movie
poster lets you know what you're buying, since it's one big close-up of
Ford. And who could make a better president? Harrison might even be able
to pull in enough votes to get the real job, but I doubt that he would
want to "step down," let alone suffer a horrendous pay cut.
Simple enough: perennial wacko villain Gary Oldman hijacks Air Force
One and the prez battles his way out against impossible odds. On the
ground, Glenn Close makes a good vice president, dealing with the
terrorists, the cabinet, the military, and scariest of all - the press.
William Macy didn't get his Oscar for Fargo, but he did get more work.
Here he plays a general involved in much of the onboard action. Poor
Jurgen Prochnow gets underused as a captured Russian general - to be
traded for the president. Special effects? - the (2nd) best reason for
reprising Die Hard is an imaginative array of stunts and CGI aerial
sequences.
The movie has the obligatory innocents - the prez's wife and
daughter and executed hostages from the White House staff. You also have
to swallow that the Russian terrorists can get onboard in the first
place. Here, a Secret Service agent is the inside man, but his
motivation is never explained. Small quibbles, though, since such
underpinning is invariably present in this genre, and this is certainly
one of the better efforts. Die Hard I is still my favorite, though..Gary
Oldman could learn a few things from Alan Rickman about villainy (and
picking varied roles, too).

Title
Review for Mimic (1997)
Mira Sorvino has been busy since she won her Oscar last year, so
it's excusable if she takes a small detour to pick up an easy check in
movie exploiting her name. It looked like she was doing that earlier in
Romy and Michele, but oops, that was a good movie. Well, here's a late
summer not-so-high-budget sci-fi thriller.. this must be the throwaway
movie. Mutant insects, mimicking humans and breeding beneath the city
sounds sorta tired, but to my complete surprise, Mimic is actually a
pretty good flick.
In the opening scenes, Manhattan is devastated by a disease which is
killing large numbers of children. The city's roach population is the
carrier, but they prove too hardy for normal measures. Mira plays Susan,
an geneticist working with Atlanta's Center for Disease Control (CDC).
She has engineered a Judas roach to do the job. It gives off a secretion
that kills the civilian roaches, and it is also engineered to die
without propagating. Remember how well the bio-engineered failsafe
worked in Jurassic Park?
Three years after she's hailed as a hero for saving NY's kids, she
is shown a live specimen that looks familiar. It's her roach, but it's
large, and it's a baby at that. Susan's husband Peter (Jeremy Northam,
forgettable) also works for the CDC, and together they investigate the
subway station where it was found. An MTA cop with an attitude stops
their snooping, but since he's played by Charles Dutton, you know he'll
be an important part of the search. Eventually, several cast members end
up very deep in the underground of Gotham. Ominously, the homeless who
lived down there have moved on..Lots of predictable stuff ensues down
there, as the insects meet the cast members that don't have a percentage
of the gross.
The genre dictates a certain amount of pro forma wandering in the
dark passages, close calls, and a complex master escape plan. Special
effects are okay. Strangely, the producers actually spent some money on
a script. The underlying science isn't too insulting, and there are a
couple nice touches. The tip-off specimen is bought from a couple kids
who think they are hustling Susan, but she is really just humoring them
because she likes their spirit and interest. The requisite threatened
child taps out mimicry of people's gaits. The story takes the time to
develop a relationship with his father, who shines shoes in that subway
station. Later, under siege, Susan reaches into the body of a dead
roach, using `scent glands' to smear roach scent on themselves to buy
time. `If they can mimic us, we can mimic them.' Such echoes are not
profound, but it looks like someone made an effort.
Director Guillermo Del Toro did a fine job of opening up the
underground, by staging many scenes in spacious areas. A few old subway
stations are used, and one has a old train car which serves as a refuge,
and maybe an escape. This means we're spared endless claustrophobic
scenes with no reference point. Nobody dies from stupidity, either. That
right there makes this an uncommon summer thriller. If you don't check
this one out, be sure to remember Guillermo Del Toro's name. We'll be
seeing more from him.

Title
Review for Starship Troopers (1997)
Well, the previews had us SF-types drooling for most of the year, and
it looks as though Paul Verhoven has delivered a reasonable product to
justify our wait. We get plenty of cutting edge special effects, and
unlike Spielberg's "Lost World," this one has a coherent story behind
it. Not a new story, though. Some have labeled this a parody, but I see
a careful reworking of a W.W.II B-movie, retreaded with futuristic
gadgetry and foes. There is some "1984" and some classic wartime
propaganda thrown in, but it is the inherent absurdities of those genres
that inspires any amusement.
Since this is a special effects movie, there's no sense spending the
budget on big names. We follow high school senior Rico (Casper Van
Dien), who is being pursued by Dizzy (Dina Meyer). But Rico is only
interested in Carmen (Denise Richards). Most of the action revolves
around these three, but we also get psychic Carl (Neil Patrick Harris).
And just so you don't think EVERYONE in the future is beautiful, the
gene pool still allows for a rodent-toothed Busey (Jake). Adult mentors
Michael Ironside and Clancy Brown round out a cast that keeps running
into each other, even though they all go their separate directions.
Carmen is one of those "natural pilots we always find in the movies,
and she plans to join the military. In this future society, you are
either a non-voting layabout, or a citizen, who has earned this status
by a hitch in the military. Rico's family is rich enough that he doesn't
need citizenship, but he wants to impress Carmen, so the fool signs up
anyway. Not smart enough for fleet, he ends up in the Mobile Infantry
(laser-cannon fodder). Dizzy joins to be near Rico, and the psychic goes
off to Intelligence, natch.
The military trappings are intentionally evocative of totalitarian
Germans and Soviets. This unified-world army would have been believable
as the army Orwell mentioned in Big Brother's news reports. There are
such news broadcasts here, presented with a CNN/Internet style. They
have the exhortative propaganda feel of 1984, with little of the parody
that Verhoven employed in his Robocop happy-news bits. 
Once the war with the alien "bugs" starts, we are treated to plenty of
complex battle scenes, with hundreds of Arachnids kicking our butt.
Inexplicably, no good tactics are developed to deal with these superior
warriors. Our guys just fire their automatic weapons at 14-foot
arthropods that keep on slashing, even when half of their limbs are shot
off. Also unexplained is what these bugs do for a living as the sole
creatures on a barren planet. The ability of huge "tankers" to spit
fiery plasma is an interesting adaptation for a race that shows no signs
of tool-use. The bugs on the screen may appear three-dimensional, but
they truly have no depth. In contrast, the franchise antagonists in
"Alien" and "Predator" have enough definition that an audience member
could conjure up his own backstory. 
Computer graphic imaging (CGI) was a new toy for stop-action expert
Phil Tippet when he built his dinos for Jurassic Park. Overseeing
Starship's effects, he was able to bring the many images together by
farming out pieces to several different effects houses. This movie does
not give us a quantum leap in technology, but it does signal that
Hollywood has turned the corner on producing CGI. Lesser efforts like
"Spawn" and "Mortal Kombat II" can now be churned out regularly, without
using the resources of a Manhattan Project. This movie does not rate a
position of honor comparable to Robert A Heinlein's source novel, but it
IS pretty cool.

Title
Review for Contact (1997)
Summer science fiction movies are a fairly well defined commodity. We
expect a special effects offering of space ships, lasers, aliens,
explosions, and what the hell, maybe even a script. The spectacle is the
star, so there's little sense spending big money on actors who will only
be upstaged. Most films like Independence Day have such a pedigree, and
it works just fine. ID4's boggling ticket sales testify that people are
willing to suspend disbelief and enjoy the ride, maybe a few times. Carl
Sagan wanted to spin a different type of yarn. Instead of the tail
wagging the dog, how about starting with a real situation and examining
how fantastic events could come about? With the same elegance of his
Cosmos series, Carl has brought the realism of astronomy to the classic
First Contact theme.
Jody Foster plays Ellie Arroway, a driven astronomer in the SETI
project. (That's `Search for Extra-Terrestrial Intelligence' for the
rest of us. )  Scraping for grants and fighting discouragement from
other scientists, Ellie finally hits it big - a strong signal from
space. This is the jumping-off point for many films, such as ID4 and The
Arrival, but this movie sticks with her chimera. The signal is rich with
complexity, and it includes what appear to be blueprints for a transport
device. An invitation? Do we dare build it? Who gets to go? Who funds
it? As in the real world, these questions draw flies from the scientific
establishment, the White House, religious factions, and most certainly
the media. Ellie becomes helpless as these groups wrest away her prize
for their own football game.
Contact has a great cast, and no one is wasted. Perennial good guy Tom
Skerrit plays a rat - a politically powerful scientist whos does
everything to discourage Ellie's snipe hunt. Once the signal comes in,
he tries to shoulder her out, positioning himself as the spokesman and
scientific coordinator with the White House. James Woods plays a vulpine
national security adviser wanting to comandeer the project, fearing an
`invasion.' Angela Basset plays a harried presidential aide, capably
herding all the factions (not a `black' role..congrats, Angela). I
almost didn't recognize John Hurt as a bald-headed Howard Hughes-type
magnate who becomes Ellie's fairy godmother. Matthew McConoughy plays a
love interest, who is also part of the religious faction and the
astronaut selection comittee. Ellie's views are agnostic at best, and
this brings about a conflict not only with him, but with the committee
as well.
As a good scientist, Ellie knows that `no data' forces only one
conclusion. She feels that people have a need to believe, hence they do.
But the movie (gently) makes it clear that her need to believe in ET
intelligence and its benevolence is just another flavor of the same
thing. People nervous about examining the theological implications
should be comfortable with the resolution.
Well, as the coming attractions show you, Ellie does get to go, but
there's no point in  divulging any more. The real trip is her struggle
with people clambering all over her project. A certain sweetness is
added by memories of her departed father (good job by David Morse), who
was so supportive of her early curiosity. I found that these scenes
stayed with me as much as the special effects. And high marks to
director Bob Zemeckis for using the effects to aid in telling the
story,  instead of competing with it. And special praise to Jody Foster
for yet another brilliant performance. All through the film, I was
watching Ellie Arroway, feeling what she felt - I didn't catch myself
seeing Jody Foster acting. Try that in a Tom Cruise movie. When she won
her two Oscars, I agreed with the choice, but I think it took this film
to make me realize that maybe it isn't just the great roles she's
had..she really is one of  the best.

Title
Review for Deep Impact (1998)
El Nińo has screwed up our weather patterns so much that the first
summer movie has arrived in early May. Some of the haste in presenting
Deep Impact is an attempt to put as much distance as possible between
this film and the July release of Armageddon. Both films bring us an
Earth threatened by collision with a Big Rock From Space. A recent news
release caused a buzz about this very thing, but it was quickly refuted.
One account said that the alarmist scientist was linked to one of these
films. Welcome to the information age.
The movie starts with a young MSNBC reporter Jenny Lerner (Tea Leoni),
who thinks she has uncovered a cabinet-level scandal. The "Ellie" that
Jenny suspects of being a homewrecker turns out to be an E.L.E. project
- "Extinction Level Event." In less than a year, a Manhattan-sized comet
will strike the Earth. This gets her on the inside track as the story
develops, and vaults her to an anchor's desk, perhaps before she is
ready. Her newscasts move the story along. And there IS a story.
Although Dreamworks spent good money for special effects, they also
hired real scriptwriters, and many good actors.
Casting Morgan Freeman as president is perfect - he always radiates a
cool intelligence that could get him the real job if he wanted it. His
grave press conferences give the film an emotional depth. Robert Duvall
plays an aged astronaut, added to a space team that will try to
intercept and destroy the comet. The  young crew resents his insertion
into their practiced team, but he proves his worth.  Charles Martin
Smith opens up the film with a good, brief role as the astronomer who
discovers the comet.  Elijah Wood plays the high-schooler who brings it
to his attention, achieving co-discoverer status. The kid's new fame
forms one of the side stories, as it merges with another - the
government lottery to see who will get to hide below the surface and
survive the impending nuclear winter. Another sub-plot gives Vanessa
Redgrave some good scenes as Jenny's mother, and she makes them genuine
enough to transcend their "filler" status.
Tea Leoni may not have been the best choice to play Jenny. She has
demonstrated that she is a brilliant, beautiful comedienne, but this
role uses none of her strengths. Jenny never smiles, never shows any
skin, and always looks tired. Seeing her weary, hollow face so often, I
caught myself wondering if she shouldn't put on a few pounds.
Some scenes in such an epic write themselves: disarrayed traffic; heroic
gestures, successful and futile; heartfelt farewells. It would serve no
purpose to elaborate on the ending, except to say that it clearly shows
a lot of thought and respect for the audience. That respect did not
preclude some fairly blatant product placement, though. While showing
stockpiles of Ensure may save some lines of dialogue, it was done more
than once. And is there any reason our reporter has to work for MSNBC
and not some other, CNN-like, cable news outfit? Other movies substitute
other letters of the alphabet without breaking stride. Small gripes for
a decent effort. Deep Impact makes a reasonable addition to the genre,
and it doesn't make the audience swallow much to buy into it.

Title
Review for Volcano (1997)
Tommy Lee Jones may have noted on his script: VOLCANO - The Paycheck.
While he performs admirably, this is a paint-by-numbers thriller
conceived by innumerates. The volcano starts as lava incursions into the
sewer system, with a talent for entirely withdrawing below after it
strikes. Easy for Bruce the Shark, but a neat trick for molten rock. A
scientist appears so that she go unheeded; in this case, its Ellen's
recently-outted friend, Ann Heche. Self-appointed gay-spotters will have
no trouble seeing her true nature, but the more balanced among us will
see a fair portrayal of a concerned human, with no time to get near
anybody's bed. Actually, Tommy, as the head of disaster control does
believe her, but he can't get any municipal services to heed his pleas.
This sort of drama was explored fully in Quincy, years ago.
So..when the caldera does poke its head up at the La Brea Tar Pits,
it politely sends its lava down Wilshire Blvd. They overturn one bus ON
Wilshire to steer the flow, but I never saw what kept the lava from
hanging a left at any intersection. You no doubt saw the trailer, where
they build a barricade to stop the flow, but where does all the
still-coming lava go to? To harden the lava at the end, fire trucks and
helicopters pour all their water on the leading edge. A totally
preposterous sight - dozens of helicopters flying twenty feet apart -
all dropping water from tanks installed with one hour's notice.
It get stupider. Now the volcano conveniently issues just one more
tendril of lava - thru the subway system. With 30-min notice, engineers
blow up a long, fifty-foot deep channel at the end of the subway, and
divert the flow to this trench by demolishing a new, unopened, $100
million-plus building. This building was shown in the opening scenes,
presented as ominously as those red-uniformed young security officers
beaming down to the planet with Kirk. Well, this sends the remaining
lava into the rain channels, toward the sea. It's Miller time. This
volcano just can't take a punch.
There are a couple incredibly amateurish "Can't we all get along?"
scenes. The lava stream was always linear, and nobody near the lava
seemed to feel the infrared heat that would have overwhelmed them before
the lava got to them. Also one-dimensional were the standard set of
imperiled youngsters, pets that always survive, and noble rescuers. One
stupid example of this involves one of those hard-headed municipal
bosses; this one has to atone for not shutting down the subway. He goes
back in the subway train to rescue the driver, but when he returns to
the back of the train, the lava has creeped several feet beyong the
train. He jumps INTO the lava, tossing the driver (who may already be
finished) clear of the lava. Personally, knowing we both couldn't make
it, I woulda chucked the now-doomed driver into the lava, and leaped
over it, using him as a steppingstone. Call me harsh for this clearer
thinking, but don't say I'm harsh on this film.
P.S. If you never think about anything, or question anything, You'll
love this movie.
