Authors
Jon Conrad
Number of Reviews
2

Title
Review for Player, The (1992)
     What sheer unadulterated joy.  I loved THE PLAYER from start to
finish.  I don't think a movie has plunged me into this kind of bliss
since... well, since NASHVILLE possibly.  (Okay, there have probably
been a few others since 1977 for me.)  Once Robert Altman was one of my
favorite people on earth; he lost me somewhere around QUINTET and A
PERFECT COUPLE, but he sure has won me back now.  He still has It.
     I guess that to enjoy THE PLAYER you have to enjoy "the movies" as
an idea.  Both to enjoy a story that, for all its wider applicability,
is definitely about the Industry as it exists at this moment, and to
enjoy all the in-jokes and self-reference with which the movie is
stuffed.  All of these were so deftly done that I don't think I ever
stopped grinning foolishly.  (Damn, I have to go again soon!)
Definitely don't be late; if you are, you'll miss an amazing 8-minute
tracking shot in which the plot exposition takes place in several
locations simultaneously, without a single editing cut (and we hear
snatches of a conversation about famous long tracking shots that open
favorite movies -- there goes that self-reference again).
     One problem remains unsolved, I guess.  With several dozen big and
medium-sized names appearing "as themselves," it's sometimes hard to
tell whether a fairly well-known actor, turning up later in the movie,
is playing a role or not.  (Whoopi Goldberg, Fred Ward, Sydney Pollack,
Dean Stockwell all evoke this kind of momentary disjuncture.)  But it's
not a huge problem, and Altman again gets extraordinary performances
from all his cast.  Tim Robbins, Greta Schacchi, Peter Gallagher have
never been better on-screen.  How does a director who simply seems to be
sitting back and letting performers do their thing, work this kind of
magic so consistently?  (The first time Carol Burnett really released
her special qualities on film was in A WEDDING.  Think also of Ronee
Blakley and Lily Tomlin in NASHVILLE, Julie Christie and Warren Beatty 
in MCCABE AND MRS. MILLER, and many many more.)
     The story takes unexpected turns and doesn't take turns one would
expect, but all of that turns out in retrospect to be exactly right.
The ending is both offhandedly perverse and exactly, hilariously right.
I saw M*A*S*H in theaters maybe 15 times, NASHVILLE perhaps 20.  I
wonder what kind of total I'll rack up for this newest addition to the
Altman canon.  It'll be fun finding out!

Title
Review for Noises Off... (1992)
     Since there was considerable interest in this topic when we first
heard that Michael Frayn's play "Noises Off" was going to be filmed, and
the cast was posted several times, I thought readers might be interested
in talking about the movie too, from a different perspective than might
normally be found in rec.arts.movies.  Anyway, I saw it Friday night.
     "Noises Off" was one of the funniest plays in a long time; and the
good news is that the movie has retained all the laughs.  Though a
screenwriter is credited, 99% of the movie is simply the play, virtually
unaltered.  This was a wise, if "uncinematic," decision on everyone's
part.  It means that most movie reviewers will not approve, not finding
it enough of a "film experience."  Indeed, it isn't a film experience
particularly.  But it's a faithful preservation of a riotously funny
play, and I encourage anyone who liked it to go see the movie.
     The alterations are of two main kinds.  Since some of us know the
play well, or have acted in it, I offer some detail:
     1.  The story is presented as a flashback by the director, on the
final opening night.  I understand the need for some such frame, to set
the scene and take the place of the "fake theater program" we get to see
in a live theater that tells us what's going on.  However, the bits of
narration and explanation are written on the corniest, most banal level
you can imagine.  Dash something off in five minutes, and you'll
probably do about as well as the screenwriter did.  Too bad, but
remember that all this takes up less than five minutes, total, of the
movie.
     2.  The locale and most of the characters have been Americanized.
*not* the play-within-the-play "Nothing On," which is still a British
sex farce.  But everybody except the director (played by Michael Caine),
the old drunk who plays the burglar (Denholm Elliott), and I *think* the
dumb blonde who plays Vicki (Nicolette Sheridan, herself American but
she has so few lines as herself I can't be sure she was playing
English...reference is still made to her acting in London) are American
actors assuming English accents when acting in this play.  This produces
some funny moments when they slip out of character -- Carol Burnett
especially can be hilarious going from stage-Cockney to her own matter-
of-fact tones.  In general, the most obvious Britishisms have been
edited out of their "offstage" talk:  instead of "Old Age Pensioners"
they say "senior citizens," instead of "pub" it's "bar," and so on.
This is reasonable granted the original decision, and at times I think
they might have gone further: everybody addressing everyone else as
"love" all the time sounds a bit false.
     Other than these choices, nearly every line of the play is intact.
There is some evidence of making a few things more obvious for a mass
movie audience, like Lloyd being off directing "Hamlet" (presumably
better known to moviegoers than "Richard III").  That sort of thing.
This seems to be a *very* low-rent pre-Broadway bus-and-truck tour.  I
mean, their startup city is Des Moines!  (Has any tour ever started
there?!?)  The matinee that we see from backstage is in Miami Beach
(that fits well enough), and the crowning debacle is in Cleveland.  The
narrative frame gives us fleeting glimpses of the actual end of the play
"Nothing On," unhinted at in Frayn's play.  I didn't mind this; it
wasn't enough to spoil the premise, and the ridiculousness of it was
fairly amusing.
     What I *did* mind, very much, were the reaction shots gratuitously
cut into the action, as if we dumb moviegoers wouldn't know what was
funny without someone to cue us:  In Act I, Lloyd smiles at some funny
bits (most improbably, as he's not feeling at all happy); in Act II it's
an incredulous security guard, and in Act III the theater audience.  If
I could get my hand on the print, I'd snip these right out and improve
the film greatly!
     Peter Bogdanovich has chosen to film the onstage action with a
minimum of cutting away, to allow the actors to build up a stage rhythm
in long "takes."  This means a lot of panning and swooping camera
motion, which I found well handled -- maybe it will seem excessive to
others.  The cast, given the American premise, does well.  Caine is
perfectly cast if slightly older than ideal, Denholm Elliott is who many
of us thought of immediately for Selsdon in any case, Burnett has the
right gallant-aging-trouper quality for Dotty, and John Ritter still
does the best befuddled pratfalls in the business.  Julie Hagerty and
Mark Linn-Baker make the most of the harried stage managers, Sheridan
embodies Vicki as well as one could ask, and Christopher Reeve, if not a
natural for the dimbulb Freddy, makes the character work anyway.  (By
the way, his character's and Lloyd's last names have been swapped
relative to the stage script; I have no idea why.)  Marilu Henner seems
wrong for the eternally sunny and friendly Belinda (what happened to
Annie Potts, originally announced for the role?); she exudes sex-bomb
instead.  She doesn't mess things up much though.  And if most of these
have fairly awful stage-British accents, that can be taken as part of
the fun.
     It's not a great movie, I guess; it certainly doesn't "use the
resources of the film medium" or any of the things film students are
supposed to look for.  But it allows me to enjoy again what I enjoyed
onstage, so I have to say I liked it a lot; so did the (mostly young)
audience I saw it with, and I intend to go again.
     And that's why I suspect that this movie will be one to divide the
theater lovers from the cinemaphiles.  The latter will protest, quite
correctly, that NOISES OFF doesn't use the film medium much at all --
it's really a filmed version of a play (and a play whose effect comes to
a large extent from taking place on a stage, and nowhere else).  The
former will like it because it's not very different from seeing the
play, and they want to see it again.
     I'll be interested to see other reactions.  I feel a bit bold
sticking my neck out for something that most film scholars (including
critics with any intellectual pretensions) will hate.  But I had a great
time at it, and I bet lots of other people will too.
