Authors
Rob Strong
Number of Reviews
5

Title
Review for Lost in Space (1998)
A review by Robert Strong (Remove "NOSPAM" from my
e-mail address to reply by e-mail.)
Starring:  William Hurt, Mimi Rogers, Gary Oldman, Matt 
LeBlanc, Lacey Chabert, Heather Graham, and Jack Johnson
LOST IN SPACE is undeniably entertaining and shows promise
early on.  Unfortunately, it never really delivers on that
promise.  I went into the theater highly anticipating the
film and wanting to like it, but I came out feeling
somehow unfulfilled.
The plot?  Well, there's not much of one.  Earth is
dying at an alarming rate, so much so that in twenty
years, it will be incapable of supporting life.  Enter
ace scientist John Robinson (William Hurt).  He is the
head of the team sent to colonize Alpha Prime, the only
other habitable planet that humans have found.  Dr. 
Robinson has pioneered a new type of technology called
hyperspace that enables instant transportation from
one place to another, provided you have a large device
called a Hypergate.  Without a Hypergate, you could end
up anywhere.  Robinson's expedition is supposed to
build a Hypergate at Alpha Prime, and when it and the one
at Earth are completed, people will be able to instantly
escape Earth.  Unfortunately, Dr. Zachary Smith (Gary
Oldman) sabotages the mission and the whole Robinson
family, ends up lost in space.  How did the whole
brood end up in space?   Apparently, Dr. Robinson's
only condition for accepting the mission was that he
was permitted to bring his family along.  Which really
doesn't make much sense, since he had been severely
neglecting them while working on his hyperspace technology.
Several questions beg answering.  One:  Dr. Robinson
said that he would oversee the construction of a Hypergate
at Alpha Prime.  With who?  Just his family, a robot, and
the pilot of the ship to take them to Alpha Prime, Major Don 
West (Matt LeBlanc)?  Two:  The people who hired Smith to 
sabotage the mission, why are thdey doing this?  If you 
only have one shot to live, I'd take it whether I like the 
people or not.  The movie mentions that this terrorist 
organization is building its own Hypergate.  So, where did
they get the technology to build said Hypergate?  Three:
At one point, Smith is betrayed by the terrorist faction.
They electrocute him with a device he they had supplied
to him.  Then, later, he comes to with just a bad burn
on his hand.  How?  He was getting some serious juice
sent through him.  I could go on.  Then there is when our
fearless heros get lost.  They are caught in the sun's
gravitational field and they only way to escape is to
activate the hyperdrive--which I can see--but this 
somehow enables them to go _through_ the sun.  How, 
I dunno, but they do.
There were also problems with the acting.  For one thing,
none of the actors really convinced me that they were
about to be sucked into the sun and incinerated.  Another
thing was that Mimi Rogers delivered many of her lines 
poorly.  She never seemed really scared when her family
members were about to be devoured by intergalactic spiders.
Speaking of the spiders, it was a case of too little too late.
The spiders themselves were done well, but after STARSHIP
TROOPERS these bugs just don't seem that scary.  Plus,
there was the case of the alien monkey, Blarp.  For one
thing, how excatly did he get on the ship where he was
discovered?  And, really, did he serve a function beyond
marketibity?  
Still, the actors can't take all the blame.  When you
have bad dialogue, nobody can save it all.  Still,
I shouldn't be too shocked since the writer/producer
Akiva Goldsman also penned the wonderful dialogue of
1997's BATMAN AND ROBIN.  There are several 
confusing elements, such as the whole time travel
business.  In addition, the movie tries to introduce
some things that it just doesn't have time to deal
with.  A case in point:  apparantly John Robinson's
father was a military hero and...that's it.  The
movie tries to go somewhere with it, but eventually
gives up.
Well, I think that I've ramble on long enough about
the negative aspects of this film.  Let's get to the
positive.  The special effects are well done.  Very
well done, in fact.  I believe that the exact tally
was somewhere around 750 CGI's, a new record.  Some
actors do in fact manage good preformances, most 
notably Hurt and Oldman.  Chabert shows promise, but
her character is relegated to background scenery 
eventually.  Director Stephen Hopkins (1996's THE GHOST 
AND THE DARKNESS) keeps the movie moving along well, and
handles the special effects quite nicely.  There are
also some good action sequences.  Be sure to stay for
the end credits sequence, but not if your the type who
has seizures from strobing lights and like.  The banter 
between Heather Graham and Matt LeBlanc is amusing at first,
but grow tiresome.  Plus, you have to wait almost
the entire film to hear "Danger, Will Robinson!"
All in all, LOST IN SPACE requires severe suspenion of
disbelief to be enjoyed at all, but belief can 
only be suspended so far.

Title
Review for Odd Couple II, The (1998)
Starring:  Jack Lemmon, Walter Matthau, Christine Baranksi,
Barnard Hughes, Jonathan Silverman, Jean Smart, Lisa Waltz,
Mary Beth Piel, Jay O. Sanders, and Richard Riehle.
Jack Lemmon and Walter Matthau are at it again.  Their
grumpy old men shtick, which was at its best in the
film GRUMPY OLD MEN, gets another go round, this time
with writer Neil Simon in THE ODD COUPLE 2.  It's the
sequel to THE ODD COUPLE, which started the whole 
grumpy old men thing.
Seventeen years after Oscar Madison (Matthau) has moved
to Sarasota, Florida, nothing has changed.  He's still
a unreformable slob of a sports writer who plays poker
for stakes of 30 cents with a group of old women.  At
one of these games, he gets a phone call from his son,
Brucey. (Jonathan Silverman)  Brucey has great news:
he's getting married.  Then he tells his dad to whom:
Hannah Ungar, daughter of Oscar's old roommate, 
ultra neat freak Felix Ungar. (Lemmon)  Time hasn't
changed Felix either.  He's still, in Oscar's words,
"a human vacuum cleaner."  The two reunite at the 
airport out in California to go their childrens'
wedding which is in "San something"--they can't
remember the last part.  From there, the rest of the
film is basically a road buddy movie, that depicts
the various misadventures the pair gets themselves 
into.
A great plot?  No.  Are there plot holes?  Yes.
Do some jokes fall flat?  Yes.  But is it funny the 
great majority of the time?  Undoubtedly.  Neil Simon 
shows he still has the touch, not as powerful as it once
was, perhaps, but it's still there.  Lemmon and 
Matthau display their always great chemistry as 
the churn out Simon's frequently funny one-liners
at one another.   The situations themselves are 
amusing.  The dance with two biker chicks and the
next morning they get taken hostage by the womens'
angry boyfriends.  They get dusted by pesticides,
arrested for hauling illegal immigrants, their
car rolls down a hill and explodes, and the list
goes on.  
The movie's funniest moment comes when they hitch
a ride with an old geezer in his antique car.
They drive very slowly.  So slowly, in fact, that
they are soon being passed by everything imaginable.
It's hilarious to watch as the car gets passed by things
whose speeds get progressively slower.  Then the
old man dies, leading to yet another great scene where
his toupee blows off and Oscar has to retrieve it.
Many people have raised the cry of "enough is enough" with
regards to Lemmon and Matthau.  I say, if it's done well,
bring it on!  And this film is done well.
THE ODD COUPLE 2 is a light, funny, inoffensive comedy
with great stars and a great writer.  It certainly won't
win any awards or go down in history as one of the 
great comedies of all time, but it is still a good, fun
way to spend an afternoon or evening.

Title
Review for Saving Private Ryan (1998)
Starring:  Tom Hanks, Tom Sizemore, Edward Burns, Matt Damon,
Vin Diesel, Barry Pepper, Adam Goldberg, Jeremy Davies, Giovanni
Ribisi, Ted Danson, Harve Presnell, Paul Giamatti
        Director Steven Spielberg is one of the most successful men in
Hollywood.  His name is one of the most recognizable and his films are
some of the best known in history.  Jurassic Park, E.T., Raiders of
the Lost Ark, Jaws: all were done by him.  However, while most of
Spielbergs films are for mass entertainment, he also has shown the
ablility to make dramatic, moving films that are extremely powerful.
The two that spring immediately to mind are 1993s Schindlers List,
a story of the Holocaust, and 1997s Amistad, a tale of the horrors
of slavery.  Now, to this list we must add his latest effort, the
World War II epic, Saving Private Ryan.
        I hesitate to use the word masterpiece when describing a
film, because there are few movies that have been made that can
deservedly wear the title.  Saving Private Ryan is most definitely one
of those.  The film combines outstanding performances, excellent
direction, smart dialogue, and wonderful photography, locations, and
costumes and gives you an unforgettable two hours and forty-five
minutes.  When you emerge from the theater, you will be changed.  This
film hits you in the head, heart, and gut.  Weeks after you see it,
you will still be able to vividly recall scenes from the movie.
        The opening shot of this film is an American flag, fluttering
softly in the breeze.  Then we learn where the flag is.  It is flying
over the cemetery above Omaha Beach in Normandy, France.  For those of
you who are woefully uneducated, Omaha Beach was the scene of terrible
carnage on June 6, 1944 when Allied soldiers invaded in an attempt to
get through Hitlers Atlantic Wall.  We see an old man walking
through the cemetery.  Then, when he locates the grave hes looking
for, he falls to his knees and begins weeping.  From this point until
the end, when the last five minutes comes back to the present day in
the cemetery and we learn the old mans identity, the story takes
place during World War II.
        The next shots are of the beach and its foreboding defenses,
just minutes before landing.  Next, landing craft are seen, filled
with soldiers, speeding through the rough waters toward the beach.
Men become seasick and throw up.  Then, a pair of shaking hands are
seen as they screw the lid off a canteen.  The owner of the hands
takes a drink, and thus is introduced Captain John Miller, superbly
played by Tom Hanks, who should win another Best Actor Oscar. (This
film also deserves consideration for Best Picture, Best Director, Best
Supporting Actor, Best Orginal Dramatic Score, Best Costumes, and Best
Original Screenplay) Miller is the most intriguing character in the
movie.  As captain, he must put forth utmost confidence and never
waver or falter.  But, there are signs that he is slowly losing
control.  His hands shake uncontrolably at random, his eyes are those
of a person who has seen too much, and in one scene, he looks around
to make sure no one is watching and breaks down crying.  Also, there
is a very nice technique used by Spielberg, where all sound is reduced
to a dull roar and men seem to move in slow motion as Miller looks
bewilderedly around.  Clearly, the war is getting to him.
        He and his right hand man and best friend, Sergeant Michael
Horvath (Tom Sizemore), issue last minute instructions to the troops.
Then, as the saying goes, all hell breaks loose.  The ramps on the
landing craft go down and the men stumble forward into a barrage of
German machine gun fire.  The first five rows of men in the boats are
killed before they can get more than a step or two.  Soldiers dive
over the side of the boat, but their luck is no better.  Weighed down
by sixty pounds of equipment, many drown or are shot underwater.
Spielberg uses point of view shots in this scene to great effect.  He
lets you see from the German machine gunners point of view to let you
know that they could see exactly who they were shooting at.  The
Americans, by contrast, could only see concrete bunkers and sandbag
piles.  Spielberg also lets us see the American point of view.  These
shots are nothing less than brilliant.  The camera is used to make it
feel like you are a soldier scrambling up the beach.  It dips in the
water and rises out, shakes and whirls to give the effect of a man
stumbling and looking about.  This scene, which is thiry minutes of
pure carnage, has been called the most realistic battle scene ever
filmed.  While I cant say this if thats true, having never been in
combat myself, I can say this: Id be greatly shocked if it wasnt.
This isnt the battle scenes of the old John Wayne war movies.
Spielberg pulls no punches in his depiction of combat in this, or any
other battle scene.  Men are blown in half, blown into bits, arms are
shot off, legs are blown away, people burn alive, men are disemboweled
and decapitated.  They lie on the beach and scream and cry, and beg
for their mothers.  The incoming tide is turned deep red with blood.
It must be noted that this isnt horror movie gore.  Spielberg is
never exploitive in his depiction; he is simply honest.  Adjectives
flow from my mind in an attempt to describe this scene, and indeed the
rest of the movie.  Brutal, savage, visceral, raw, powerful,
unforgettable, amazing, and dramatic all come to mind.  Finally, after
what seems an eternity, Miller and the other men clear the beach and
gain a foothold.  The scene ends as it began, with Miller taking a
drink from his canteen. Quite a view, Sgt.  Horvath remarks.
Yes, it is, replies Miller as he looks down at the beach with
bodies strewn everywhere.
        We are then taken to a Washington office where a legion of
secretaries work at typing up the telegrams that will be used to
notify the families of the men killed in action.  Something is soon
discovered.  Three men, Pvts. Sean, Peter, and Daniel Ryan were all
killed in action within a week of each other.  That doesnt mean much
until you realize that the men are brothers.  To add to that, their
mother will be receving all three telegrams on the same day.  Also,
there is a fourth brother, Private James Ryan.  He was part of the
paratrooper force that parachuted in behind German lines the night
before D-Day.  His status and location are unknown.  He could be
alive, he could be dead.  All of this news quickly goes up through the
ranks, until it reaches the ears of Chief of Staff George C. Marshall.
General Marshall (Harve Presnell), has a letter written from Abraham
Lincoln to a Mrs. Bixby in Boston.  Mrs. Bixby lost all five of her
sons in the service of the Union Army in the Civil War.  When Marshall
hears the news, there is no question in his mind as to what must be
done.  He orders a squad of men to go into enemy territory and track
down Pvt. Ryan and bring him back home. Some of his advisors argue
against this, saying that James is most likely dead, and anyone sent
into enemy territory to find him, will probably die too.  Marshall,
remains adamant however.  We gain a sense that he has a noble,
detached view of war.  The viewers, having just witnessed the hellish
inferno that is war, know better.  Incidentally, the scene where
Mrs. Ryan receives the notification of her sons death is staged
without a bit of dialogue, but still works brilliantly.  We see her
watch with trepidation as the Army car pulls up her driveway, and
then, when a chaplin and an officer get out, she collapes in front of
them on her porch.
        Back to Normandy.  Miller reports to his superior officer
about a recent assignment he was given.  We see him gaze enviously at
the hot water for shaving, real food, and hot coffee the men behind
the lines have.  After taking his report, the superior officer hands
Miller another assignment.  It is, of course, to go save Private Ryan.
In addition to Miller and Sergeant Horvath, the squad also consists of
a cynical New Yorker, Pvt. Reiben (Edward Burns), the Jewish Private
Mellish (Adam Goldberg), the Italian Pvt. Caparzo (Vin Diesel), the
Bible quoting Southern sniper, Pvt. Jackson (Barry Pepper), and the
medic, Wade (Giovanni Ribisi).  Also along is an interpreter, who is
the second most intriguing character in the film, Corporal Upham,
wonderfully portrayed by Jeremy Davies.  Upham has never seen combat,
in fact, he hasnt even held a rifle since basic t raining.  He is
along because he speaks fluent French and German.  He is a awkward
man, somewhat nerdy, who is kept out of combat.  All of these
supporting cast members are fleshed out to some degree at least.
Spielberg deserves a lot of credit for this.  Never does he allow his
characters to become the cardboard cutout squad members of the old
fashioned war movies.  Each in given at least one character
development moment.  Some of these are dramatic, such as when Mellish
takes a Hilter Youth knife from a dead Nazi and weeps over it, or when
Wade mournfully reminisces about his mother.  Others are comedic, such
as Reibens recounting of an experience while working in his
mothers dress shop. That is a particular strentgh of Robert Rodats
script.  The battle scenes are so overwhelming and devastating, they
could make the entire movie too much to watch.  Rodat sprinkles in
touches of humor to lighten up the mood, to keep it from becoming too
dark.  Something else Spielberg should be commended for, is that he
resists the temptation to bludgeon you with Dramatic Moments--he lets
scenes speak for themselves.
        The men trek across the French countryside while debating how
little sense the mission makes.  It risks the eight of them, just to
save one man.  Particularly oustpoken against the mission is Private
Reiben.  When Jackson remarks about Ryans mother, Reiben replies,
Hey, I got a mother.  I mean, you got a mother, Sarge has a mother.
Shoot, I bet even the Captain has a mother--okay, maybe not the
captain, but the rest of us got mothers. This comment is
significant.  We learn that Miller is a highly secretive man, who
doesnt tell anyone what he did or where he lived before the war.  In
fact, the men have a pool going on it.  The first to find out wins 300
dollars.
        Millers men journey from one dangerous situation to another
in their quest.  They travel from a devastated village, to a field
hospital, to a German radar installation, and finally to a climactic
defense of a strategic bridge.  The unit slowly begins to be killed
off.  Each surviving man becomes more and more resentful of Ryan as
their friends die.  Theyre fighting and dying to save a man they
know nothing at all about.  At one point, Miller remarks, This Ryan
better be worth it.  He better go home and cure some disease or invent
a longer lasting lightbulb. By the time Ryan is found, two hours
into the movie, he has become a symbol to the men.  As Rosebud was a
symbol of innocence lost in Citizen Kane, Private Ryan is a symbol to
the men of how little sense anything seems to make anymore, a symbol
of the futility of war.
        When Private Ryan (Matt Damon) is found, he is not eager 
to go home.  Not at all.  In fact, he refuses to.  It doesnt make 
any sense.....why do I deserve to go? he wonders out loud.  Damon 
does an effective job of conveying the confusion and bewilderment 
of a man who doesnt understand why he is so special; why men have
fought and died just to rescue him.
        When it comes down to it, Saving Private Ryan is simply awe
inspiring.  Its the little touches that make it all come together, 
though.  John Williams outstanding score, which underscores without 
intruding, to Janusz Kaminskis wonderful, drained out cinematography 
that gives it a newsreel like quality, to Corporal Uphams terrified
bewilderment at the conflict all around him, and Reibens wordless 
glance at Ryan in which he forgives all.  There are scenes that 
uplift, and scenes that tear your heart out. 
        The best scene in the movie, I think, is when Miller elects 
to let a captured Nazi go, rather than execute him.   Near mutiny 
breaks out, but Miller is able to diffuse the situation in the most 
surprising way possible.  During his speech, which is the best in the
film, he remarks I dont know anything about Ryan.  But if finding 
him earns me the right to go home to my wife--then thats my
 mission.......just know that every man I kill, the farther away 
from home I feel.  Later in the movie,  Sergeant Horvath 
says, Maybe someday well look back and realize that saving 
Private Ryan was the one decent thing we were able to pull out 
of this whole godawful mess.  Those are two of the key lines in the
film.  When you walk out of the theater, the realization hits you 
that it wasnt just Private Ryan that Captain Miller and his men 
were fighting to save.  They were also fighting to save
themselves.

Title
Review for Titanic (1997)
Starring:  Leonardo DiCaprio, Kate Winslet, Gloria Stuart,
Kathy Bates, Billy Zane, Frances Fisher, Bill Paxton, Suzy Amis, 
Danny Nucci, Victor Garber, and David Warner
Once every so often a film is made that transcends all bounds,
breaks all records, shatters all conventions, and then makes
new ones.  The last movie to do so was STAR WARS.  Twenty
years later, one has been made again.  It is TITANIC.
Clocking in at 194 minutes, you would never know it from
the way it is paced and presented.  The film is absolutely
astounding.
A brief plot summary will follow.  Brief, because if you
don't know it by now, you've been living in a cave on 
Mars with your eyes shut and your fingers in your ears.
A penniless artist (Leonardo DiCaprio) falls in love 
with a high-born rich girl (Kate Winslet).  She is
unhappily engaged to a snob (Billy Zane) and has a
shrewish mother (Frances Fisher).  They are all passengers
on the famously huge, but ill-fated, ocean liner Titanic.
The film also has modern day pieces, of Rose, now
100 years of age (Gloria Stuart), telling her story to a 
sleazy treasure hunter (Bill Paxton) who is looking on
Titanic for a fabulously expensive jewel that Rose once wore 
on the ship.  Clear?  Great.
The performances are all uniformly excellent.  The 
characters are real and vibrant.  You know them and 
feel sadness and joy as they do.  Of particular note
are DiCaprio, Winslet, Stuart, and Bates.  Director James
Cameron really has created a triumph.  All the pieces
fall into place beautifully.  He has wisely kept the
ship and all the effects that go with it in the background,
rather then make them the main characters.  Still,
they work, and work well.  Plus, Cameron injects some 
moments of humor to keep the movie from becoming flat
out depressing.
But, what I liked best about TITANIC were the little 
touches.  The exquisite attention to detail.  The
shot of the ship's designer, Andrews (Victor Garber), 
as he winds the clock as his creation falls apart around 
him.  The priest giving absolution as the ship turns 
upright and people fall away all around him.  The
mother putting her children to bed and the old couple
together as water pours in around him.  Benjamin
Guggenheim, one of the richest men on earth, putting
on his finest clothes and asking for a brandy as
he and his manservant prepare "to go down like men."
And, of course, James Horner's hauntingly beautiful
score.  The shots of the Titanic as it sinks, in the middle
of the big, black ocean, even it dwarfed by the water 
around it.  All of these are extremely powerful images
that only add to an already wonderful movie.
I can't end this review without commenting on the last
scene, which is my absolute favorite.  It is so haunting
and beautiful that it will stick with you long after you
have seen it.  If you are unclear as to when I consider
the end scene to begin, it is when the camera begins to
show all of Old Rose's pictures.  
Now, I will list the film's flaws.  Several moments of 
bad dialogue and some effects that you can tell are 
effects.  Some people have criticized the plot as being
formulaic, but as Roger Ebert said, "...you don't use
the most expensive movie in history as your opportunity
to reinvent the wheel."
But, then again, CITIZEN KANE had flaws too.

Title
Review for Urban Legend (1998)
Starring:  Alicia Witt, Rebecca Gayheart, Jared Leto, Joshua
Jackson, Tara Reid, John Neville, Robert Englund, Julian 
Richings, Natasha Wagner
The only thing worse than watching a bad movie is realizing that
the film had a lot of potential and could've been effective.
Such is the case with _Urban Legend_, the new horror film from
first time director Jamie Blanks.  The idea behind the movie is
that the mad slasher of the film muders people according to various
urban legends.  Examples include the killer in the backseat of the
car and person getting calls from inside her house.  The killer wears 
one of those L.L. Bean parkas with the hood drawn completely up, so
you can't see the face.  I guess Halloween masks are out of style
for psychos these days.  Anyhow, the premise is certainly a nifty
one and the opening scene is spooky and atmospheric.  It's a very
good setup that promises more chills to come.  Unfortunately, the
film never takes off from there.
The movie takes place on a peaceful New England college campus.
Like most slasher flicks, this one also centers around a young
female main character whose friends are slowly killed off by a 
knife wielding maniac (or in this case an axe wielding maniac).
I've always wondered why these killers don't save themselves a lot
of time and trouble and just go after the person they ultimately
aim to kill.
After the fine first scene, the movie degenerates into a monotonous
series of those annoying you-thought-it-was-the-killer-but-was-just-
someone-else scares.  These are always accompanied by loud bursts of
music.  I guess sudden, sharp music chords are what passes for terror
these days.  The actual killer will attack at about every third 
music blast.  The slasher appears, attacks, the victim is eviscerated,
and the tedious cycle appears anew.  False scares should always be used
in moderation.  Someone needs to tell director Blanks that things like
this just aren't as scary as they used to be.  This movie commits the
biggest sin a horror film can commit--it's not frightening.
Remember the horror movie cliches that were so mercilessly mocked in 
_Scream_ and _Scream 2_?  This movie still adheres to them.  Tons
of illogical moments about; more than I really have the inclination
to list.  And I don't mean illogical in the summer popcorn movie
sense.  That type of illogical can be fun.  This film insults your
intelligence more times than I care to remember.  The last 20 minutes
especially degenerates into such lunacy that you'll be laughing more
than you'll be screaming.  Actually, you won't be screaming at all.
At its best, the acting can barely be called "adequate" and the script
could've definitely used a rewrite or two.
The film still manages to have some strong points.  The killings are
certainly inventive and plentiful enough to satistfy most gore fans.
There are some intentionally funny moments.  (These were exceeded by
the unintentional ones.)  The film is well made from a technical
standpoint.  Besides the first part, there is also another good scene,
a prolonged cat and mouse chase inside a radio station.  If there had
only been more sequences like this, that relied on tautness and 
suspense rather than loud bursts of music, _Urban Legend_ might've
been worth your money.
