Authors
Shakil Waiz Ahmed
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for City of Joy (1992)
     One person has said, "Disappointed to see number of notes from
fellow desis praising CITY OF JOY as an accurate depiction of life in
Calcutta, must see, moving, etc.  While we are always grateful for any
such movie since we browns make it on screen in west so infrequently,
not all of it is so uplifting.  CITY OF JOY strikes me as the worst of
its kind of orientalist, exoticising pap."
     I just saw the movie and I am inclined to agree.  To begin with,
there is the standard stereotype of a white American hero going to show
the helpless Indians what they need to do.  There is an underlying theme
about the movie that bothered me.  It gives off the image that wealthy
Indians are leeches by default who take advantage of the poor masses.
The poor, of course, are good at heart, but are waiting for the big
American hero to go and lead them to rebel against the evil wealthy
Indians to bring the poor out of their misery.
     Om Puri has to marry off his daughter and has been saving for years
for her dowry.  When a young man from a well-to-do family develops a
liking for her, Om Puri approaches the father of the man on the question
of marriage of their children.  The father objects because Om Puri is a
rickshaw-wallah, not on the grounds that this breaks social norms, but
because the dowry is not high enough.  Indeed, when Om Puri puts up the
missing half ounce of gold for the required dowry, all problems
disappear, and the marriage is approved.  While the scene does highlight
the problems associated with dowries, it gives off a completely
distorted picture of real-life scenarios.
     There are numerous such scenes in the movie.  Patrick Swayzwe
arrives in Calcutta to seek "enlightenment," but he has no plans -- he
just *arrives* as if that is all he thought was necessary.  Why a young
American doctor would randomly pick Calcutta when he so obviously shuns
the very environment in early scenes, is never quite explained.  How he
expected to find "enlightenment" and what he planned to do to seek it,
is conveniently also omitted.  Instead, we find him check into an
un-air-conditioned hotel and complain that there is no mini-bar.  If a
mini-bar is what he was looking for, one wonders why he did not check
into any one of the many high class hotels that Calcutta does have to
offer?  Would he check into an el-cheapo hotel in the US and expect to
find the same?  Could an educated American doctor possibly be so naive
as to ask a roadside snack-seller in Calcutta for a "hamburger?"  Now
while I'm sure that many would argue that this pokes fun at the
stereotypical ignorant American, I would argue that it is equally
damaging to the image of Calcutta.  For most of us on this newsgroup,
the former may be the interpretation.  But what does the average
American with only very limited exposure to India see?
     There are some beautiful and touching scenes in the movie.  But the
underlying traditional theme of white hero going to save the helpless
brown masses fight against the evil rich brown bloodsuckers is an
orientalist theme that is getting old.  It disturbed me and the friends
I went to see it with.
