Authors
Randy Turgeon
Number of Reviews
11

Title
Review for Contact (1997)
Summary 
        Eight year old Ellie Arroway (Jena Malone) and her father, Ted (David
Morse), are very close. Her mother died while giving berth to her and her
father never remarried, bringing up Ellie on his own. She is a very
intelligent girl and her hobbies include such things as short wave radio
and telescopes, hobbies she shares closely with her dad. Tragedy strikes
her life when her dad dies that year.
        Flash forward to present time where Ellie (Jodie Foster) has pursued a
scientific career, becoming an astronomer. She listens intently to sounds
emitted by the universe, hoping to make contact with other intelligent
life.  She has a bumpy road ahead as her boss, Dr. Drumlin (Tom Skerritt)
informs her that her department is getting shut down. She refuses to give
up, and successfully interviews for an investor to back her project on her
own.
        Ellie's dreams come true when she eventually hears what she believes is an
intelligent signal from outer space. It is indeed confirmed to be so, and
the signal is decoded to reveal a shocking image. It is video footage of
Hitler giving his speech before the 1936 Olympics. That is not all. It also
appears that the signal contains thousands of pages of text, which turn out
to be blueprints for a machine. What exactly the machine will do is a
mystery, although it appears like it will act as a transport.
        Ellie finds that her troubles have only begun. She now has to deal with
many problems, including 
a brash, unfriendly military advisor (James Woods), her former boss who
returns to stake his claim, her lover (Matthew McConaughey) who questions
her non-religious motives, the overall media frenzy that the machine
causes, and bizarre dealings with the mysterious S.R. Hadden (John Hurt),
the owner of the company backing her project. 
All is not lost for Ellie, as she is eventually chosen to be the sole
person who will "pilot" the machine for its incredible journey into the
unknown, a journey into history.
Commentary
        I read many reviews for this film when it came out last summer and found
that people either loved it or hated it. There was no in between. I can
honestly say I fall in the "in between" category. 
        I liked some of the plot threads, such as the accurate depiction of the
media frenzy and radical religious groups. There are some good
performances, most notably William Fichtner who, I thought, had been
typecast to play psychotic killers, John Hurt as the eccentric millionaire,
and Angela Bassett as the White House Aide. Jodie Foster does her usual
fine job also.
        What I did not care for was the relationship between Foster and
McConaughey. They did not have much chemistry together, and I felt their
relationship was predictable. I could accurately guess every time the
McConaughey character was due to pop up in Ellie's life again, and I knew I
should have bet the farm on whether or not he would betray her at some
critical point during her quest. If anything, I felt Ellie had more
chemistry with John Hurt (of all people), considering both of them were
outcasts and a bit eccentric.
        There has been much talk about the ending to Contact, and this is where
most critics are divided. I felt that the ending was a major letdown.
Without giving away too much, lets just say that I felt that there could
have a been a lot more done with Ellie's destination and who she sees when
she gets there. The special effects are nothing special either.
        I have seen some good films with sub-par endings before ("Swimming With
Sharks" and the alternate ending to "Clerks" come to mind), and some of
them can be forgiven because the overall effect of the movie escapes
unscathed. But because the entire point of Contact relies on its ending,
and that ending is so poorly done, I cannot recommend the film.
Directed by Robert Zemeckis.
Ellie Arroway...................Jodie Foster
Ted Arroway.....................David Morse
Michael Kitz.....................James Woods
Kent Clark.......................William Fichtner
David Drumlin..................Tom Skerritt
Palmer Joss.......................Matthew McConaughey
Rachael Constantine............Angela Bassett

Title
Review for Last Supper, The (1995)
Summary 
    Five liberal Iowa Graduate students share a house and carry on a tradition
of a large Sunday dinner. For a year now they have been inviting a guest for
dinner and discussion. On this occasion one of the roommates, Pete (Ron
Eldard),
brings home a stranger who picked him up when his car broke down. The stranger
is Zack (Bill Paxton) who appears like a decent enough good Samaritan. Nothing
could be further from the truth.
    After some dinner conversation it appears that Zack is, among other things,
a racist "You know my Grandfather once said that if he knew you coloreds were
going to be so much trouble we'd have picked the damn cotton ourselves", and an
anti-Semite. An argument escalates at the dinner table and leads to violence.
After Zack assaults Marc (Jonathan Penner) and Pete, Zack is killed.
    The roommates are at odds with what to do. Marc, Pete and Paulie (Annabeth
Gish) immediately wish to call the police. Luke (Courtney B. Vance) and Jude
(Cameron Diaz) suggest something different. After more discussion they agree to
dispose of the body and cover it up. They do not want to be sent to jail for
what they feel was a justifiable homicide. When it is done the roommates
realize
that it was easier than they thought. So easy in fact that they decide that
every Sunday their dinner guest would be someone who opposes of their views. If
they all agree that the guest deserves to die, they will poison them and bury
them in the back yard.
    The back yard fills up rather quickly, its' victims including (among
others)
a right to life extremist, an anti-environmentalist and a homophobe. By the
time
the roommates get to their tenth victim they begin to question their methods.
Are they giving the guests a chance? Are they even giving them good food
anymore?
    This film is what I like to call a "hidden treasure". This film is such a
pleasant surprise. A well written, devilish satire that is funny, sexy and
original. This film should be a hit, but I guess the fact that it apparently
had
no marketing wouldn't give it much of a chance. I had never heard of it until I
saw a copy at my video store.
    Stacy Title does a wonderful job directing. She somehow finds the time to
give all of the characters enough screen time to develop a distinct
personality.
>From the five members of the house to other key characters including Sheriff
Stanley (Nora Dunn), the local law closing in on the truth, and the dream
dinner
guest, Norman Arbuthnot (Ron Perlman), a Rush Limbaugh clone who should be the
roommates easiest kill.
    Perlman gives the films' best performance. He finds the right note as the
right wing big mouth who simultaneously offends and gains followers, and may
just inadvertently talk his way out of death. The other actors are convincing
as
well, as all of the roommates deal with their murderous ways. Some of the
characters appear to be heading down the road towards insanity, while others
grieve their decisions.
    When friends ask me to recommend a movie, this is usually the first one I
think of. I am not saying that this is my favorite movie (although it is in my
top ten), but because the film was such a wonderful surprise, I have a fondness
for it. I also try to recommend films like this: ones that have not been seen
by
many people, but should.

Title
Review for Hoodlum (1997)
    Set in Harlem during the Great Depression, rival gangster "families" go to
war over control of "The Numbers", an illegal gambling lottery.  "Runners" take
bets from potential lottery winners and deliver them to private locations for
drawings.
    The undisputed leader of the Harlem numbers is the Madame Queen (Cicely
Tyson) who is challenged by Dutch Schulz (Tim Roth), a ruthless hoodlum. By
turning against the Queen, Dutch defies his partner, the infamous Lucky Luciano
(Andy Garcia), who wishes to respect the Queen and keep the peace.
    The Queens' army strengthens when an acquaintance, Ellsworth "Bumpy"
Johnson
(Lawrence Fishburne) is released from prison and becomes a bodyguard for her.
He
proves himself worthy in short time as he thwarts an assassination attempt (on
himself and the Queen), and later takes control of the Queens army when she is
jailed for tax evasion. Bumpy's reign is not as restrained and subdued as the
Queen and he declares all out war on Dutch. Bloody gang warfare ensues.
    Bumpy faces many obstacles during his reign. His new army questions his
methods. His girlfriend (Vanessa L. Williams) and the Queen disagree with his
violent solutions. Most importantly (in his eyes), Dutch has become a more
formidable foe than he imagined, and seeks help from Lucky Luciano to
assassinate him. 
    There have been so many movies dealing with organized crime that it must be
hard to write an original story dealing with it. This movie is not original at
all. In fact, I was angered by how many similarities there was between this
film
and, arguably, the best gangster movie of all time, The Godfather. If you are
going to borrow ideas from another movie and not give credit, why not borrow
from a lesser known movie (say, Millers Crossing?). How could the credited
screenwriter Chris Brancato not give credit to Mario Puzo himself? Here are
just
some of the major similarities (I stopped counting at 10).
Crooked Cop assaults blood relative of the leader.
Gang extracts revenge on crooked cop.
Wife (or girlfriend) questions her partners' murderous activities and leaves
him.
High ranking "officer" betrays the leader.
Blood relative of the leader murdered.
War erupting between the "families".
High-ranking officer disapproves of the leader in front of other family
members.
New leader runs family differently from previous leader.
Large meeting with all families involved.
    The setup in this movie is done rather well. I enjoyed the portrayal of the
network of "runners" sprinting through the streets collecting bets for the
Queens lottery. This was the way of life in Harlem, and most people involved
with the Queen did so because it was the only way to support their families and
put food on the table. Number running was the only way for the Harlem
population
to find work. I also enjoyed the interaction between the angry, violent Dutch
and the calm, patient Lucky.
    After about the 30-40 minute mark all of the similarities with the
Godfather
start appearing, one after the other (and in short order). It was a huge
distraction, and an insult to my intelligence. Who was the screenwriter kidding
here? 
    Some of the individual performances were well done. Andy Garcia was very
convincing as Lucky, unfortunately his screen time is reduced to a supporting
role. Tim Roth effectively plays the cocky villain, much like his roles in "The
Cook, the Thief, his Wife and her Lover" and "Rob Roy". The good performances
and convincing setup during the first third of the movie do not make up for the
lackluster story that follows. A couple of coincidences is one thing, over a
dozen is an insult.
Ellsworth Bumpy Johnson.......Lawrence Fishburne
Dutch Schultz............Tim Roth
Lucky Luciano..........Andy Garcia
The Queen.............Cicely Tyson
Francine Hughes..........Vanessa L. Williams
Illinois Gordon..........Chi McBride
Written by Randy Turgeon, January 22, 1998

Title
Review for Bound (1996)
Summary
    An elevator ride provides the chance meeting between Corky (Gina Gershon)
and Violet (Jennifer Tilly). There is an instant attraction between them. They
don't speak, probably because Violet is not alone. She is escorted by her
boyfriend Caesar (Joe Pantoliano), a cocky Mafia thug. Corky was recently
released from prison and managed to find work performing building maintenance
on
the apartment complex were Violet and Caesar live.
    It is not long before the two women speak, and their obvious attraction
leads to a passionate love affair. Through their conversations we learn more
about them. Violet is basically a full time escort for Caesar, even though she
doesn't let that stop her from having other clients while Caesar is away. She
has never had a lesbian love affair before. Corky is a lesbian and served time
for theft and is apparently very good with power tools. The women fall in love.
    Caesar informs Violet that another member of the Mafia is suspected of
stealing money from the Mafia boss, Gino Marzzone (Richard C. Sarafian).  The
unfortunate suspect is Shelly (Barry Kivel), a client of Violets who is dealt
with severely by Caesar and relinquishes two million dollars that he had
stolen.
Caesar has to clean the money (which was covered with Shelly's blood), count it
and turn it over to Gino.
    Violet and Corky decide to try to steal the money. They concoct a plan that
would not only allow them to get away with the cash, but set up Caesar so that
it would appear that he took it, forcing him to run for his life. Although the
plan seemed like a great idea, the execution of it becomes the women's worst
nightmare, as every possible wrong turn, bad timing and bad luck arises,
putting
their lives in extreme danger.
Commentary
    I can't recall a film where the last hour was so absolutely riveting. A
great edge-of-your seat thriller the keeps the adrenaline flowing. But this
isn't just a thriller, it has elements of black comedy, a love story, and noir.
That is not to say that the setup isn't well done - it is, but it's the
incredible final two-thirds of the film that stick in your mind.
Very compelling characters, especially Caesar, who by usual movie standards
should be the dimwitted Mafia hood bad guy, and Violet, who appears to be the
stereotypical bimbo. Both characters show a surprising intelligence and depth,
and are well played by Pantoliano and Tilly. There is such good acting in this
film that I could mention every performance, but the only other character I
will
single out is Micky (played wonderfully  by John P. Ryan), as a Mafia enforcer
who steals most of his scenes, including a great scene at the end, where he
conveys his feelings to Violet by facial expression alone, without making a
sound. It was incredible acting.
I also wanted to take a quick moment to plug the DVD format. The DVD for Bound
is top notch. Not only does the picture and sound do the format justice, but it
includes the best director commentary I have heard, as the Wachowski brothers
are joined by all three of the leading stars for the narrative. There is a
great
comment where Jennifer Tilly explains how, during a screening of the film the
violent outcome with Shelly is edited out (if you saw it, you know what I am
talking about). Because of this edit, a later scene involving Caesar
threatening
Violet in the same manner didn't have nearly the same dramatic effect. If
anything, it proves the importance of good film editing.
There are many different elements to this film that contribute to its great
style. It seems most of the scenes were shot in one extreme (dark rooms with
many shadows) to another (very bright blinding bathrooms). There are also trick
shots like Gino's slow fall to the floor, Caesar's panic-stricken stumble after
opening his briefcase (he had a camera strapped to his belly), and a slow pan
out to reveal the direct view into a gun barrel. All of these elements do the
film justice to create a mood all its' own. It is refreshing to see first time
directors taking these chances and having confidence in the script.
    An absolute must see film. One of the best films of 1996.
Directed by Larry & Andy Wachowski
Violet................Jennifer Tilly
Corky.................Gina Gershon
Caesar................Joe Pantoliano
Gino..................Richard C. Sarafian
Johnnie...............Christoper Meloni
Micky.................John P. Ryan
Shelly................Barry Kivel
Written by Randy Turgeon, March 4, 1998.

Title
Review for Big Lebowski, The (1998)
Summary
    Mistaken identity spells disaster for The Dude (Jeff Bridges), the laziest
man in L.A. County. Two thugs invade his home and assault him, looking for
money
to pay off his wife's debt. The only problem is The Dude is not married and we
learn that although his real name is Jeff Lebowski, it is not the same wealthy
Jeff Lebowski who has a wife that owes money to the wrong people. The thugs
leave, but not before one of them urinates on The Dude's prized rug.
    The Dude wants reparations for the loss of his rug. After conferring with
his two bowling buddies Walter (John Goodman) and Donny (Steve Buscemi), he
decides that since his rug was ruined due to the negligence of Jeff Lebowski's
wife Bunny (Tara Reid), he should seek out the Big Lebowski himself (David
Huddleston) for restitution. It does not go well, as Mr. Lebowski scolds and
berates The Dude as if he were a child caught stealing money from his mother's
purse.
    The Dude's dealings with Lebowski are not finished however as The Dude is
hired to be a courier for him. It appears that Bunny Lebowski has been
kidnapped
and Lebowski needs someone to deliver the ransom to her captors. The Dude
accepts and with the help of Walter promptly botches the delivery. Nothing
worse
could have happened to The Dude as he becomes fully involved in the bizarre
situation surrounding Bunny Lebowski including involvement in pornography
industry and association with German nihilists.
    Could the scenario possibly get worse for The Dude? His love interest is
the
Big Lebowski's daughter Maude (Julianne Moore), who initially assaults him also
(she didn't care for his solution for his rug replacement). She is quite a
character, as flying around in a harness while naked, spraying paint appears to
be her favorite pastime, and her acquaintances would make Marilyn Manson seem
like a Boy Scout. The Dude must deal with all of these strange people (his
friends included), unusual circumstances and survive countless assaults (some
self-inflicted) to uncover the truth to the wacky Lebowski family.
Commentary
    After the credits rolled for this film I sat in the theater trying to
decide
whether I actually liked it or not. Two hours later I still could not make up
my
mind. To call this film "offbeat" would be a tremendous understatement. There
are some truly bizarre films that work well (Matthew Bright's 'Freeway' comes
to
mind), and some films that have some bizarre moments (the Gimp scene in 'Pulp
Fiction') that have the same effect. The Big Lebowski falls under the former
category and some elements work, some do not.
    The Coen's definitely have a style all their own. If you were to walk in on
this movie and not know what it was, you could pick out it was 'a Coen' in
minutes, much like Stanley Kubrick films. The Big Lebowski's high points are
definitely vintage Coen: colorful characters, a great ear for dialogue,
seemingly unnecessary extra characters (like Marge Gunderson's lunch date in
'Fargo') and funny self-parodies. All of these elements are well done. Jeff
Bridges does a wonderful job playing the spaced out Dude, and John Goodman gets
the great role of the psychopathic Vietnam war veteran on the verge of a
killing
spree. This film is funny and has some nice comic subtleties, like when the
Dude
goes to the Supermarket just to buy cream and pays for it with a check.
    What I did not like was the fact that this movie is far too strange. I
enjoy
offbeat films more than the average movie fan, but this was ridiculous. It
tries
too hard. What was the point in having the Maude character introduced with that
silly harness? What was with those strange dream sequences? I usually dislike
dream sequences because it gives the director free reign to do whatever they
please without explanation. The only normal character may be Donny, if only
Walter would actually let him speak.
    It would have been nearly impossible for the Coens' to duplicate the
success
of 'Fargo', but this film is a slight disappointment nevertheless. However, I
will still marginally recommend the film because it does have its' moments, and
it is unfair to hold it up to 'Fargo' standards.
Directed by Joel Coen
The Dude....................Jeff Bridges
Walter......................John Goodman
Donny.......................Steve Buscemi
Maude.......................Julianne Moore
Big Lebowski................David Huddleston
Nihilist....................Peter Stomare
Bunny.......................Tara Reid
Written by Randy Turgeon, March 11, 1998.

Title
Review for Contact (1997)
Summary 
        Eight year old Ellie Arroway (Jena Malone) and her father, Ted (David
Morse), are very close. Her mother died while giving berth to her and her
father never remarried, bringing up Ellie on his own. She is a very
intelligent girl and her hobbies include such things as short wave radio
and telescopes, hobbies she shares closely with her dad. Tragedy strikes
her life when her dad dies that year.
        Flash forward to present time where Ellie (Jodie Foster) has pursued a
scientific career, becoming an astronomer. She listens intently to sounds
emitted by the universe, hoping to make contact with other intelligent
life.  She has a bumpy road ahead as her boss, Dr. Drumlin (Tom Skerritt)
informs her that her department is getting shut down. She refuses to give
up, and successfully interviews for an investor to back her project on her
own.
        Ellie's dreams come true when she eventually hears what she believes is an
intelligent signal from outer space. It is indeed confirmed to be so, and
the signal is decoded to reveal a shocking image. It is video footage of
Hitler giving his speech before the 1936 Olympics. That is not all. It also
appears that the signal contains thousands of pages of text, which turn out
to be blueprints for a machine. What exactly the machine will do is a
mystery, although it appears like it will act as a transport.
        Ellie finds that her troubles have only begun. She now has to deal with
many problems, including 
a brash, unfriendly military advisor (James Woods), her former boss who
returns to stake his claim, her lover (Matthew McConaughey) who questions
her non-religious motives, the overall media frenzy that the machine
causes, and bizarre dealings with the mysterious S.R. Hadden (John Hurt),
the owner of the company backing her project. 
All is not lost for Ellie, as she is eventually chosen to be the sole
person who will "pilot" the machine for its incredible journey into the
unknown, a journey into history.
Commentary
        I read many reviews for this film when it came out last summer and found
that people either loved it or hated it. There was no in between. I can
honestly say I fall in the "in between" category. 
        I liked some of the plot threads, such as the accurate depiction of the
media frenzy and radical religious groups. There are some good
performances, most notably William Fichtner who, I thought, had been
typecast to play psychotic killers, John Hurt as the eccentric millionaire,
and Angela Bassett as the White House Aide. Jodie Foster does her usual
fine job also.
        What I did not care for was the relationship between Foster and
McConaughey. They did not have much chemistry together, and I felt their
relationship was predictable. I could accurately guess every time the
McConaughey character was due to pop up in Ellie's life again, and I knew I
should have bet the farm on whether or not he would betray her at some
critical point during her quest. If anything, I felt Ellie had more
chemistry with John Hurt (of all people), considering both of them were
outcasts and a bit eccentric.
        There has been much talk about the ending to Contact, and this is where
most critics are divided. I felt that the ending was a major letdown.
Without giving away too much, lets just say that I felt that there could
have a been a lot more done with Ellie's destination and who she sees when
she gets there. The special effects are nothing special either.
        I have seen some good films with sub-par endings before ("Swimming With
Sharks" and the alternate ending to "Clerks" come to mind), and some of
them can be forgiven because the overall effect of the movie escapes
unscathed. But because the entire point of Contact relies on its ending,
and that ending is so poorly done, I cannot recommend the film.
Directed by Robert Zemeckis.
Ellie Arroway...................Jodie Foster
Ted Arroway.....................David Morse
Michael Kitz.....................James Woods
Kent Clark.......................William Fichtner
David Drumlin..................Tom Skerritt
Palmer Joss.......................Matthew McConaughey
Rachael Constantine............Angela Bassett

Title
Review for Flirting (1991)
Summary
    A young man is caned with a thick stick to his backside and he should be in
more pain or distress than he appears, but apparently it is more or less a
common ritual for him and the boys living with him. His name is Danny Embling
(Noah Taylor) a teenager living in a boarding school in Australia in the mid-
1960's. Although he is a bright student, he is tormented by most of his
classmates. He is not much of an athlete, does not have many friends and he has
an unfortunate slight stutter for which he is given the nickname "Bird" (it is
actually more like "B-B-B-Bird"). It seems like it should be a tough time for
him, but he is actually doing rather well. He keeps with his studies, sees his
hazing as more of a petty nuisance, and has one good friend who he confides
with. His life is about to get better.
    Her name is Thandiwe (Thandie Newton), a pretty girl from the school across
the river. It is an all-girls school that shares many social events with
Danny's, and their eyes meet at a Rugby match. They do not speak until their
next encounter, at a debate between the schools and it is obvious they like
each
other. They make a date for an upcoming dance, which almost becomes a disaster
as Danny is informed that he cannot go, but the two of them sneak away from
their perspective groups and spend time together. Their relationship starts out
with playful flirting.
     The relationship develops as the couple attempt to spend as much time
together as possible, usually by sneaking out of their dormitories to meet in
the early morning hours, risking possible expulsion. They talk about their
families a great deal, flirt and experiment with sex. They also have some
difficulties, including misunderstandings regarding a letter written by
Thandiwe
that gets into the wrong hands, and the constant threat of other students
reporting them to school officials. Danny also risks physical harm as he
foolishly tries to defend his dignity and fight the school boxing champ in the
ring.
    Of all possible events to threaten Danny and Thandiwes' relationship, it is
the most unlikely that strikes a mortal blow. The political unrest in Uganda,
Africa (where Thandiwe comes from) threatens her parents, who are writers that
speak out against injustice. Their lives are in danger, and Thandiwe must
return
home to help the family in a time of need. She may not return, and Danny must
deal with losing his first love. 
Commentary
    I am a fan of most John Hughes films, but the teenagers in his films do not
always act and behave like most teenagers in the real world. His films are more
like teenage fantasy, and they are entertaining, but the teenagers in
"Flirting"
seem so real it is an absolute pleasure to watch them. The relationship between
Danny and Thandiwe is very honest, sweet and well written. Dare I say that the
chemistry between these two young actors was more powerful then many films
concerning adult relationships? I do.
    One of the strengths of the movie is that not much is made of the racial
differences between the teenagers. Thandiwe is African American, but the only
racial stereotypes present are the occasional crude comments about the color of
her skin by Danny's schoolmates. There is also an uncomfortable moment when the
parents meet each other for the first time after a school play and are clearly
surprised. The scene is a great example of the wonderful writing and directing,
and is one of the films' best moments.
    Another strength is the inclusion of the political uprising in Uganda.
There
could have been many different ways for the relationship between the teens to
be
threatened, but by making it such an important event on such a large scale (and
beyond their control), it makes it much more poignant and sad.
    Few movies about teenage love are as effective as this one. The characters
seem absolutely real, as if they were in a documentary about Australian
boarding
schools. The two lead actors were relatively unknown this time, adding to this
effect. The only recognizable face is that of Nicole Kidman, playing an
upperclassman looking over Thandiwe. 
I could almost see this film be rewritten into a John Hughes type film, but
that
one would have popular young actors, a pop music soundtrack, a predictable
romance and a typical Hollywood ending. You will see that watching "Flirting",
and it is a real treat.
Danny Embling....................Noah Taylor
Thandiwe Adjewa.................Thandie Newton
Nicola Radcliffe...................Nicole Kidman
Jock Blair...........................Felix Nobis
Written by Randy Turgeon, April 9, 1998.

Title
Review for Devil's Advocate, The (1997)
A hotshot lawyer gets an obviously guilty child molester acquitted, and
shortly after during the victory celebration gets offered an opportunity to
show his prowess in New York City. The lawyer, Kevin Lomax (Keanu Reeves)
is not offered a job yet, he is asked to simply pick a jury. He accepts.
The jury he selects work out well and before long he is offered a job with
the firm. Making his decision easy is the fact that not only is he offered
big money, but a gorgeous apartment. He convinces his wife, Mary Ann
(Charlize Theron) to make the move to New York.
The first case given to him is a big test; a "winless" case concerning a
man who sacrifices animals in his basement. The charge was health code
violations and Kevin once again shows his skill and earns an acquittal. His
new boss and partner in the firm, John Milton (Al Pacino) is quite
impressed and takes Kevin under his wing, explaining many of his
philosophies on law, women and sex, and angles the promise of a blissful,
wealthy life. Kevin's next case is a dream case, given to him by Milton
himself (much to the chagrin to his colleagues), defending a triple murder
suspect who has had a history of problems with the law. 
Although Kevin's career is taking off, his home life is not doing very
well. Mary Ann is starting to have numerous problems. She is experiencing
severe depression over Kevin's long hours, and before long is having
horrible dreams and hallucinations of people turning into ghouls, their
faces becoming horribly disfigured. Kevin does not help matters by
dismissing his wife. He does not spend more time with her as he explains to
Milton that he needs to spend as much time on the case as possible to get
it over with, then focus all of his attention on his wife. Not helping
matters is the fact that Kevin is having ideas about a possible affair with
a sexy lawyer (Connie Nielson) also working with the firm. 
Mary Ann falls deeper into her madness as Kevin spends more time away from
home. Kevin eventually looses control of his life and has to
institutionalize his wife, and gets disturbing news from his mother (Judith
Ivey) about the mystery concerning the identity of his father. He also
starts to lose control of his case.
Kevin learns that all of his problems have been caused by the work of one
man. That man is his boss, Mr. Milton, a truly evil character who just may
be the devil himself. Kevin must somehow confront Milton and thwart
whatever diabolical plan he has in store. But how do you defeat the devil? 
Why is it that most courtroom scenes in the movies are absurd? Do
filmmakers really believe that "normal" courtroom drama doesn't fit the
bill and they have to juice them up? The courtroom scenes in this movie
would never happen in a real courtroom, which wouldn't have been too bad if
it weren't Keanu Reeves trying to pull it off. I give Reeves credit for
trying hard, but throughout the movie I never saw the Kevin Lomax
character, just an actor trying very hard to play Kevin Lomax and coming up
short. Charlize Theron defines the term "over-the-top" in her performance
as Mary Ann Lomax, a disappointment in contrast to her good performance in
"2 Days in the Valley".
The only good performance in the movie is by Al Pacino, but I kept asking
myself what the heck he was doing in this mess? Maybe he felt it would be
interesting playing the devil, and you can tell he is having fun doing so,
but his skill as an actor cannot save the poor performances and lackluster
script that surround him. It's pretty standard stuff, including the fact
that the hotshot lawyer appears to be the only competent person on the
planet who can do anything right in the courtroom.
Please read no further if you do not want the ending spoiled, but I have
to get something off of my chest. In 1986 I remember watching a movie
called "Wisdom" with Emilio Estevez and Demi Moore, and the ending of that
film did the worst possible thing that a movie could do. What I like to
call "Guess what, it was all a dream" scenario. In "Wisdom" the two lead
characters are killed at the end, only to have one of the characters "wake
up" from an apparent and say "Gosh, I'm glad that didn't really happen!". I
considered it inexcusable the way the audience was toyed with. Well, the
same thing happens in "The Devils Advocate", and although arguments could
be made surrounding whether it was actually a dream (perhaps Milton went
back in time to try a different route for his plan, since it failed and he
is the Devil), but the point is that the last 90% of the film didn't
happen. I know it's a stretch, after all it is a movie and nothing really
happened, but I just get annoyed to get toyed with like that.
Of course, the dream ending could almost be forgiven if the story that
precedes it was at least an interesting one. As I recall, "Wisdom" was a
decent film. "The Devil's Advocate" is not.
Directed by Taylor Hackford
John Milton..................Al Pacino
Kevin Lomax................Keanu Reeves
Mary Ann Lomax...........Charlize Theron
Mrs. Lomax..................Judith Ivey
Eddie Barzoon...............Jeffrey Jones
Christabella..................Connie Nielson
Written by Randy Turgeon, March 18, 1998.

Title
Review for Picture Perfect (1997)
Kate (Jennifer Aniston) is having some problems. It appears the
twenty-eight year old is not happy with her slow progression up the
company ladder, and her love life apparently leaves something to be
desired. She learns that her problems are related, as the owner of her
advertising agency, Mr. Mercer (Kevin Dunn), explains to her that her
single status does not bode well with the company. Her freedom would
make her more likely to leave the company, taking clients with her.
    A solution presents itself in Nick (Jay Mohr), a wedding
videographer who Kate meets through a coincidence and gets
photographed with. Kate's boss, Darcy (Illeana Douglas), uses the
photograph to fabricate a wedding engagement between Kate and
Nick. Kate is at first repulsed by the idea, but after getting
immediate positive results, she pursues it.
    Her first task is to convince Nick to go along with her plan. The
actual plan consists of Nick pretending to be her fiancé. At a
dinner with Kate's bosses he will provoke a fight and they will break
up. She meets Nick to propose the plan. He accepts.
    Kate's new status brings unexpected results in other areas. The
office bad boy, Sam (Kevin Bacon), who wouldn't give Kate the time of
day, now does. Now that she is engaged, he pursues an affair with her,
as doing so would destroy her good girl image, hence Sam's sudden
interest.
    Things start to fall apart for Kate, as it becomes apparent that
Nick really likes her, and does not wish to break up with her. After
some provoking Nick does oblige, but problems continue for Kate. It
appears Sam is no longer interested now that she is available. Or
maybe Kate does like Nick, but "reconciliation" will force her to
admit her lies to her employer. Adding to her mess is the constant
prying of her mother (Olympia Dukakis), who wants her to get married
and settle down.
    There is a scene in this movie where Jennifer Aniston is (from the
waist up) only wearing a bra. It made me chuckle because it is the
only time in the movie when she actually wears one. There is enough
cleavage in this movie to satisfy Russ Meyer. It's like the director
said 'Well, we know the story is formulaic and the performances aren't
that great so, what the heck, let's show Jennifer's assets as often
and as uncovered as humanly possible to keep the PG rating."  Quite
frankly it's insulting.
    I don't think Aniston is a competent enough actress to carry a
movie. She did a decent enough job in Ed Burns' "She's the One"
because it was a smaller and supporting role, and she just doesn't
deliver the goods effectively in this movie. Her performance was not
convincing.
    Unfortunately, as far as romantic comedies go, this movie adds
nothing new to the standard formula for these types of movies. The
film is similar to "My Best Friends Wedding" in a sense that the
leading female character is actually quite vindictive and due her
actions, gets no sympathy from me when things go awry. I didn't care
for how quickly Kate puts down Nick's profession by explaining that
videotaping weddings wasn't glamorous enough for her co-workers.
 At least "My  Best Friends Wedding" changed the formula a bit and had a
somewhat surprise ending. No such luck with "Picture Perfect". 
    Every plot occurrence can be spotted a mile away, including a
couple that really made no sense. After everything Kate had done to
prove her loyalty to her company, why would she blindly throw it all
away when she should have made sure that Nick would even talk to her
first, let alone consider a relationship? Was quitting her job a
prerequisite to making amends with Nick? Throw in the fact that I
don't think Nick and Kate spent enough time together to even warrant
that rash of a decision. I believe that Kate liked him, but liked him
so intensely that she was willing to throw her career away? I doubt
it. And what of the ending scene at a wedding where the entire
congregation feels it necessary to stop everything and stare at the
couple? Are mass groups of people simultaneously that interested in
total strangers? Well, I guess of the congregation consists of movie
extras and the strangers are the movies two lead stars, then that
would make sense.
Kate........................Jennifer Aniston
Nick........................Jay Mohr
Sam........................Kevin Bacon
Mercer.....................Kevin Dunn
Darcy......................Illeana Douglas
Rita........................Olympia Dukakis
Written by Randy Turgeon, February 26, 1998.
Visit my movie reviews! www.xtdl.com/~canran

Title
Review for Game, The (1997)
    Nicholas Van Orton (Michael Douglas) has quite a dull
life. Although he is a very wealthy investment banker he lives alone
in a giant house and has no social life to speak of. On his 48th
birthday his brother Conrad (Sean Penn) surprises him by giving him a
strange present - an appointment with Consumer Recreation Services
(CRS). Conrad does not explain anything about the company or what they
actually provide, just to call and use the appointment. "It will
change your life" Conrad explains.
    After some thought Nicholas agrees. He spends an entire day at CRS
filling out questionnaires and getting vague responses from a CRS
employee (James Rebhorn) to his specific questions about the company
and its services. All he is told is that the company provides a game
that differs per client. Nicholas does not know what his game entails
or when exactly it begins. A previous CRS client explains to Nicholas
"The Game provides what is lacking in your life".
    Nicholas' Game begins. A message and a strange key are left in a
creepy clown puppet in his driveway. It is a sign of strange events to
come, including a night with a mysterious woman Christine (Deborah
Kara Unger) that consists of a fake ambulance rescue, a seemingly
broken elevator (that his mysterious key fixes), and fleeing arrest
from police and police dogs. Was the woman part of the game, or was it
a chance meeting?
    Events soon take a turn for the worst. Nicholas is linked to a
trashed hotel room (that his credit card paid for), that is littered
with pornography and cocaine. Soon Nicholas finds possible evidence
that CRS may be running a scam to steal money from clients at any
cost. It seems murder, bribery and blackmail are also part of CRS'
business practices. Running for his life, Nicholas must try to end the
game. Or is it all part of the game?
Commentary
    This is a somewhat familiar formula. Bad stuff happens to our
hero, and just when it cannot get any worse, it does. At one point the
Michael Douglas character is drugged and wakes up in Mexico with no
money, no passport and no food.  Ouch. The first movie that came to my
mind with this formula was "Pacific Heights", where Michael Keaton,
playing the tenant from hell, played landlords Matthew Modine and
Melanie Griffith like a violin until hope was (almost) lost.
    This is a better movie than "Pacific Heights", which bordered on
absurd.  Some parts of "The Game" was a little far fetched of course
(would firing blanks shatter glass?), but because the performances
were well done (especially Unger as the mystery woman), I overlooked
it. The story kept me interested, including a nice link between
Nicholas and his dad who (told in flashback) committed suicide when he
was 48, and the strained relationship between Nicholas and his
ex-wife, and Nicholas and his brother.
    The best part of the movie is the depiction of the strange
company, CRS.  Its employees are friendly, yet vague and misleading,
leaving a reason for distrust.  There are also some funny moments
involving some fake company names that are obviously a part of CRS. I
couldn't help but grin when Nicholas jumps into a cab only to see the
same exact CRS letters staring him in the face, or when he is chased
by the cable company van, conveniently called "Cable Repair Service".
    This is a good thriller. I cared for the hero and hoped he
survived unscathed. I hoped the hero and the mystery woman would
further their relationship. Do they? I'll let you find out for
yourself.
Directed by David Fincher
Nicholas Van Orton................Michael Douglas
Conrad Van Orton..................Sean Penn
Christine.........................Deborah Kara Unger
Jim Feingold......................James Rebhorn
Elizabeth.........................Anna Katerina
Written by Randy Turgeon. February 4, 1998
Visit my movie reviews web site! I just got started!
www.xtdl.com/~canran

Title
Review for Sweet Hereafter, The (1997)
A small Canadian town copes with a terrible tragedy when a school bus
slips off an icy road and plunges into a river killing most of the
children on board. A lawyer, Mitchell Stephens (Ian Holm) arrives
shortly after to convince the suffering parents that they should sue
for damages. Who exactly they should sue is not a concern for Stephens
yet. He will blame someone.
Stephens interviews the parents and survivors with varied success to
his cause.  Most of the parents, including Delores Driscoll (Gabrielle
Rose) the bus driver who survived the crash, join Stephens in his
lawsuit. Others are not so convinced, including Billy Ansell (Bruce
Greenwood) who lost both of his children and refuses to help, feeling
that the lawsuit will divide the once peaceful community, and Nicole
Burnell (Sarah Polley) a survivor now confined to a wheelchair.
Stephens' case is also hindered by his own personal turmoil. His
daughter Zoe (Caerthan Banks) is a drug abuser who has been through
(and dropped out of) countless rehab centers and clinics. Through
frantic phone calls at inopportune times, Stephens learns that his
daughter is in serious trouble. In effect, Stephens anguish is similar
to that of the parents in his lawsuit. He is dealing with the loss of
a child.
Atom Egoyan is an impressive director. The Sweet Hereafter is similar
to his previous work - 'Exotica' in many ways. From his non-linear
form of storytelling to his beautiful, long shots of landscapes (The
rugged snowy mountain in this film and the big grassy prairie in
'Exotica' are great examples). Many people (my wife included) felt the
bouncing time line a bit distracting, but I felt that it was effective
and that it enhanced the story.
Dealing with grief and loss is the major issue with this film. Egoyan
skillfully introduces the characters and reveals how they are dealing
with the tragedy.  Very painful, touching and sometimes disturbing
memories unfold, as secrets of the inhabitants in the town are
revealed. Adding to the poignancy of the story is the wonderful
narration of a Robert Browning poem "The Pied Piper of Hamelin" (where
the film gets its title), drawing similarities between Nicole and a
character in the poem.
This is an impressive ensemble cast, even though there are no big name
actors in this film (except Holm). Most noteworthy Sarah Polley (the
Boston Society of Film critics gave her their award for Best
Supporting Actress), who not only portrays the courageous moral center
of the film very well, but also wrote and performed most of the songs
on the soundtrack. She deserves an Academy Award nomination.
The Sweet Hereafter leaves many loose ends and questions unanswered,
most notably the situation with Stephens daughter. It is unlikely that
a film like this could possibly have a happy ending, but a lesser film
could easily have forced some kind of resolution or closure to some
(or even all) of the characters. Egoyan trusts his audience. This is
one of the best films I have seen this year and eagerly await Atom
Egoyans next film.
Written by Randy Turgeon. January 15, 1998
