Authors
Melissa Martin
Number of Reviews
4

Title
Review for Waterworld (1995)
     There has been so much bad press surrounding WATERWORLD, that it
seems to be one big scandal after another.  But if you let this deter
you from seeing the film, feel ashamed--you're missing one hell of a
show.
     There have been tons of action flicks this year: DIE HARD WITH A
VENGEANCE, BATMAN FOREVER.  But WATERWORLD outshines them all.  This is
a blow-away, edge-of-your-seat action adventure with enough secondary
stuff to please the palate: adventure, post-apocalyptic eerieness,
love, a great script, a cool story,  sex, a cute child, and a bad guy
to root for.  This has been said before, and will be said again, but
it's true when they say that every dollar has gone onto the screen.
Every shot is absolutely mind-boggling in its scale.
     Kevin Costner stars as the sullen, loner Mariner, a man who was
born with functional gills and webbed feet.  I was pleasantly surprised
when I enjoyed his performance; my personal views about him (having
nothing to do with the post-WATERWORLD Costner scandals) as well as my
reservations about his acting talent had me preparing to shrug off his
performance on-screen.  But he comes across marvelously, with the
perfect bitter facade as merits an outcast.  Emotions shine through
wonderfully, and you can actually see the relationship developing
between the Mariner and Helen, played by Jeanne Tripplehorn, through
Costner's eyes.
     As for Tripplehorn, I was awaiting her performance with some
degree of gleeful anticipation, and I was not to be disappointed.  She
somehow manages to be a stunner even with grimy, tangled hair, cracked
lips, weather-beaten skin and clothes compiled of what appear to be
mesh and fabric scraps.  She is delightfully strong of will, a true
heroine in an industry dotted with obnoxiously volatile feminist
heroines.  It is pleasant to see a drop-dead gorgeous actress with some
large degree of talent, which is sadly missing in most films today (no,
I'm not naming any names).
     Tina Majorino comes across as the cutest thing the human race has
to offer in her role as the enigmatic Enola, who draws pictures of
horses and trees and has a map-like tattoo on her back.  Her stubborn,
hands-on-hips pouts are absolutely adorable.  Not only does she flash
the right smile and bounce around in an amazingly endearing way, she
also shows that she's one of the few talented child actors out there.
     Dennis Hopper, however, was the actor I was looking forward to the
most.  The guy is so damn good at playing these deliciously evil
villains, that one would almost expect him to walk into the recording
studio of a Disney animated feature.  Only Disneys animated villains
have had the kind of charismatic, 100% pure evil personalities that
make you want to root for the villain, and Hopper becomes something
akin to THE LION KING's Uncle Scar.  He's so delightful that it's a shame
he didn't have more screen time.  The character he played was that of
the almost Koreshian Deacon, who was intent on leading the villainous,
wild-guy Smokers (thusly named for their habit of smoking cigarettes
nearly constantly) to Dry Land ... using, of course, the map on Enola's
back.
     The story is great fun, and has tons of elements.  The movie is
fast-paced, giving you a few minutes of human-appeal in which to
breathe, before diving headlong into another mind-blowing, nonstop
battle scene, which is on the grandest scale ever seen.  The most
impressive sequence is split between the two main battles.  The first
occurs when the Smokers attack the giant, floating atoll--what is the
Waterworld equivalent of a village--in an amazingly long but never
dull explosion-filled battle.  The atoll is a complete set, and built
to patched-up perfection.  There are thousands of wonderfully cast
extras who populate the atoll, and all of whom are very convincing in
their ragtaggedness.
     The second, climatic battle sequence occurs on the Exxon
Valdez ... which survived the coming of the Waterworld to become
the Smokers' refuge.  What is impressive about this is when the Mariner
drops a lighted flare down into the oil-filled belly of the ship ...
causing the obvious results, a massive explosion that guts the entire
ungainly thing.
     There is plenty of human appeal in the form of the Mariner's
heartwarmingly cold bond formed with Enola, who refuses to hate him (no
matter how mean he is to her).  And then, of course, theres the
Mariners oddly realistic desperation-born romance with the
tough-as-nails Helen.
     The special effects--actually, just the whole thing--looks so
incredible that it completely transports you into the place called
Waterworld.  Everything is absolutely amazing.  It would be quite
complex to go into it all here, so Ill suffice to say that the visual
effects look like a million ... well, one hundred and seventy-two
million bucks.
     *Bottom Line*: Go see this film.  It's a completely blow-you-away
action delicacy, and certainly one of the better films out there.  The
trick to enjoying this film is to totally let yourself go, which is
pretty easy considering all the work that's gone into it.  The acting is
superb, the story is wonderful, and the visuals are gloriously
stunning.
     Rating: I'd easily give this an "A", but not an "A+" for the
simple reason that it didn't elate me the way that the "A+" APOLLO 13
did.  It's a haunting film, but not a feel-good one. **** 1/2 stars.

Title
Review for Ace Ventura: When Nature Calls (1995)
     If critics don't hate this movie with every bone in their body, I
will be stunned. At times, this inane piece of drivel is even worsely
written than DUMB AND DUMBER ... and funny as hell.
     There is no plot to this film. The pseudo-plot exists apart from
the scenes on film, never really having a lot of impact on the viewer's
experience. But what story does exist is cliched beyond belief.
Basically, Ace (Jim Carrey) has to find a white bat that is sacred to
two tribes of African aboriginals before they go to war.  Meanwhile,
he's up to his old Ace tricks.
     There is only one reason to see this film... Jim Carrey. Some may
be (and rightly so) disgusted by the fact that the general public
craves Jim Carrey so, but in this film he is hilarious. Nothing new in
the Carrey department, same wayy-too-overstated-enunciation, same
rubber eyebrows.  But he's funny. Perhaps his moronic excuse for
quality comedy appeals to the eight-year-old in me, but Carrey never
failed to put me into tears of laughter.
     The other characters consist of a Traditional Villain, who is
not portrayed interestingly or originally in any way whatsoever, a
Traditional Sidekick, who is too dopey to be truly likable, a
Traditional Beautiful Seductress, who was actually surprisingly
enjoyable, and a Traditional Flustered General, played with a yawning
performance.
     The animals are nicely used, especially the adorable monkey and
the raven. Far less of the animals is seen than might be expected from
all the hype surrounding them.
     Pleasantly enough, there is considerably less sexual innuendo in
this installment of ACE than the first (although there are still
gratuitous references). It's more of a kid's film than the first, which
frankly just disgusted me.
     I wouldn't suggest seeing this film unless you're either really
bored or really crave that goofy humor. If you don't look for any
glimmer of intelligence in the writing or acting, you'll have a blast.
But if you're hoping for anything at all meaningful, you're in the
wrong department. I for one laughed till I gagged, and so did everyone
else in the audience.
     PARENTAL NOTE : There are only two expletives (Ace says 'damn'
twice, no biggie), but many not-so-subtle references made to genitalia
and sex (including one blatant scene where Ace is caught masturbating).
There are two full-nudity scenes, but all that is shown are bare
buttocks (in the Ace nude, it seems like there should be more showing,
but there isn't).
ACE VENTURA - WHEN NATURE CALLS: B+, or ***.5 stars

Title
Review for Nine Months (1995)
     I will truly expect every professional critic to absolutely hate
this movie.  It makes no pretenses for being anything but a stupid,
childish, predictable, cliche comedy.  The film is awful on that
level.
     This is a great comedy, more in the tradition of DUMB & DUMBER
than something oh, say, cleverer, like CLUELESS.  I laughed like a
fool from some stupid physical comedy, cartoon-style gags and some
really corny jokes.  The script is unquestionably cheesy and cheap, but
it's hilarious ... which is all that really counts.
     Hugh Grant, who I thought was horrible in FOUR WEDDINGS AND A
FUNERAL (actually, a friend and I didn't even finish the film, we
thought it was pretty awful) and I never liked previously anyway, turns
on the English boy charm like a firehose.  I walked into the theatre
with a slight loathing for him, and by the middle of the movie I wanted
to have his child.  :-)  He is absolutely hilarious and has an obvious
knack for corny comedy.  He even managed to switch gears and carry
something more emotional ... during the middle of the film, at one of
the fleeting moments of seriousness, I almost cried (seriously) because
of the look in his eyes.
     Julianne Moore is a goddess given actress form.  With her
strangely stunning, delicate average-girl appearance and high-quality
acting, we get a character to put our heart into, unlike the childish
Samuel (Grant).  She carries her performance through well and is a
pleasure just to look at.
     Unfortunately, Moore and Grant do *not* make a cute couple.  There
are no sparks nor chemistry between the two characters, which is
unfortunate considering the appeal of the two.
     I never liked Tom Arnold either, and so was surprised that I didn't
sit back and wish he was not in the entire movie.  In fact, he was
rather enjoyable.
     Joan Cusack is lovely as Arnold's also-pregnant wife (which was a
sad plot attempt, a little too much like a coincidence).
     Robin Williams, as is natural for the man, is side-splitting funny
and a darned fun ride.  It is unfortunate that he got so little time :
I would have preferred him to take the place of both Cusack's and
Arnold's characters.
     The most unfortunate thing about this film is somewhat in the vein
of ACE VENTURA : PET DETECTIVE, it has been billed as a kind of
semi-family movie.  I saw a huge number of obviously under-13 kids (I'm
thirteen, I should know) get tickets and go in, when it was very
clearly stated 'PG-13.'  What particularly saddened me was that one
sweet ol' grandma had taken two children, about seven and ten, to the
film.  There is a *lot* of sexually explicit and lewd writing here.  It
is very funny at times, but completely inappropriate for anyone under
my age (especially with parents, which is what we tend to call
"unbelievably embarrassing").  There is also one prelude-to-a-sex-scene,
where Julianne Moore gets to participate in a rather demeaning
strip-tease.
     I can't really write much about this film, because there isn't
much to write about.  To sum it up, NINE MONTHS is a very funny but
purposely stupid film.  Not exactly the kind of
"don't-miss-comedy-of-the-year," but easily merits a few good laughs if
you have nothing else better to see.
     Of course, the best films of the year remain POCAHONTAS and APOLLO
13.  If you haven't seen those yet, you've missed a hell of a show.
     WATERWORLD comes out this week.  Can't wait to review it for the
reading public.  :-)

Title
Review for Apollo 13 (1995)
     There is a scene in the beginning of APOLLO 13 where the
astronauts of the disastrous Apollo 1 mission are boarding the ship.
During this short orientation sequence, I was awed, then gripped by
suspense, and then moved to tears by tragedy.  Not only does the whole
movie play like this, it also adds appropriate amounts of humor,
wisdom, and humanity.
     The script is amazingly written.  Facing the obvious difficulties
of writing an entire story around technical jargon, the writers did a
stunning job of making all the NASA lingo seem somehow completely
intelligible.  I was never lost for a second: indeed, as I walked out
of the theatre, I was using most of the space-speak that they used in
the film.  Also difficult to pull off is a story that deals with one
problem after another: in other movies with this type of anticlimatic
flow, the audience often becomes bored.  But this movie keeps you
riveted with one suspense-filled climax after another.  After every
problem has been faced and solved, there is a lot of remaining tension
that stops one from getting back into the flow of the movie.  However,
this was cleverly avoided by adding moments of whimsy, and some very
humorous scenes that relieve the tension, so that you can be on the
edge of your seat again when the next problem comes up.  This movie
can, at times, be extremely funny and delightful: this is well
countered by the true thriller nature.
     The story, guided by the tremendous directing talent of Ron
Howard, becomes a touching story of humanity alone against the two
greatest unknowns: death and the universe.  The movie, while being an
intelligent and well thought out thriller, also becomes a sentimental
film about the limits of human ability ... and the ultimate human
triumph.
     Not one actor in the superb cast gives a mediocre performance.
Tom Hanks is on the Oscar road again with his performance as Cmdr. Jim
Lovell.  This is Hanks at his versatile best.  Appropriately showing
his patented lovability (which is still endearing, unlike Meg Ryan's
narcissistic cuteness), Hanks also takes on a new role for him: the
dashing all-American hero.  Moments of passion are beautifully
complimented by a quiet, wordless, expressionless sorrow, and it is
easy to see the feelings that lie beneath the stony, professional-NASA
exterior.  Under Hanks' guidance, Lovell becomes a person with
astounding subtlety and range of emotions.
     Gary Sinise, (whom I didn't personally rave over in FORREST GUMP)
outdoes himself with a spellbinding performance as grounded astronaut
Ken Mattingly.  His emotions are so incredibly tangible that I was
moved to tears (extremely rare for me ... this is the second movie I've
*ever* teared up at) at one particularly touching scene of his.  During
much of the film, I felt horribly sorry for Mattingly.  However, this
is remedied by his later, amusing, smugness, and the fact that were he
not grounded, the astronauts never would have been able to return
home.
     Kevin Bacon gives a good, solid performance as the hotshot pilot
Jack Swigert.  I've never held Bacon in much regard, so this was an
extremely pleasant surprise.  Even his character, who appeared to be the
bitter, odd-man-out replacement pilot, was a likable character.
     Ed Harris is wonderfully determined as the cantankerous mission
controller, Gene Kranz.  Kathleen Quinlan is touchingly real as
Lovell's devoted but unsure wife, Marilyn, and all the supporting
actors in mission control were real and wonderful.
     The weakest performance, I felt, came from Bill Paxton as the
ailing Fred Haise.  While he was absolutely perfect as the joker during
the first part of the film, as Haise became ill, so did Paxton's
acting.  However, I suspect that this was because he really didn't have
much of a character to work with.  But he still gives an easily
above-average performance, and it in no way hurts the film.
     The visual effects are absolutely stunning.  During most of the
film, I had an extremely difficult time believing that the sweeping,
vertigo-inducing shots of the spacecraft were not real.  The scenes of
the earth and moon are so beautiful and sentimental to induce tears, or
at least an amazed sigh.
     One thing that is interesting to note is that even though
everybody *knows* that the astronauts survived, it in no way lessens
the suspense.  You're still perfectly gripped in fear.
     To sum it up, this is a brilliant, mature thriller (not like
no-brainers like CONGO) as well as a serene, sentimental film.  This is
a film for anyone--for anyone who has ever lost their moon.
     If it doesn't get Academy Award nominations for Best Picture, Best
Actor, Best Direction, Best Visual Effects, and at least one Best
Supporting Actor, it will confirm my belief that there is something
terribly wrong with the world.  This is easily the best film to be
released this year.
