Authors
Peter Dizozza
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Time to Kill, A (1996)
I saw Dr. Moreau (director John Frankenheimer) and A Time to Kill 
(director Joel Schumacher).
Moreau has the great H.G. Wells story, the second of the summer (war of 
the worlds being independence day).  The stars get their individual death 
scenes which disjoints the film, and then the lead actor tells us and the 
cat girl what we could have learned visually with him as he searched the 
lab records, but there are surprising Brando scenes.  He's so like a 
relative up there.  I feel such affection for the man.  He was really 
sweet in this film.  I think he was actually trying to do something on 
screen.  Rex Reed referred to his refinement as his Eleanor Roosevelt 
immitation.  Val Kilmer was Jim Morrison, and in this film he acts like 
one of his disciples.  Say, his last movie was a Schumacher film, Batman 
Returns, the Scorpio Rising homage to Kenneth Anger.  
Schumacher makes good films.  The affection in this legal one goes to 
Donald Sutherland.  I'm referring to a film whose more complete title 
should be: IT'S ALWAYS TIME FOR A FATHER TO KILL A MOCKING CHILD RAPIST.
Donald Sutherland is from Nova Scotia and I've been there so again, I 
feel like I'm related to the man.  Did you see Kelly's Heroes?  I 
particularly like his MASH role.  Then he became disturbing starting with 
Bertollucci's 1900 and Eye of the Needle.  
Grisham's story carries a lot of plots.  The most interesting conflict is 
the interpretation of the lawyer's non-action in the face of the immenent 
revenge murder.  First we get his reason, then finally his wife gets it, 
and the near affair ends.  Ms. Bullock, the other woman, gets short 
shrifted if you ask me.  She's almost left hanging in the field until the 
mickey mouse saviour comes along.  Was I wrong about feeling I was left 
hanging about some of the plot elements.  The appearance of the Klan 
seemed to spill over from the Moreau film.
The best thing about Moreau is the hour and a half length.  Remember the 
Laughton film of the thirties, Island of Lost Souls.  That one handled 
the animal misegenation issues well.
A Time to Kill and the Island of Lost Souls, two films dealing with the 
issue of misegination.  The refinement of animal instinct is unique to 
Moreau.  
I also saw Ms. Tyler in Bertolucci's Stealing Beauty, a funny story in 
that she's not only the last virgin in Northern Italy, but a virgin 
looking for the identity of her father, when it's perfectly obvious she's 
the Arrowsmith singer's daughter, but apparently she didn't know that in 
real life until her mother left her a cryptic letter, like the one in the 
film.  A RIDDLE solvable by a glance in the mirror while watching MTV.
