Authors
Neil Smith
Number of Reviews
4

Title
Review for Thin Red Line, The (1998)
With Saving Private Ryan being my candidate as the best movie so far for
1998, it was with some eagerness I was looking forward to seeing the other
Second World War Two epic nominated in the Best Picture Oscar category.
Having now seen both movies it is clear to me who the winner is going to be
now that the canon smoke has cleared. Is it Steven Speilberg's Normandy
landing based movie or Terrence Malick's jungle based movie.
And the winner is  Saving Private Ryan. And for many reasons which I will
touch on as I continue my review. This is not to say The Thin Red Line is a
bad movie. Far from it. The Thin Red Line is one of the best stream of
consciousness movies I have ever seen. The lovely jungle scenery, the voice
over narration contemplating what death might be like and the stresses of
combat clearly etched in the faces of the combatants, gives this movie an
otherworldly dreamlike experience unlike any other. I also read the James
Jones based novel on which the movie is based only a scant few months ago.
So for me the characters from this unforgettable novel is still very fresh
in my mind. Whether this is an aide to enjoying the movie or not is hard to
say. At least I had perhaps a clearer understanding about the soldiers'
journey of discovery they were going through. Obviously as with so many
book-to-movies the whole books plot was almost thrown away, and only the
bare basics survived. The main character in the movie had only a bit part in
the book. In the book Cpl. Fife who we hardly see in the movie was more or
less the books main voice. Also overlooked was Pvt. Jack Bell rapid rise
from ex-lieutenant to private back up to lieutenant. Also strange was the
exclusion of the final village battle after the walk along the river as
Charlie Company becomes unstoppable in the forward advances. And we only get
the mere mention of the word "property" which is the whole lifes philosophy
of company First Sgt. Edward Welsh. For me the first two thirds of The Thin
Red Line was the best. The hour long build up to the battle for the hill and
then the battle itself. There is a superb building up period to the eventual
test of fire these ordinary men have to go through after which their lives
will never be the same again.
The battle scenes themselves don't match the sheer raw power of Saving
Private Ryan nor is it as gruesomely bloody and realistic. I think the main
reason for this could have been because Terrence Mallick lacks Steven
Speilbergs mastery of special effects. And obviously it has been twenty
years since his last moive. With all of today's digital technology at his
disposal, Speilberg was able to make us truly believe we are in the midst of
a war for ourselves. Saving Private Ryan also had more identifiable
characters and a better plot, rudimentary as it was. The Thin Red line on
the other hand has more name actors, who unfortunately are more an
distraction than a help. John Travolta and George Clooneys two second speech
at the end of the movie serves no real purpose. Nick Nolte is superb though,
as the obsessed colonel who knows he is taking part in the last ever war he
will have a chance to participate in. For him it is all about objectives
taken and how many lives can be spent to accomplish this. It is all a
numbers game to him, like for any good accountant as long as his gains
outweighs his losses he is doing good business.
Pvt. Witt the movies main character is well played by James Caviezel. One
has real empathy for his character. Here is someone who has gone AWOL a
number of times but now that he is in the thick of things is willing to
volunteer himself for the most suicidal of missions.
War of all about contradictions. We profess to be peace seeking individuals
but when we are offered an excuse we will kill, maim and destroy to the
fullest of our ability to place ourselves ahead of the enemy. With such
inherent duality evident in all men, it is no wonder that wars are still
being fought every day around the globe and fanatics will find any excuse to
inflict their harmful will upon others for some misguided cause or the
other. In the end it is about he who holds the biggest stick who will win.
Look at the United States the worlds only remaining superpower. The US is
supposed to be this huge peace loving nation but doesn't hesitate to impose
it will on others via smart bombs and Tomahawk missiles. I guess when you
are the number one power in the world you have to flex your muscles from
time to time as to discourage other from picking fights with you
unnecessarily.
Anyway, excuse main lapse of concentration. Go see The Thin Red Line if you
like challenging movie experiences.
Neil Smith
Review courtesy of www.megavideo.co.za as well as www.dvdsa.co.za

Title
Review for Ronin (1998)
Rating: 81 %
Starring: Robert DeNiro   Jean Reno   Natasha McElhone
Director: John Frankenheimer
After the dismal and complete disaster that was the 'Island of Dr Moreau,
director John Frankenheimer could only do better in his next big screen
effort. Well he has just done that. Ronin is an intriguing , but most of all
a thrilling rollercoaster ride full of twists and turns and on the edge of
your seat excitment. Just like the recent 'Negotiator' I was expecting
another average action movie with the usual explosions and some above
average acting. I was yet again surprised. And I do like surprises.
In Japan, a samurai must protect their master with their lives. The samurai
whose master was killed was a disgrace, and they were forced to wander the
land, looking for work as hired swords or assassins. A masterless warrior
were reffered to as 'ronin'.
We are introduced to an array of enigmatic characters basically covering all
four corners of the earth. We have an Irish contact called Deidre (Natasha
McElhone), an American who has a great deal of knowledge regarding battle
strategies and weapons (DeNiro), an English weapon specialist (Sean Bean), a
French operative (Jean Reno) and another American that is the driver (Skip
Sudduth).
It is set in the post Cold War era. A group of skilled people are hired to
collect a certain mysterious briefcase, which stays a mystery until the end
just like in 'Pulp Fiction'. Nobody is told what it contains or given any
specific details. All the group knows is that it is always guarded by a
group of bodyguards and that it is handcuffed to a man's arm. What they do
know is that the price is high. And they are doing this job only for the
money.
The movie is a wonderful action thriller. Probably the best I have seen in
years. It is a wonderful tourism ad for Paris and Nice, showcasing the
marvellous scenery. I have not seen Europe in all its splendour in a very
long time since Harrison Ford's 'Frantic'. The movies these days only shows
you cities somewhere in America like New York. I know New York so well by
now, and I have not even been there yet. It has some amazing stunts and
action sequences ever. There are two LONG car chasing scenes that is totally
awesome. It is so exciting I did not want it to end. Action , action ,
action all the way.
The performances from the entire cast are all superb. DeNiro(Cape Fear;
Heat) is great as usual. The scene where he guides Jean Reno and his
mysterious friend to help him remove a bullet was quite funny and
convincing. Reno (Godzilla; Professional) is an actor France should be more
proud of more than Gerard Depardieu. He has really made a name for himself
across the globe and especially in Tinsel Town. Natasha McElhone(Truman
Show) as the Irish contact is quite convincing even with her Irish
accent.She is one to watch out for in the future.
In conclusion all I can say is that if you like Die Hard then this is your
movie. Miss it at your own peril.

Title
Review for Enemy of the State (1998)
Rating: 80 %
Starring: Will Smith   Gene Hackman   Jon Voight
Director: Tony Scott
We in Cape Town have had our own experience of the type of surveillance as
portrayed in Enemy of the State. Six alleged Pagad G-Force members were
recently arrested following the monitoring of their movements by the
Business Against Crime surveillance cameras. Big Brother is definitely alive
and watching our every movement here in sunny South Africa.
In the director Tony Scott's movie Enemy of the State, the central question
is how much invasion of privacy the state can be allowed to do. Is it right
for the state to monitor every nook and cranny of its citizen's lives in the
pursuit of protecting the country against those who seek to harm her. The
movie kicks off when a prominent government official is assassinated because
he is preparing to oppose Jon Voight character, who is seeking more leeway
into prying in the daily lives of the ordinary citizens of the United
States. Will Smith, portrays a lawyer who also uses illegally obtained
surveillance footage to leverage himself and his clients into a position of
strength against some shady Mafia figures.
When through a chain of events Will Smith comes in possession of the
evidence of the government officials murder, his life is thrown into turmoil
as the corrupt NSA agency head uses all the means of the modern spy
apparatus to regain the evidence from him.
What really makes Enemy of the State such an engrossing movie is not the
slick editing and well staged action scenes which makes the Jerry
Bruckheimer production move at a cracking pace. The real success of the
movie is to show how computer geeks locked away in dark rooms surrounded by
the most expensive digital toys their governments can buy, can
systematically destroy the illusion of ordinary day to day life that we take
for granted.
The irony of Enemy of the State is that for Will Smith's character to
retrieve himself out of the predicament he is in, he has to fight fire with
fire. With the help of Gene Hackman's character he gains the necessary know
how to defeat the enemy. The message one can get from this, is heaven help
the poor souls who become the target of the government's focus to destroy
them. If you can't hack a computer or call up spy satellite to aid your
fight, you might as well give up.
I really enjoyed Enemy of the State. If only half of the things shown in the
movie are true, you better hope you don't stay in a country with a
government too keen in using the latest hi tech gadgets against their
citizens.
Neil Smith
Review courtesy of www.megavideo.co.za as well as www.dvdsa.co.za

Title
Review for You've Got Mail (1998)
Rating: 80 %
Starring: Tom Hanks   Meg Ryan   Greg Kinnear
Director: Nora Ephron
Based on 1940's 'Shop around the Corner' and a 1949 musical version 'In the
good old Summertime', this film has got all the elements freshened up for
the 1990's. Nora Ephron conjured up a reunion for Tom Hanks and Meg Ryan
since their 1993 sleeper hit 'Sleepless in Seattle'.
Set in the Big Apple, the story tells of two individuals Joe Fox (Hanks) and
Kathleen Kelly (Ryan) who get along famously chatting on the internet. They
literally sneak around their partners e-mailing each other, having a
cyberspace romance. Joe's cyber name is 'NY152' and Kathleen is known as
'Shopgirl'. Joe is a rich man, who is busy opening up a huge bookstore,
Kathleen also has a thriving children book shop that was a family business
for decades. Joe's huge discount store is sure to close Kathleen's store.
Joe is the first to find out that 'Shopgirl' is actually Kathleen, and he
uses this information to manipulate Kathleen. Kathleen is heartbroken that
her family business is going down the tubes, and confesses everything to
'NY152'. He even gives her 'Godfatherly' advice as to fight for her rights
to survive. When Kathleen actually finds out that Joe is behind the big
store opening she despises him at first for what he is taking away from her.
She has no security and everything she knew her whole life is gone. Joe
feels terrible about this and tries to win her trust and confidence, but he
also falls for the person he came to know as 'Shopgirl'.
The movie has a lot of charm and should appeal to even the male audiences.
It is a sweet romantic comedy that has two great leading actors. They know
what to do with the movie and they execute their task with warmth and
confidence. Tom Hanks is really a great actor. He can do both drama and
comedy with such ease. Meg Ryan is perfect in this role. I can understand
now why she received a Golden Globe nomination for her part. She was much
better in this fairy tale, than in 'City of Angels'.The chemistry between
Ryan and Hanks was definitely there. Greg Kinnear we all came to know last
year as the gay artist in 'As good as it gets' has a minor role in this
movie. I think he is actually the only weak point of this movie. They could
have done without his role.
Nora Ephron has taken over from Penny Marshall as the best female director
in Hollywood. She was also responsible for the so-so 'Michael' not to long
ago. She brings forth her ideas with such a clear vision. The emotions and
feel of the movie was spot on.The dialogue is funny and witty. The scene
where Hanks introduce his family to Ryan in the bookstore was really funny.
This is one of the best Valentine's Day movies around, waaayyy better than
'Sleepless in Seattle'. Another thing is, we always get to see the gloomy
dark look of New York, not here though. The place is bright and summery. I
felt like moving there straight away.
If your two favourite pasttimes is reading books and the internet, you will
surely love this movie. After seeing so many violent and disaster movies, it
was a nice change of pace. A movie that has warmth and great actors in it. I
can understand why it is such a huge hit currently in the US. Like Ryan's
character said in the movie, it is great to hear those three words, 'You've
got Mail'. I must agree, it is great getting e-mail!!
Graeme Smith
Review courtesy of www.megavideo.co.za as well as www.dvdsa.co.za
