Authors
Afroditi Michailidi
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Chaplin (1992)
     CHAPLIN is the long awaited film about the life of Charlie Chaplin.
Directed by Richard Attenborough and with a host of stars including
Robert Downey, Jr., Kevin Kline, Anthony Hopkins and Geraldine Chaplin
(Chaplin's real life daughter who, in a twist, plays his mother), this
film sets out to be the very definition of epic biography, pure and
simple.  It almost succeeds.
     The problem is, it tries too hard.  I found some of the scenes too
loaded for my tastes.  At times I was almost glad the director was
constricted by real life events and could not use all of the plot
devices he otherwise might have.  And, my feeling is, some of the
material was not epic to begin with -- that might well be my serious
gripe with this film.
     The movie is of epic length too, being over two hours and twenty
minutes long.  I found it slow in developing.  On the other hand, I do
not think that cutting any of the introduction would improve it; the
film carries you along little by little until you are engulfed and
immersed in its tale; only by detailing as many events as possible can
it achieve that effect.
     Don't get me wrong.  It is a good film and one of the best I have
seen lately.  Based loosely on Chaplin's autobiography, the film works
on two levels: one is following Chaplin from his early years throughout
his career, while the second one shows Chaplin as an old man conferring
with his biographer (the only fictional character in the movie, existing
purely as a narrative device).  This dichotomy was at first jarring,
since you get pulled in and out of the timeline -- but in the end, it
works too; Attenborough is no novice.
     Robert Downey, Jr., does a wonderful job as Chaplin.  I even began
to think of him as Chaplin midway through the film.  The supporting cast
is excellent too, particularly Kevin Kline as Douglas Fairbanks.
     Bonus points for the ending -- it is really the stuff that cinema
is made of.
     In conclusion, I found this to be a very good and entertaining
film, although dragging in some places.  A masterpiece it is not, which
is rather disappointing considering the cast, director and script
material.  However, the film makes up for it, if only for its ending.
I'd rate it a 9- on my personal scale, i.e., recommended with some
reservations.
[quick reference chart
[recent movies: THE BODYGUARD 5-, ALADDIN 8.5, ZENTROPA 10-
[all time faves: ZOO & THE ELEMENT OF CRIME 10-
[rock bottom: LIQUID SKY 0
