Authors
John Sylva
Number of Reviews
48

Title
Review for Snow Falling on Cedars (1999)
Snow Falling on Cedars (1999) by John Sylva    Rating: A
Too many films today rely solely on dialogue to tell their story, as nothing is
left for the imagination or mind to devour, but only for the ears to enjoy. 
"Snow Falling On Cedars," Australian director Scott Hicks' follow up to 1996's
heart warming "Shine," is almost dialogue free, relying on magnificent shots
and settings to tell the thoughtful story on their own.  This clever tactic
succeeds triumphantly, telling a complex story with deep meaning without a hint
of wear and tear, delivering some of the most powerful, heart wrenching scenes
in a motion picture this year, many without a word of dialogue.  Hicks
co-adapts "Snow" with Ronald Bass from the best selling novel of the same name,
penned by David Guterson.  If it wasn't for the stunning visuals, "Snow" could
have been a bumbling mess of a film, but instead is one of the year's
strongest.
The hypnotic, overwhelming picture of prejudice, truth, love, and war opens
just north of Puget Sound, where a fisherman is savagely murdered by the
suspected Japanese fisherman Kazuo Miyamoto (Rick Yune), who is charged for
murder and put on trial.  From this sequence, "Snow" has already wrapped you in
its artistic ways, leaving you spellbound in its beauty for the entire course
of the film.  "Snow" tells its story during the World War II era, in a time
where racial ties between the Chinese and American cultures weren't
particularly strong, a fact which later serves as a subplot between two central
characters.  Defending Miyamoto is Nels Gudmundsson (Max von Sydow), an
elderly, caring man, prosecuting him Alvin Hooks (James Rebhorn), an efficient,
serious man.  As the trial unfolds, so does the deep plot in form of flashback,
mainly focusing on the romance between Ishmael Chambers (Ethan Hawke),
newspaper journalist covering the trial, and Hatsue Miyamoto (Youki Kudoh), who
later became wife to the convicted murderer.  We learn Ishmael and Hatsue had a
childhood love affair throughout their younger years, but were separated by the
war, in which Hatsue, along with her family, ended up in a camp, and Ishmael
was sent to battle, in which he'd lose an arm.  
The acting is up to par all around, mainly in supporting areas, where Kudoh
steals the show as her troubled, generally sad character.  Ethan Hawke may be
the main focus of the film, but is, for the majority of the film, silent. 
Kudoh and Hawke have wonderful on screen chemistry together, most of the time
tense and unstable, without a word being spoken, which adds to the realness of
the situations presented to the viewer.  The two particularly shine in the
final, unspeakably emotional final shots, which will entrance every bone in
your body with their sheer power.  Also of note is Max von Sydow, who delivers
a well executed performance in some of the film's most memorable scenes. 
Sydow's performance never feels restrained, as he lets you feel the sincerity
and devotedness of his character.
Appearing at first to be simply a murder mystery, "Snow Falling on Cedars"
tells multiple, enchanting stories throughout the course of the trial, all
connecting somehow to the characters within the courtroom.  The film is
captivating in a way which films rarely are, blinding you with its blistering
intelligence and stunning visuals.  "Snow" is a miraculous picture, an
absorbing, one of a kind thriller, that shows even more promise coming from
director Scott Hicks.  The characters within are real, strongly written souls
with much background to prove themselves worthy of their personalities.  The
film moves at a deliberately slow pace, building its story to a stronger level
with each passing minute, until everything about the plot becomes crystal
clear.  Hicks' direction has got to be the best in a film this year, pacing the
film in such a way to make the viewer anxious as to what will occur in the
coming moments.  The film transfers between war stories and love stories, all
which polish off this professional, unforgettable work of art.  "Snow" is
excitingly clever in the way which it tells its compelling story, always
presenting every image, from a dying fish to a pine tree, with artistic,
beautiful compassion.  Also worth praising is that "Snow" depicts the era in
which it is set realistically, revealing the awful things the U.S. did to
Japanese Americans as a result of the bombing of Pearl Harbor.  Provocative is
the best word to describe the atmospheric film, whose structure is so well
planned and thoughtful, it's hard to decipher how one could be so talented to
put this film together.  The rich musical score serves as a perfect backdrop
for the real star of the show, the setting, playing out loud, melodic pieces to
aid the moving story.
"Snow Falling on Cedars" is a rare gem, that doesn't follow the simple path
most courtroom thrillers take.  If this route was taken, every ounce of beauty
and cleverness would be sucked dry from the film, as the originality of the
script is what makes "Snow" glisten in so many departments.  Many will dislike
the film for its choice of narrative structure, but to some, "Snow" should
undoubtedly stand as one of the year's best, most breathtaking films.  Words
can't describe the lush settings of "Snow," or the captivating story, so to
experience what the film has to offer, it's best to travel to your theater,
kick back with your popcorn, and embrace the power and beauty that is, "Snow
Falling on Cedars."
The Bottom Line: "Snow Falling on Cedars" is a rich, beautiful, compassionate
film with heavy subject matter, that unfolds flawlessly, against eye popping,
mind blowing backdrops.  A triumph.

Title
Review for Brokedown Palace (1999)
Brokedown Palace by John Sylva    Rating: A
http://hometown.aol.com/DeWyNGaLe/MoviePED.html
Just when you thought the teen movie craze was over, as films like Varsity
Blues and She's All That stopped being released every weekend, Brokedown Palace
comes around as a late summer, teen movie- sort of.  Brokedown Palace features
a teen friendly cast of Claire Danes, Kate Beckinsale, and Lou Diamond
Phillipps, but has a premise not so teen friendly, with a plot similar to that
of the 1998 film Return to Paradise and 1978's Midnight Express.
Best friends Alice (Claire Danes) and Darlene (Kate Beckinsale) are looking to
take a vacation.  Somewhere exotic, yet different from the same old vacations. 
Their destination becomes a 6 dollar a day hotel in Thailand, an eleven day
vacation in which the two hope to find freedom from their everyday lives.  What
they find is the exact opposite.  After sneaking into a first class hotel, the
two meet Nick Parks (Daniel Lapaine), a friendly, suspicious guy who invites
them to Hong Kong for the weekend, while he is on business.  Purchasing their
airline tickets?  Buying them drinks?  Taking them to Hong Kong?  Where does
the niceness end? 
While waiting to board the flight to Hong Kong, Alice and Darlene are assaulted
by police officers, who find heroine in Alice's bags.  The two are immediately
sent to a dirty prison, in which they have no freedom whatsoever.  In seek of
desperate help and freedom, the two contact Hank Green (Bill Pullman), an
American lawyer who resides in Thailand, whom attempts to remove these two
seemingly innocent teens from serving undeserved jail time.  Alice and Darlene
both insist that Nick Parks is involved, but no trace of such a person can be
found.
Throughout the film we see both worlds of Thailand, good and bad, starting with
the beautiful, busy city streets, and then the disgustingly grotesque, dark,
moldy, damp prisons which resemble a concentration camp.  The prison settings
are amazingly realistic, letting you feel the pain,  suffering, and frustration
Alice and Darlene are going through, as they may very well spend the rest of
their lives there.  Thanks to the great acting from Danes and Beckinsale the
film does what it is supposed to- make you feel and route on these two likable
teens.  The screenplay, which is written by David Arata, doesn't have a plot
hole to be found, as every possible way to get the teens out of prison is used,
and every possible way to find Nick Parks is used.  Unlike many screenplays,
Brokedown Palace is complete, answering any questions that might arise from the
situation the two are in.  
Claire Danes steals every scene she is present in, acting her character to
perfection, as Alice becomes a person in the viewer's life, as you feel for her
deeply as she is treated harshly in the smucky prison.  Danes, who at the age
of 20 is one of today's most talented, young actresses, makes a smart move with
Brokedown Palace, after performing in last spring's flop, The Mod Squad.  I
must not be the only one realizing her great talent, as she will be working
with famed director Robert Altman and Academy Award winner Jodie Foster in the
coming years.  After stealing the show in 1997's The Rainmaker, and doing a
fine job in 1996's Romeo and Juliet, Danes proves she has the right stuff to be
a leading actress in Brokedown Palace.
Kate Beckinsale, who was deprived of an Oscar nomination last spring for her
1998 film, The Last Days of Disco, gives an equally terrific performance in
Brokedown Palace as she did in Disco, but her character isn't the main focus of
the film, as Darlene is a static character, while Alice learns who she is and
develops greatly from what you could call, the vacation from hell.
Bill Pullman's role serves as the knot that ties the plot together.  Pullman's
credible performance doesn't act or subtract to the film, but Brokedown Palace
would have been nowhere without Hank Green.
Director Jonathan Kaplan couldn't have done a better job with Brokedown Palace,
as he cleverly uses the effective setting to make you care about the outcome of
the film, as the film engulfs you as to what is happening on screen, keeping
you guessing and wondering until the film's final moments.  After Brokedown
Palace, I felt like I just watched my best friends go through a living
nightmare, due to the acting, screenplay, and direction by Kaplan.  The two
friends act like teens act, using their language, expressions, and actions,
which is the opposite of how last spring's She's All That and Varsity Blues
portrayed teens.  Every element of Brokedown Palace works together perfectly,
creating a film that is virtually flawless.  Hands down the biggest surprise of
the summer.
The Bottom Line- Brokedown Palace will flop at the box office, and many kids
will think its boring and/or pointless.  That's not surprising, considering
that's usually the definition of a four star film.
Rated PG-13 (Mature themes, language, some violence)

Title
Review for Shrek (2001)
    It stands as a moment one will not soon forget: a giant, green ogre flips 
through the pages of a cliche fairy tale, narrating it with every bit of dull 
inspiration that the story holds.  This leads one to believe that this serves 
as the prologue to Shrek, DreamWorks' second computer animated feature, but 
in a pricelessly hilarious bit of cinema, a page of this tale serves as that 
ogre's toilet paper.  From this opening moment, one can infer Shrek's defying 
of all expectations regarding it as a standard, Disney-esque fairy tale.  
Although rampant moments of hilarity dot Shrek, the true charm of the film 
lies in the bold elements of friendship, courage, and acceptance, excelled by 
outstanding direction, stunning actor voice work, and most importantly, a 
witty screenplay with more going on than meets the eye. 
While Shrek features an abundance of humor related directly toward 
adults, positive friendship values aimed at younger children fulfill the 
storyline: Shrek, the previously mentioned ogre, holds a position of absolute 
nothingness within his community.  The jolly green giant meets a fellow 
outsider, known only as the Donkey (his species) who talks, and although he 
remains reluctant to warm up to him for a good portion of time, Shrek 
eventually comes to a mutual understanding with him by acknowledging their 
common state as outcasts of the world.  The pair team up to retrieve Princess 
Fiona from a castle guarded by a dragon for the powerful Lord Farquaad, 
learning quite a bit about each other and themselves along the way.  Their 
friendship exhibits the core theme of the need for someone to lean on, 
exemplifying to any child who may witness the film that acting as an honest 
companion can unquestionably affect someone.  Shrek and Donkey endure as 
supposed freaks of nature due only to their differences from others but cling 
to each other for support and guidance along their journey.
Courage demonstrates itself within two major storylines: along the 
journey to rescue Fiona, Donkey's immeasurable cowardice reveals itself.  
Whether he encounters walking over a shaky bridge or living alone, Donkey 
withholds fears that he continuously puts aside without self-acknowledgment.  
But the yapping Donkey must face his phobias when presented with the giant, 
fire-breathing dragon guarding Fiona; either he dies from terror or he 
triumphs with courage.  He wisely chooses courage by pretending as if no 
dangerous situation actually faces him, allowing the donkey to overcome a 
horror that likely only continued due to his insistence of them.  Secondly, 
upon Shrek's and Donkey's redeeming of Princess Fiona, the ogre finds the 
princess has plans for whomever saves her: to satisfy her desire for a 
(human) knight in shining armor.  Throughout this storyline, Shrek faces his 
deep, perpetual misgivings of inhering as an ogre and struggles to determine 
how he will reveal his true identity to Fiona.  An ongoing struggle occurs 
between himself and his reluctance of the truth, but eventually, Shrek 
courageously conquers his fear by telling the forbidden secret to Fiona.  
Children can realize from Donkey and Shrek that fear remains only as 
complicated as one makes it; if one sets his/her mind to overcoming something 
in particular, endless possibilities exist.
After the friendships and courage prevail, the three central characters 
at the heart of Shrek must take one more stretch of development: acceptance.  
Surprisingly, Fiona holds a dark secret of her own: due to a spell cast upon 
her years ago, she transforms into an ogre by night.  In this storyline, 
Fiona must learn to hold acceptance for herself, and she must realize what 
beauty truly means: to simply act as one's self.  Upon Fiona's learning of 
Shrek's desire to pursue a relationship with her, Fiona, knowing that 
acceptance of herself serves as the only platform for her love with Shrek to 
work, gives in to her inner demons of self-ridicule and hatred.  Any child 
can pull from Fiona's transformation the meaning of beauty and the meaning of 
self-acceptance.  
On the technical side, Shrek triumphs.  Directors Adam Adamson and Vicky 
Jenson pace Shrek in a consistent and satisfying manner, evenly distributing 
the lessons learned by the central characters.  These central characters 
spring to life thanks to brilliant voice work from Mike Myers (Shrek), Eddie 
Murphy (Donkey), and Cameron Diaz (Princess Fiona).  Myers creates his Shrek 
as a lovable and troubled ogre whose green color not only serves as a skin 
color but perhaps his envy of other, "normal" beings.  Murphy succeeds with 
his Donkey through recreating the high-strung persona that so many know the 
actor to have off screen.  Cameron Diaz exudes charisma and innocence as 
Fiona, giving the princess/ogre a sense of power that many female characters 
in animated films lack.  While the direction and voice work certainly elevate 
Shrek, the ultimate factor in the film succeeding lies in the screenplay, 
written by Ted Elliott, Terry Rossio, Joe Stillman, and Roger S.H. Schulman.  
The script never underestimates the intelligence of the viewer, combining the 
three previously spoken of elements with humor for adults and children alike. 
 Capping it off with a constant tongue-in-cheek feel that pokes fun at 
classic Disney animated features, the fresh and entertaining screenplay 
delivers.  
With Shrek, DreamWorks executive Jeffrey Katzenberg has certainly 
one-upped himself by creating an instant animated classic that will live on 
for ages to come.  The smaller children will laugh and cheer; the adults will 
laugh even harder and leave understanding much that their children did not.  
A film that breaks stereotypes and creates a definite standard of its own, 
Shrek can certainly endure as one for the ages.

Title
Review for South Park: Bigger, Longer and Uncut (1999)
South Park: Bigger, Longer, and Uncut by DeWyNGaLe    Rating: A-
http://members.aol.com/DeWyNGaLe/MoviePED.html
*Note- This review contains some mildly vulgar language which could be
offensive to some, but the film calls for me to bring up these issues.
VOICES
Trey Parker- Eric Cartman, Stan Marsh, Mr. Harrison, Mr. Hat
Matt Stone- Kyle Brofloski, Kenny McCormick, Jimbo Marsh
Mary Kay Bergman- Sheila Brofloski, Mrs. Cartman, Mrs. McCormick, Wendy
Testaburger
Issac Hayes- Chef
Based on the hit television show, South Park: Bigger, Longer, and Uncut is an
unbelievably vulgar animated comedy starring none other than America's favorite
lovable little 3rd grade South Park festively plump resident, Eric Cartman. 
Cartman, Kyle Brofloski, Kenny McCormick, and Stan Marsh are all here in this
film which seems to be a regular South Park episode, only three times the
length.  Being a devoted fan of South Park, the stretched out episode is good
news to me, and even those unfamiliar with South Park should find themselves
laughing during this potty mouthed film.
In South Park, Colorado, the new film, "Asses of Fire" is playing, which stars
two Canadian comedians who chowed down to much sour kraut dinner, Terrence and
Phillip.  After hundreds of children are exposed to the "R" rated language in
the film, new words can be heard flowing from the mouths of kids everywhere. 
In protest, Kyle Broslofski's Mom forms an organization against Terrence and
Phillip, resulting in the death sentence of the two, and the United States
declaring war on Canada. Meanwhile in Hell, Satan and new boyfriend Saddam
Hussein are outraged about the death sentence of Terrence and Phillip, and plan
to launch the apocalypse.
The result of one of the strangest plots in a film for years is an outrageous,
mind-blowing film.  Bigger, Longer, Uncut, which is directed by Trey Parker,
and written by Parker and Matt Stone, doesn't hold back on language, but uses
unrepeatable phrases, making me question how this film got an "R" rating from
the MPAA.  The film received an NC-17 rating from the MPAA three times, but
this final version doesn't seem to be edited at all, but rather "uncut." 
Bigger, Longer, and Uncut has language to offend everyone, whether it be
African Americans or smart students, this film has it all.  Some may take the
humor (which I believe is innocent) harshly, but as an African American in the
theater laughed as the blacks in the army are used as "Operation Human Shield"
against Canada, some may take it lightly and laugh at the classic use of humor.
If Bigger, Longer, and Uncut is going to offend one group in particular, it is
those who are very religious.  Themes of Satan being friendly and gay are shown
constantly, there is a child who hates God, and says unbelievably crude things
about him, among other lines and sequences which will have religious folks
scattering the theater before the relatively short film is finished.
Adding to the humor are the songs in which characters break out into
frequently, which have more appeal to me than the songs in Disney's recent
release, Tarzan.  Although every song is particularly vulgar, the tunes are
catchy and upbeat, and surprisingly well done.
South Park: Bigger, Longer, and Uncut couldn't come at a better time, as the
MPAA is cracking down on teens seeing "R" rated films, this film proudly waves
the middle finger at the association.  I agree with a character in the film
that says something along the lines of, "You can have loads of violence in a
film, but bad language isn't okay."  Bigger, Longer, and Uncut is a "theme
movie" of sorts for those who dislike the MPAA as much as the film's writers
do, Matt Stone and Trey Parker.
Some may say "Anyone could make a film about four foul mouthed kids with
terrible animation," but I disagree with that.  For someone to take this simple
concept, create a national phenomenon, and make me laugh to the point where I
was choking on my popcorn, is sheer brilliance.  What is the brilliant force
behind South Park?  You may say I'm crazy, but Trey Parker and Matt Stone are
brilliant.
The Bottom Line- A film that delivers the fans of South Park what they need--
an "Uncut" version of the hilarious T.V. show.

Title
Review for Arlington Road (1999)
Arlington Road by DeWyNGaLe (John Sylva)    Rating: A-
http://members.aol.com/DeWyNGaLe/MoviePED.html
Arlington Road is a relieving summer film, as we get away from special effects
extravaganzas, into a spellbinding film marvelously crafted by director Mark
Pellington and first time screenwriter, Ehren Kruger.  Arlington Road's clever
script features many horrifying, tense sequences in which the viewer is brought
into the film, and in result, fear their own neighbors, friends, and possibly
even family.  Ehren Kruger takes a chance with his non Hollywood script, which
includes a depressing ending that is impossible to see coming.   
Arlington Road's concept deals with Washington State University terrorism
professor, Michael Faraday (Jeff Bridges), who suffered the loss of his F.B.I.
agent wife in a shootout, and lives with son Grant (Spencer Treat Clark) and
occasionally girlfriend Brooke (Hope Davis) on the quiet, peaceful street that
is Arlington Road.  In Arlington Road's well-photographed opening sequence,
Michael Faraday saves the young Brady Lang, whom he finds in the middle of the
street wounded terribly.  After rescuing Brady, Michael is introduced to his
parents, who live just across the street, Oliver (Tim Robbins) and Cheryl (Joan
Cusack) Lang.  The pleasant neighbors have kept to themselves for their time
living there, but quickly become friends with Michael and Brooke.  Clues lead
up to Michael believing his Brady Bunch type neighbors are actually terrorists,
and learns that Oliver has a terrorist past, and is ready to strike again.
The screenplay feeds Jeff Bridges an array of conflict to handle, as Faraday
constantly conflicts between his deceased wife and girlfriend Brooke, his
neighbors who are turning his life into a 24-hour scare, and must decipher what
is happening in his life, whether his terrorism college course is getting to
his head, whether to look past his wife, and look at Brooke, and how to handle
the situation across the street.  Jeff Bridges handles all tasks well in deed,
as he exhibits a performance which is both applaudable and unwatchable, as his
facial expressions are so tense, they become hideous.  Bridges rehearses every
line and every move with a certain amount of tenseness, which helps create the
well-written character's fear of Oliver and Cheryl, as he is the only one who
knows that he has stumbled upon something big. 
Hope Davis gives a shockingly down to earth performance, and fits her
character's shoes well, as she must deal with her paranoid boyfriend, while all
she wants to do is lead a happy life.  Hints of Brooke giving in to Michael's
beliefs come frequently, but the apparent gut feeling never comes out of her,
until she discovers the truth for herself.  
Joan Cusack and Tim Robbins are particularly eerie as the picture perfect
neighbors, which turn out to be not so perfect in the end.  Cusack gets to show
off the darker side of her acting skills as a character that is common in
everyone's everyday lives, therefore the scariness of her character seems
realistic, and will you make you question your own neighbors.  Cusack is
horrifying as Cheryl Lang, as every smile, every move, and every word from her
are chilling, as she seems to be Miss Goody-Goody to everyone, but the viewers
know the devastating truth.   Tim Robbins isn't given much to do as the main
antagonist, but does what he can, delivering an utterly horrifying performance.
 Oliver's past isn't developed well, and is explained by Oliver to Michael in a
frightening scene, where Oliver reveals his motives.  Oliver's motive just adds
to the tension between himself and Michael, and doesn't seem out of place, as 
many horror films have demonstrated motive sequences which seem strange, as the
killers have a perfect chance to dispose of their victim, but go on about their
past, as the victim slowly devises a plan to defend themselves.  Arlington
Road's motive sequence is something realistic, that a person would actually do,
to darken the protagonist's world more than they already have. 
Ehren Kruger's screenplay stays true to the key plot of the film, but also
contains an abundance of subplots, which all contribute to the overall
greatness of the film.  Each character is a three dimensional, realistic person
with distinctive thoughts and personalities, that aren't your regular movie
characters, which usually don't act like people do, as in last spring's Analyze
This, where the characters were anything but human.
Even now, days after viewing this film, I feel fear deep within, as I glance
over my shoulder every few seconds, just for that extra ounce of security that
I lost while viewing Arlington Road. The screenplay does what I like best, save
the good part for last, as the entire ending 45 minutes are particularly
unsettling, as Michael's suspicions become reality, and the film gets down to
the real nitty-gritty.  The disturbing score, the edgy script, the terrific
ensemble cast, and original directing all contribute to make this wonderful
presentation of pure, raw terror.
The Bottom Line- Arlington Road was supposed to hit theaters in May, but due to
the tragic Columbine High School shootings, the film was delayed. The tagline
for last spring's film Never Been Kissed best sums up my thoughts with the
line-- "Some things are worth waiting for."

Title
Review for Man Who Cried, The (2000)
    It's almost amusing to watch 21-year old Christina Ricci get drastically 
overshadowed in Sally Potter's follow-up to 1997's The Tango Lesson, The Man 
Who Cried. The gen-Y actress, with her cold stare and big, black eyes, has 
appeared in an impressive range of films; but she doesn't even come close to 
being the bold heroine the film, set against the historical backdrop of World 
War 2, requires her to be.  Ricci, whose character is shockingly silent and 
blank, showing only the occasional smile or hint of concern, shares most of 
her scenes with the astounding Cate Blanchett: quite an amusing sight to 
behold.  Blanchett's Lola, a Paris dwelling dancer who befriends the aspiring 
singer Suzie, is bold, interesting and layered–everything our heroine lacks. 
 Co-star of the upcoming Lord of the Rings trilogy, Blanchett has a good 
seven inches on Ricci, sports twice the makeup and dons a flashy wardrobe. 
 The actress inhabits the role–as she always so remarkably does–with a 
fervor and life that makes you want her to hold the screen as the film's lead 
rather than her dull companion. 
     Important historical events involving Hitler and his Nazis scatter 
themselves across the film; these landmarks serve as the film's little 
conflict.  Obviously, the tables are turned in the life of Suzie by these 
events, whose Jewish origin is unknown among her Parisian colleagues. 
     The Man Who Cried has many aspirations, none of which come full circle 
by the film's close.  There are forced messages here and there: "Go forward; 
always go forward," Lola preaches to Suzie; there's romance between Suzie and 
a fellow target of Hitler's Nazis, the gypsy Cesar (Johnny Depp, who, like 
Ricci, barely gets to speak); Lola struggles with her character that desires 
above all things wealth and men who have it; and at the core of all these 
devices lies Suzie's desire to travel to America, where her father journeyed 
after leaving her and her mother years ago. 
     The film's main problem is that Potter isn't skilled enough to tell the 
epic-sized story of Suzie.  The time period's instability, the conflicting 
social classes, the prejudice against Suzie from all those around her in her 
new life: serving as both writer and director, Potter throws in some of each, 
but hardly an inch of depth is to be found in any.  By the time the 
sigh-inducing climax hits, the believability and complete absence of focus 
leave one ready to leave the theater.  The film's falling action is weirdly 
unsatisfying and unlikely; are we really meant to believe any of this could 
happen? Contrastingly, in its moving final scene, The Man Who Cried strikes a 
note that is made effective in its ties to the emotional beginning of the 
film. 
     Although it's apparent that Potter can't grasp what she reaches, I'm 
puzzled as to why she reaches for so much in the first place.  Ricci's Suzie 
is meant to be the film's core: from the extended flashback at the film's 
beginning to the quickly drawn ending, everything seen in the film, in some 
way, relates to her.  So why then does Potter spend so much time on subplots 
involving other individuals?  The character of Suzie is too present for The 
Man Who Cried to work as an ensemble, but not present enough for the film to 
be Ricci's.      
     The almost constant lack of flow and one-note tone with which Potter 
depicts The Man Who Cried are somewhat improved upon by Sacha Vierny's 
beautiful cinematography that renders the film's various locations 
wonderfully.  Also worthy of note are Lindy Hemming's costumes that help to 
depict the area quite nicely.   
     And then there's the music.  From minute one to minute ninety-seven, 
there's hardly a moment when the wavering, skilled voice of an opera singer 
or the rhythms of the gypsy music don't undercut the action; the notes 
stricken both overwhelm (particularly John Turturro, portraying fictional 
opera singer Dante Dominio, whose money and reputation catch Lola's interest) 
and accompany (oftentimes, the perfect chords are captured to undermine the 
state of the film's characters and reinforce that state).  Potter obviously 
cares much about each and every musical note; unfortunately, the same effort 
isn't given towards (almost) everything else. 

Title
Review for American Beauty (1999)
American Beauty by John Sylva (DewyNGale@aol.com)     Rating: A+
http://2Webmasters.simplenet.com (COMING OCTOBER 26th)
Think hard about the following question.  When was the last time that when a
film's credits started rolling, you just stared at the screen, in silence? 
Seconds, minutes later, you were still in silence.  The grin on your face seems
to be placed there naturally, and won't go away.  You can't move a muscle, as
you are completely shocked and astonished, as the film you just viewed is among
your favorites of all time.  If you're stumped, and can't answer this question,
as it has been too long since this has happened to you, go see American Beauty,
and feel the experience, once again.
You see a happily married man.  He is a magazine writer, father of one.  His
life couldn't be any happier.
You see a self absorbed, sarcastic, mean spirited person who despises his wife,
and only cares about what he wants.
You see a happily married woman. She is a successful realtor, and mother of
one. Her life couldn't be any more perfect.
You see a shallow, rude person who despises her family, and only seems to be
the reflection of Carol Brady.
Lester (Kevin Spacey) and Carolyn (Annette Bening) Burnham live in a peaceful,
ordinary suburban neighborhood, where they live their not so peaceful lives. 
The unhappily married couple live with teen daughter Jane (Thora Birch), who
appears to hate both her parents, as she often smarts off to them and uses
vulgar words at them.  This relatively small, threesome of a family is the main
focus of American Beauty, in which we get a closer look at each one of the main
characters, as the film unfolds each being's true beauty.  By the time American
Beauty reaches its climax, we have "looked closer" at every character, as their
true personalities and feelings are true.  By the time American Beauty reaches
its climax, you have felt so many emotions and thoughts you feel like you're
going to explode.  By the time American Beauty reaches its climax, you realize
you've seen one of the most powerful, saddening, funny, and real motion
pictures of our time. 
Looking to take an active interest in their daughter, Lester and Carolyn attend
a basketball game in which Jane is cheerleading in.  Lester catches a glimpse
of one of Jane's fellow cheerleaders, Angela (Mena Suvari), and something
inside of him is sparked.  Just by taking one look at this girl, Lester decides
to quit his job, take up smoking pot, and start working out.
"I feel like I've been in a coma for about twenty years, and I'm just now
waking up."
Of course the entire Burnham family realizes these odd changes in him
immediately, but they also start noticing changes in themselves.  Jane's life
is changed by Ricky (Wes Bentley), the new kid on the block, who just moved
next door, and films everything he sees.  Ricky, who has been in a mental
institution, finds no joys in life except the beauty in it, as he has an entire
wall full of videos that he has filmed.  In an extraordinarily powerful scene,
Ricky shows Jane the most beautiful thing he's ever seen- a paper bag, blowing
around in the wind with the leaves, on a cold, beautiful day.
Carolyn's life is changed instantly and drastically by "The King" Buddy Kane,
the most popular realtor in town, whom she has an affair with.  Carolyn goes
through with the affair with Buddy as a result of her now care free husband,
and the fact that she is on the verge of becoming a psychotic person.  As the
three go on their own separate conquests, the family becomes farther and
farther apart, as Jane continues to give desperate cries for attention to her
parents, but they are pre occupied with their own needs. 
The entire ensemble cast gives performances nothing short of perfection, as
every line, every move, every facial gesture, and every blink each actor makes
is so perfect, so real, the characters come to life, and stop being characters
in a movie, but your friends, family, and neighbors.  The screenplay, along
with the actors, bring each and every character to life with such vivid color
and beauty, you feel like you're watching your life story put to screen.  The
screenplay takes your basic, cookie cutter characters, and shows what the
characters are really like, instead of giving a one dimensional, predictable
personality.  The main cast, consisting of Annette Bening, Kevin Spacey, Thora
Birch, Mena Suvari, and Wes Bentley all deliver performances that will surely
bring them many award nominations and hopefully wins, as the bunch are such a
likable, talented group, I don't think any motion picture group, including the
Academy, can ignore their performances while choosing the nominees and winners.
Annette Bening and Kevin Spacey are a marvelous on screen duo, as you savor for
the moment the two are in a scene together, and start dealing out argumentative
statements.  At times, the two are hilarious, but when the words become darker,
and more serious, the smile on your face starts to fade away and turn into a
frown.  Watching a fight between the couple is like watching your own parents
fight, as the dialogue and acting is so real, you feel horrible and unstable
while watching.
It's obvious where veteran actors such as Spacey and Bening would give Oscar
worthy performances, but the big surprise performances come from the
youngsters.  Thora Birch and Mena Suvari bring their roles to life with an
extra touch of realism, making you believe they are teens, not characters
written to act like teens, and Wes Bentley, although not always acting like a
teen, adds the psychotic touch that the character needs to make his character
work.
American Beauty can make you laugh at one time, with its outrageously funny one
liners, and at the next can jerk a tear or two.  Or three.  Or twenty.  The
heart racing, moving climax is one that moved me in a way a film has never
done, as I sat there, eyes bulged open, jaw dropped to the ground, tears on
their way to my eyes.  Everything from start to finish in American Beauty is
done so perfectly, you wonder how the screenplay is written by, and the film is
directed by, first time filmmakers.  The screenplay, written by Alan Ball, will
surely launch him into superstardom, as American Beauty is the most skillfully
crafted piece of work to be put to screen this year.  Ball knows not only how
to make the viewer laugh and cry, but how to make them sympathize with
characters, relate to characters, and care for them deeply.  Director Sam
Mendes' directorial debut in film is an enticing blend of comedy, drama, and
contains a rock solid, down to earth feel about it, you just can't refuse
loving this four star gem.
The Bottom Line- You see a movie.  Look closer, and you'll see one of the
decade's best.

Title
Review for Frequency (2000)
FREQUENCY (2000) by JOHN SYLVA, associate of OFCS (www.ofcs.org)
It's a wonder of a concept, isn't it?  The thought of reaching back in time,
changing a certain something that in turn alters the course of your life
forever- Is it really possible?  Screenwriter of the new film "Frequency," Toby
Emmerich, would try to pass the idea off, but perhaps the concept would be a
good one for him, which would allow the first time scribe to reach back in time
and fix all of the plot holes and mistakes his script bares.  "Frequency" has
its ups and downs, but when it's all over, there's nothing that the film holds
effective or memorable enough to have any lasting effect on the viewer.
John Sullivan is a modern man with a modern life, living in the year 1999.  He
is a dedicated police officer, with a great deal amount of affection for his
single mother, as his father Frank died in 1969.  Everything about John's life
is modern.   Frank Sullivan is a man in the past, living in the year 1969.  He
is a dedicated firefighter, with a great deal amount of affection for his son,
John, and his wife.  Everything in Frank's life is just an element of the past.
 How could it be, that parallel universes on Earth are in existence
simultaneously?   
"Frequency" tells the complicated story of the son, John Sullivan (James
Caviezel), who will communicate with his father, Frank Sullivan (Dennis Quaid),
over his dad's old ham radio- Who's been dead for thirty years.  The two unite
(reunite for John) over the radio like friends would at school after their
summer vacation, very un-father/son like, and then play catch up, as Frank has
no knowledge that his future has death in store, and John is still shocked that
there's a â€˜lil John living thirty years before him.  After the two are pretty
much on the same page, "Frequency" becomes more of a thriller, as Frank has now
overcome what would have been his death, resulting in everything in the future
being different- Including the fact that John's mom lost her life long ago to a
serial killer.
Quaid and Caviezel are major letdowns in their starring roles, as neither one
ever convinces the viewer that they're witnessing an occurrence of the
supernatural.  They rehearse the already dull dialogue without caring, and
handle scenes of intense drama with mellow mediocrity.  
The screenplay isn't written convincingly or focused enough for the idea of the
parallel worlds existing to be believable, which is a major chip on this film's
shoulder, as in order for us to believe "Frequency," we must suspend our
beliefs about the laws of physics, the element of space and time, and the
ability and capacity of the human memory.  Emmerich's script is full of too
many holes to pass anything off in the film as realistic.  Time is certainly on
the character's sides in the film, and it would have been to Emmerich as well
if he had polished his work before having it produced into this mess of a
feature film.  
Gregory Hoblit's follow up to the eerily intense "Fallen" is mostly a letdown,
as "Frequency" doesn't seem to build strong enough roots before delving into
the numerous subplots that it has.  The film seems to be trying to make a film
as magical as quite possibly the best fantasy film ever made, "Field of
Dreams," but never even thinks about making a film that plants its own roots.
"Frequency" is a perfect example of when too much is too little, as constant
twist after turn is taken, which is usually something I look for in a film, but
the catch is: The screenplay isn't written well enough for us to really care.
Although "Frequency" is a film of numerous problems, it certainly has its
undeniably touching and exciting moments, but the sloppy screenplay and acting
make for a film that is nothing extraordinary. For a good portion of the film,
you're feeling positive about the general environment and story, but as the
film progresses, the intriguing setup transforms into an aimless, shallow film
possessing a "Sixth Sense"-ish ending that may encourage one to stand up and
cheer for a moment, but then after the credits roll, you're left with the
burning question, "That's it?"  Don't get me wrong, I'm a sucker for
sentimental, crowd pleaser endings- Just not when a film is as unsatisfying,
incomplete, and average as "Frequency" is.
The Bottom Line: "Frequency" is a film of mystery, suspicion, murder, love,
reunion, and family...Somewhere, among it all, the effect vanishes into thin
air.

Title
Review for Where the Money Is (2000)
WHERE THE MONEY IS (2000) by John Sylva, associate of OFCS (www.ofcs.org)
There are nurses who treat and care for their patients in nursing homes as if
they were a part of their own family.  There are nurses who volunteer extra
time out of their life, just to be with their patients.  Then, there are nurses
who go around performing bank robberies with their patients.  Well, not too
many nurses do that, but that's what the unbelievable comedic caper "Where the
Money Is" is trying to sell.  Linda Fiorentino stars as Carol Ann McKay,
nursing home employee responsible for watching over the home's newest patient,
Henry Manning (Paul Newman).  What results from a humorous, delightful setup is
an unbelievable, over the top caper flick that is moderately entertaining, but
never escapes the "been there done that" feeling that so many films of this
genre carry.
Carol discovers that her new patient was once, or possibly still is, a
well-known bank robber, who has supposedly suffered from a stroke, and as a
result, cannot communicate or hardly move.  Catching onto what seems to be a
cleverly planned scheme, she eventually tricks him into snapping out of his
stroke act, and starts to bond with the old timer, as the stroke routine was
part of his plan to pull off his next big heist.  From here, the two, along
with Carol's husband, Wayne (Dermot Mulroney), decide to go on a series of
robberies that will eventually land the team 2 million dollars.
As the film's lead, Paul Newman is hilarious in his comic portrayal of his
aging bank robber, giving a performance that is unquestionably worth watching. 
The 75 year old actor has wonderful comic timing, and steals the show, turning
what could have been a total flop into a pretty decent picture.  The legendary
Newman deserves better than "Where the Money Is," but it's apparent he wanted
to travel into his older, crime caper days with this one.
Linda Fiorentino handles several of her scenes with comic pizzaz and energy,
and falls flat as a pancake in others.  The actress can't decide whether or not
she's putting on a comedic performance or a mysterious one, changing Carol's
personality from scene to scene, resulting in her character coming off dull,
uneven, and unlikable others-which should probably be credited to the
screenplay, which gave her an unclear character.  As her husband, Dermot
Mulroney is a complete misfire, ruining almost every one of his lines with a
cocky, unrealistic tone of voice, and awful facial expressions.
Under the direction of Marek Kanievska, "Where the Money Is" is surprisingly
good in some moments; surprisingly bad in others.  Although flawed, some of the
film's laughs cannot be ignored or go unmentioned, as a few choice moments are
worth being rewound repeatedly when the flick comes to video. Kanievska wastes
much of the film's screen time, especially with a totally unnecessary, 3 minute
plus opening credit, and overly long scenes, present only to fill time.  At a
mere 88 minutes, one would think the screenplay would be from the desk of one,
first time amateur screenwriter, but "Money"'s script gives credit to three
screenwriters, E. Max Frye, Topper Lilien, and Carol Cartwright.  The three
pull off a satisfying enough work, but don't give any one actor enough to work
with in their one-dimensional roles.  Every character in the film is
under-developed, and with a little more effort and time, could have been
transformed into well rounded, likable beings.  A lot more effort and time
could have gone a long way in other areas of the screenplay as well, as the
plot jumps from too many elements in such a short time to come off with any
realism.  The film is too unfocused to be very effective, but during many
bright moments, you can tell a great movie is trying to squeeze through the
cracks.  Still, despite its few ups, "Where the Money Is" would have been
better left for the video store.
The Bottom Line: "Where the Money Is" is where the money won't be at the box
office; but it's a fine choice for a video rental.

Title
Review for Story of Us, The (1999)
http://twowebmasters.cjb.net   (COMING NOVEMBER 16th!)
The Story of Us, a Rob Reiner film, is the second movie this fall that touches
the viewer in a way they are rarely touched by a film, as they can see their
everyday lives in the usually once in a year films.  Well, 1999 has two of
them, the other being the instant classic about a very dysfunctional family,
American Beauty.  The Story of Us, a film about the highs and lows of marriage
and family, is a well written, heartbreaking and insightful film that made the
majority of the audience, including myself, cry.
The Story of Us tells the story of Ben (Bruce Willis) and Katie (Michelle
Pfeiffer) Jordan, and asks the question, "Can a marriage survive 15 years of
marriage?"  The film is about two individuals who have come together, spent a
good chunk of their lives together, and shows when our main characters are
"him" and "her" (during the bad times), and when they are "us" (during the good
times).  The Story of Us is about their entire 15 years of marriage that is
collapsing day by day.  Ben and Katie now only see and live with each other
because they don't want to devastate their children with the fact that their
parents no longer, or at least say they don't, love each other anymore.  Ben, a
cartoonist, and Katie, a crossword puzzle writer, have grown apart during their
fifteen years of marriage, as they have grown to follow different views on
life, family, and marriage.  Katie is the more organized, sophisticated type,
who wants to plan everything out, while Ben is a spontaneous, adventurous
individual who doesn't mind doing things differently than they were planned.
The Story of Us plays out nicely, as the film opens with Ben sharing his story
with a therapist, told to the viewer through flashbacks.  As the film
progresses, it switches between Ben and Katie talking to their therapist, with
their stories being told with flashbacks of their marriage.  This method is
highly effective, as we see the characters changing from year to year, slowly
growing apart.  Through the flashbacks, we get to see the story of them through
both of the character's eyes, and this gives us a strong sense of what their
characters are really like, as The Story of Us has three dimensional,
believable main characters.
The screenplay, written by Jessie Nelson (Stepmom) and Alan Zweibel (Dragnet),
is a touching, down to earth work that hits a chord within the viewer, much
like another one of Nelson's films, Stepmom.  The script has an open honesty
and outlook on life, one that is so realistic, you feel uncomfortable at many
times, because so many situations the characters are in are undeniably
familiar, as most families these days most go through the hard times, as Ben
and Katie must.  If it wasn't for the first 15 minutes that the writers wrote,
which are rugged and certainly flawed, The Story of Us would have been this
year's best picture.
Bruce Willis, a usual action/adventure star, has certainly turned himself
around in the past year- He went from being a man who was being typecast to the
same role in action movies, to a distinguished, sophisticated actor, as in last
summer's The Sixth Sense; and now in The Story of Us, Willis shows the world
what he can really do if he is fed a good script.  Although I wouldn't pick
Willis as the choice actor for Ben Jordan, Willis handles himself nicely, and
shines in a few of the film's most powerful scenes, enough that make his
performance a definite contender comes awards season.
Where to start about Michelle Pfeiffer?  Pfeiffer's performance is spellbinding
and ultimately strong, as she brings her character to life with such charisma
and emotion, you wonder how, how it is possible for someone to portray a real
person with such realism.  Pfeiffer's performance is one that if not recognized
by the Academy next spring, will be in the heart's of any viewer that has
watched this moving film.
The Story of Us is one of 1999's most real, yet funny films, as the razor sharp
script evens out the laughs and the tears to keep the viewer hooked.  Superb
acting, direction, writing, story, and soundtrack that always sets the mood for
the film, which is beautifully composed by Eric Clapton and Marc Shaiman, make
The Story of Us a touching, unforgettable motion picture that will touch the
hearts of viewers across the country- And will certainly become one of the most
talked about movies of the fall.  The film's major high points are the fights
between Ben and Katie, as the two constantly accuse of each other of whose
fault it is that their marriage has collapsed, and although they also say
things like "It's over," or "I hate you," you can tell the two still share a
deep connection, and that inside, somewhere, they are still an "us."
The Bottom Line:  A wonderful, enchanting, and heartbreaking film.  One of the
most realistic, heartbreaking films in recent years.

Title
Review for King and I, The (1999)
http://hometown.aol.com/DeWyNGaLe/MoviePED.html
The King and I, a Warner Brothers animated, musical feature, recycles the
classic story of a woman who challenges the heart of a King, with obvious
results.  When Anna (Miranda Richardson), a British schoolteacher, travels to
Saim to educate the King's (Martin Vidnovic) children, she learns that the King
is treating his people unfairly, and must say something to the greedy ruler. 
Meanwhile, the King's Prime Minister (Ian Richardson), the stereotypical
villain, plots to overthrow the King, taking the throne.  The last, and most
predictable, main subplot deals with the King's son (Allen D. Hong), and his
love for a servant, Tuptim (Armi Arabe), and how he conflicts with his
feelings, and the ancient laws of Saim.
Not even the lone strong character of Anna can save the unbelievably horrible
waste of talent, as The King and I's problems could fill the blank pages of a
journal.  I will only note the major difficulties, for it would take pages to
elaborate on every detail.  The screenplay, written by Arthur Rankin, Peter
Bakalian, Jacqeline Feather, and David Seidler, which is based upon the play
written by Richard Rodgers and Oscar Hammerstein, has some of the worst
dialogue written in a film within recent memory, as every time the obnoxious
king would shout, "Etc, etc, etc," I would cringe.  Literally.  Speaking of
cringing- I did quite a bit of this during the rather short film, which is a
classic display of terrible filmmaking.  Besides the repetitive dialogue from
the King, on the whole, the songs seem out of place, and unlike the lyrics, are
unmagical.  The sole song which is used cleverly is "Getting to Know You,"
which is used as Anna shows the children the great outdoors, which they have
never been exposed to.  Unlike Disney animated features, the King and I's songs
don't add to the film, and are as uneffective as could be.  Take the following
scenario as an example, as the sheer horror of the King and I's music is at its
worst.
Martin Vidnovic voices the King without effort or emotion- You hear the saying
two negatives don't make a positive?  Believe it!  With the terrible dialogue
that the King has, along with his awful voice track, the King is completely
unbelievable, only shows mild signs of any personality, and the only thing that
changes in the King is that he says "Etc., etc., etc.," more and more as the
film progresses.  No personality at the beginning of the movie, none at the
end.  And where does this character's personality change?  Hey, I thought Anna
was supposed to change him!  Isn't that the whole plot?
The Prime Minister's hideous sidekick (Darrell Hammond) brings his share of
cringes as well - Oh no!  Another one of his teeth fell out! HARDY-HAR-HAR!  He
is supposed to bring laughs for the kidlets, but even at age five I would have
cringed while watching him.
By the way this review is going, you may think the reasoning for my hate for
this film is due to not liking animated films- Hence why I hate this movie,
because The King and I is a disgrace to animation.  Animated films, such as
1994's The Lion King and 1998's The Prince of Egypt, are among my favorite
movies of all time.  The animation team does design their share of well
animated settings, so this makes it easier to take my mind off of the annoying
King, until I realize that day and night switch back in fourth within seconds.
I have not read the play, or seen the Oscar winning, 1956 film adaption, but
from what I can tell, the screenplay for the 1999 version completely butchers
the play, for The King and I is never magical, nor interesting.  If it wasn't
for Miranda Richardson, who voices Anna with feeling, The King and I could earn
the title, "Worst movie of the decade."  Instead, The King and I will just go
down as among the year's worst.
The Bottom Line- Avoid this movie at all costs.  Not even young children, the
target audience in this film, will enjoy it.  Not the slightest bit.

Title
Review for World Is Not Enough, The (1999)
James Bond 007: The World Is Not Enough by John Sylva    Rating: B-
As the movies come and go, some bad, some horrible, some wonderful, it's good
to know that you can be reassured that there is still one character you can
always count on to bring you first rate entertainment in his films.  Bond. 
James Bond.  In "The World is Not Enough", Pierce Brosnan's third outing as the
007 agent, you can expect to see the usual Bond formula put to use, and you can
expect to hear the same lines, feel the same emotions, and see the same type of
villain wanting to cause mass destruction.  Michael Apted takes the director's
chair in this 19th Bond film which is a slight improvement over 1997's
"Tomorrow Never Dies", but doesn't reach the cleverness of Brosnan's debut as
Bond in 1995's "Goldeneye".
In this chapter of the ongoing Bond series, the slick 007 agent is in charge of
looking after Elektra King (Sophie Marceau), an oil heiress who is believed to
be in grave danger due to the mad terrorist Renard (Robert Carlyle).  The
challenge of protecting Elektra won't be as easy as many of Bond's missions,
for Renard has a bullet lodged in his head, making it impossible for his senses
to function, resulting in the fact that he feels no pain.  Along the mission,
Bond meets up with nuclear weapons expert Dr. Christmas Jones (Denise Richards)
and sets off to rescue Elektra in this exhilarating story of action and
inventive stunts.
Once again, Pierce Brosnan sets a new standard for himself with his performance
here.  Brosnan is fluently impressive, adding the extra charm and smoothness to
his character needed to play Bond.  The majority of the film it is hard to tell
how well Brosnan is actually acting though, as he is constantly either outshone
or under shone by his co-stars.
The talent above Brosnan being one of the "Bond girls," Sophie Marceau, and the
talent below being the other "Bond girl," Denise Richards.  Sophie Marceau is
surprisingly clever here as her seemingly (hint, hint) innocent, harmless
character, tricking you into her false emotions scene after scene.  Her
performance is the most memorable, devilishly clever performance of a Bond girl
in all of Pierce Brosnan's turns as 007.  On the other hand, we have Denise
Richards.  Where to begin?  Richards shows much promise in last summer's
hilarious laugh riot Drop Dead Gorgeous and 1998's Wild Things.  Where did she
go wrong?  To make it 100% clear, Richards couldn't sell her lines if she was
being held at gunpoint, her life depending on giving an adequate performance. 
The lines the screenplay gives her are bad enough- "Jones.  Christmas Jones. 
And don't make any jokes, I've heard them all."- but did she really have to
utter those lines without an ounce of feeling or sincerity?  Girls in James
Bond movies are historical for their poor acting skills, but Richards certainly
sets a new low.  When she's on screen with Brosnan, who doesn't particularly
dazzle here either, she makes him look like an acting legend, and yes, she's
that bad.  Although bad she may be, the Bond series isn't known for good acting
or good plots, so Richards fits into the series just as well as most of the
Bond girls that have acted as badly in the past as she does here.
"The World is Not Enough" is your basic Bond, with a bigger budget and a louder
soundtrack, both of which help make this installment a worthwhile venture. 
I've seen the majority of the Bond films to date, and not once have I witnessed
one that was ever boring or non entertaining.  This nineteenth installment runs
at a relatively long 128 minutes, but every minute is another endeavor into the
fun, exciting, dangerous life of James Bond.  Although similar to its
predecessors in many ways, the script does feature a key change, which is a
shear delight.  Judi Dench's character of M gets much more screen time in her
third turn as the sophisticated boss of Bond, as she even gets involved with
the villains this time around.  007 can't be the only one to get all the action
can he?
The major flaw with "The World is Not Enough" lies in its screenplay, written
by Neal Purvis, Robert Wade, and Bruce Feirstein.  Although filled with
adequate action and suspense, the storyline is unsteady.  Hints are given here
and there as to where the film is actually going, but other than the fact that
oil is involved, and that Renard appears frequently, there isn't a plot.
"The World is Not Enough"s script is awfully close to those of the past two
James Bond movies, as it covers no new material, other than introducing a new
character here and there, and writing the villainess' character to perfection. 
As to why the writers don't try something new baffles me, as with today's
technology and capability in film, the Bond films could be covering new ground
in the movie industry, but instead we see the same scenes, the same characters,
and the same endings, all declaring that Bond will return.  Although not a fact
that hurts the series, it would be wonderful to see the Bond series go higher,
louder, and bigger than it has in the past, and here, in "The World is Not
Enough."
The Bottom Line: Although a solid story line is only sporadically clear, the
nineteenth installment in the ongoing series is host to Brosnan's best
performance as the 007 agent to date.

Title
Review for Gods and Monsters (1998)
GODS AND MONSTERS by DeWyNGaLe (John Sylva)    Rating: A+
http://members.aol.com/DeWyNGaLe/MoviePED.html
Director Bill Condon delivers this brilliant look into one of the world's most
famous motion picture directors, the director of Frankenstein and The Bride of
Frankenstein, James Whale.  Gods and Monsters is about this interesting man in
the last years of his life.  Ian McKellen, who deserved to win the Oscar for
this role, plays Whale with such enthusiasm and talent, developing his
character to the fullest.  James Whale, who has been out of the motion picture
business for around twenty years, has been living in a relatively small home,
with his maid Hannah, played by Lynn Redgrave, who also deserved the Oscar for
Best Supporting Actress, an elderly woman with a strange accent, who loves her
boss.  One secret that is not known among the public is that Whale is gay.  One
man that definitely doesn't know so is his gardener, Clay Boone, played by
Brendan Fraser, who becomes friends with Whale as they discuss Whale's hard
life, through directing his movies, through Whale's hard times at war, and
losing his friends.
The relationship between the James and Clay becomes greater throughout the
film, and is developed much like a father/son relationship, in which Clay
starts to admire Whale, but at the same time doesn't realize that his friend is
gay.
The screenplay, which was written by Bill Condon, is marvelous, using
flashbacks and hallucinations that really let you into the mind of Whale while
his mentally stable status plummets.  Gods and Monsters isn't just a look
inside the director's mind, but it shows what war can do to a man, years after
the events occurred, in ways that will in turn, haunt the viewer.  Looking back
on the film, I still remember those disturbing sequences, and I get a chill.
The entire premise of this film is brilliant, for it's not too often we get to
see what the people behind the films and plays are like.  Much like Shakespeare
in Love, which let us see William Shakespeare, Gods and Monsters has one of the
best screenplays of 1998.  James Whale is shown not only dramatically, but
comically as well, as he asks men to remove an article of clothing for every
question he answers in an interview.  James Whale is much like another recent
Ian McKellen character, in the film Apt Pupil, in which McKellen played a
former Nazi who still held the memories, and changed the life of a young boy,
played by Brad Renfro, forever.  Unlike Apt Pupil though, Gods and Monsters
isn't as intense, as it concentrates more on quality rather than the intensity
Apt Pupil had.
Lynn Redgrave is almost completely unrecognizable as Hannah, using a hysterical
accent, and walking around with a hunchback.  Hannah added a lot to the overall
effect of the film, showing how one can put up with the strange man.
Brendan Fraser gives his best performance of his career, making Gods and
Monsters his breakthrough film that will make him mainstream.  Clayton,
Fraser's character, is one that seems like your average person, and as his life
is completely changed by that of James Whale's, Fraser is able to go places
with his character that he hasn't been able to in past roles, giving a dramatic
and moving performance.
Gods and Monsters overwhelmed me, as I viewed this man's life come to a slow,
moving halt, when I expected only a light and interesting drama, based on clips
from the film.  What moved me the most was the flashbacks, and this combined
with the great performances by McKellen, Fraser, and Redgrave make for a
memorable film which will be in my mind for days to come. 
The Bottom Line- One of the most moving, compelling, and best films of 1998.

Title
Review for Tarzan (1999)
TARZAN by DeWyNGaLe (John Sylva)    Rating: B
http://members.aol.com/DeWyNGaLe/MoviePED.html
Disney, who is still the king of animation and always will be, has been in a
slump lately, with its last two animated films not doing well at the box
office, Hercules and Mulan.  Disney used to deliver classic films such as The
Lion King and Beauty and the Beast, but hasn't come out with anything even
close to the quality of those films recently, but Tarzan gives it a good shot.
Tony Goldwyn is the voice of Tarzan in this adaption of the famous legend.  The
film starts off from Tarzan's beginning, when he is just an infant.  In the
jungle, his parents are killed by a cheetah, but Tarzan is left unharmed, but
alone.  When Kala, voiced by Glenn Close, a gorilla who roams among the jungle
nearby where Tarzan's parents were killed, finds Tarzan, she takes him to live
with her family.  Kerchak, voiced by Lance Henrikson, who is the leader of the
ape family, doesn't want an outsider to be a part of their family, but gives in
to Kala, who will raise Tarzan alone.  While Tarzan grows up, he learns the
ways of the gorilla, taking on their language, walking style, and their
behavior.  Still after many years, Kerchak avoids Tarzan.
Now grown up, Tarzan has the full agility and speed that a gorilla does.  One
day while roaming the vast jungles, Tarzan discovers Porter, voiced by Nigel
Hawthorne, his daughter Jane, voiced by Minnie Driver, and friend Clayton,
voiced by Brian Blessed.  The three have set up a camp, as they plan to search
for gorillas, and Tarzan has no idea what they are, considering he doesn't even
know other humans exist.  He immediately bonds with Jane, as they become
wonderful friends as time goes on.  Jane teaches Tarzan the ways of human, the
English language, and how to walk and behave like a human.  Of course Tarzan's
entire family is upset that he has found new friends, especially his life long
friend Terk, voiced by Rosie O'Donnell.  
Tarzan is a new step in animated features, creating vast jungles and roaring
waterfalls that seem real.  Sequences in which Tarzan is swinging on vines
rapidly are particularly well done, creating a real environment.  Even though
the environment looks tremendously real, the gorillas do not.  This is most
likely to make them kid friendly, but if Disney has the power to make things
look real, they should include the creatures.
One key feature of Tarzan is that the characters don't break out into a song
every thirty seconds, but the songs are in the background while the action on
screen is taking place.  This transition was a smart move, considering most
songs in Disney films are lengthy and not well-written.  Phil Collins, who
wrote and performed all of the music for Tarzan, does a nice job.  The lyrics
and beat to the songs fit the movie perfectly, but the songs seemed too much
alike.
Tarzan is missing the magic that other Disney movies, such as Aladdin and The
Lion King, have had.  Aladdin and The Lion King had moving, epic stories, that
appeal to adults and children, but Tarzan seems to be an attempt for Disney to
get back in the game, and not an effort to touch the hearts of children and
adults.  Although Tarzan is good, it doesn't seem like a Disney film, lacking
humor and character development.  The Lion King was moving, as you cared about
the characters, because they were developed carefully, but in Tarzan, the
characters don't change much, and Tarzan seems to just swing around in the
trees, rather than letting the viewer get to know him better.  The only
characters who seem like they belong in this film are Jane and her father
Porter, who have light and friendly personalities that fit a Disney film.
After viewing Tarzan, there is no impact on me at all, there are no memorable
moments that I am still thinking about, and I hardly remember any scenes from
the movie.  Tarzan looks great, but the quality doesn't live up to the
animation.  The voices are good though, as Rosie O'Donnell, Tony Goldwyn, and
Minnie Driver give the best voice tracks among the large cast.  Tarzan isn't
for children under 7, due to the darkness and some violent sequences which
don't belong in a children's film.  If directors Kevin Lima and Chris Buck
would have made this film more kid friendly, then Tarzan would be up there with
Disney's best recent animated feature, The Lion King.
The Bottom Line- Disney gives a good try to get back in the big time, but
doesn't succeed.

Title
Review for Titanic (1997)
TITANIC a capsule review by DeWyNGaLe (John Sylva)    Rating: A+
http://members.aol.com/DeWyNGaLe/MoviePED.html
James Cameron directs this stunning film based upon the ocean liner Titanic,
which plummeted to the Atlantic Ocean floor in 1912 after striking an iceberg. 
Leonardo DiCaprio and Kate Winslet star as Jack and Rose, two passengers aboard
Titanic, who fall in love after Jack talks Rose from flinging herself off of
the massive ship.  Jack gambled his way onto Titanic, while Rose is the rich,
sophisticated type who is aboard Titanic with family, and fiancee Cal (Billy
Zane).  
All actors put fourth their best effort, especially Kate Winslet and Gloria
Stuart (playing an elderly Rose), who both deserved the Oscars they didn't win
at the 70th Annual Academy Awards.  Leonardo DiCaprio seems miscast as Jack,
but DiCaprio gives a top notch performance as he rehearses his witty, hilarious
dialogue with emotion and believability.  The screenplay gives each character
their deserving screen time, so each character is developed to the point where
we could almost write a book about them.  
The Titanic ship's exterior and interior are marvelously crafted, not for a
second looking fake.  After researching the actual Titanic, and viewing
numerous photos, the ship looks identical, thanks to cinematographer Russell
Carpenter. Adding to the 1910's feel are the beautiful costumes which are shown
off mostly by Kate Winslet, and  designed by Deborah Lynn Scott.  
All of the elements of Titanic work, as in the three hour running time we are
told one of the saddest stories of all time, a well developed, believable love
story, and informed about the wreckage and afterschock of Titanic.  The three
hour running time goes by in a flash, as Titanic had me deeply involved with
its developed characters and massive settings, as James Cameron directs and
writes his film to perfection, and the United States must agree with me, as
Titanic went on to gross 601 million dollars at the box office.  
After the film's emotional opening credits, in which we see actual footage of
those aboard Titanic in 1912, I knew this film would stand among the greatest
of all time. Titanic contains some of the most memorable, heartbreaking scenes
I have ever been witnessed to, which make up the entire last hour or so of the
film.  Titanic is a titanic of a movie, a haunting, chilling film, as I feel
the pain of those aboard Titanic as they held on for their lives.    
The Bottom Line- Legendary filmmaking.  One of the most dramatic, memorable
movie experiences ever.

Title
Review for Final Destination (2000)
Final Destination (2000) by John Sylva    Rating: A
For this review and more, visit Clear Illusions (www.clearillusions.com)
The majority of scary movies signal the fact that a character is about to meet
their demise with cheesy music, worn out dialogue such as "I'll be right back,"
or simply with the overall tone of the scene.  How about a classic John Denver
song as a death signal for a change?  That's the kind of bursting originality
that allows "Final Destination" to invade the viewer's mind, even days after
seeing it, making one pause before ever entering a dark room, taking a shower,
or even going to sleep.  The unique and horrifying thriller is the best thing
to happen to the slasher genre since 1996's "Scream."  "Final Destination,"
directed by James Wong and penned by Jeffrey Riddick, Glen Morgan, and James
Wong, the latter two being writers for the T.V. series "The X-Files," is a
movie with wonderful ideas, and executes them effortlessly.  It's rare a film
of this nature can grab an audience's attention these days, as the genre has
seem to be completely worn outâ€`But "Final Destination" has more in store for
one than one can imagine.
Unlike "Halloween"'s Michael Myers or "Nightmare on Elm Street"'s Freddy
Kruger, "Final Destination"'s killer is of the supernatural, the dark one
himself, death.  The intriguing premise is as follows; A portion of a senior
class is set to travel by air to Paris for their class trip.  After boarding
the plane, one of the students, Alex Browning (Devon Sawa) dreams of their
plane exploding into flames just after takeoff, killing everyone on board. 
Once waking up, Alex gets himself and six others off of that plane, all of who
seem to be rather confused by the entire happening.  Shortly after their
departure, the plane takes off, and guess what; It blows up in middair.  Now,
Alex, and fellow survivors, who consist of friend Clear Waters (Ali Larter),
enemy Carter (Kerr Smith), Carter's girlfriend Terry (Amanda Detmer), the goofy
Billy (Sean William Scott) and his brother Tod (Chad Donella), and teacher, Ms.
Valerie Lewton (Kristen Cloke), are in extreme danger, as it seems they have
cheated death by getting off of that plane, and now death wants them.  The
number of survivors starts to peel back quite quickly as death goes around
offing those who got off the planeâ€`But who is next, and how will death get
them?
"Final Destination" is a film that is unbearably suspenseful; always making the
viewer frantic, as death will strike in the most unlikely of times.  John
Denver's "Rocky Mountain High" being played pretty much warrants another
deathâ€`Everyone on that plane learned the hard way.  Although it's usually
given whose life will be taken next, the intensity and unpredictability of the
film never fades, because you don't know when death is coming.  Like the
characters in the movie, I was constantly nervous and shaky during "Final
Destination".  The slightest noise or movement nearby would send me a mile into
the airâ€` And yes, the film is that intense.
The cast is surprisingly effective and up to par; the best ensemble in this
genre since "Scream."  The characters have multi-dimensional personalities for
a change, and for the most part, you highly sympathize with them once death
starts to come their way.  Devon Sawa and Ali Larter are the main focus of the
film, and both actors follow up their well written characters with even better
performances, that, like the "Scream" movies did for their cast, will launch
them into superstardom.  Kerr Smith and Kristen Cloke are also impressive,
although the two don't posses as much screen time as the leads.
"Final Destination" is one exhilarating, exciting ride.  Any age should be able
to enjoy the complexity and eeriness of the film, and should find an edge to it
that most slasher films lack.  For the blood loving moviegoer, "Destination"
contains buckets of blood, guts, and all that good stuff.  "Final Destination"
is a film that is destined to become a cult classic among horror fans, and a
sleeper hit at the box office.  Hands down to the first film in years that has
actually scared me.  By scare, I don't mean making me jump, or making me wonder
if I'm in danger, but by scare I mean a film that stays locked in your mind,
absorbing you, leaving one question that's constantly on your mind:  Is death
coming for me? 
The Bottom Line: Make "Final Destination" your destination.

Title
Review for Chocolat (2000)
In Chocolat, a chocolate shop owner tells her customers to look into a 
spinning object of obscure textures, patterns, and lines, hoping she'll be 
able to foresee the kind of chocolate they'll most enjoy.  Some scoff the 
idea, but everyone who gazes into the complexity of the spinning object winds 
up seeing something different than the next, revealing personality traits 
which the person may not have known they had before.  This can easily stand 
as a model for Chocolat as a whole: On the surface, it appears to be a light, 
fluffy fable with no depth or true worth, but when one takes a second, deeper 
look, Chocolat's true colors begin to shine through.  Making a bold statement 
about organized religion and those who practice it, Lasse Hallstrom's 
Chocolat is flawlessly acted and meticulously crafted-not to mention one of 
the best films of the year.  
What gives Chocolat its magic, much like Hallstrom's 1999 winner of two 
Academy Awards, The Cider House Rules, is its willingness to say what's on 
its mind without holding back to prevent offending audiences.  The bold and 
honest message Hallstrom conveys with Chocolat will no doubt outrage a select 
group of viewers, but those who are willing to suspend their bitterness 
because they feel they are being intimidated or attacked should find 
themselves to be in agreement with what the film says about narrow-mindedness.
Chocolat centers its story around the small French village of Lansquenet, 
where majority rules, and the majority lives by only one law: religion.  The 
bulk of the townspeople (with few exceptions) are preparing for the sacred 
time of abstinence, Lent, but when the independent thinking, seemingly 
non-religious Vianne Rocher (Juliette Binoche) and her daughter Anouk 
(Victoire Thivisol) make the village their home, the people will be tempted 
beyond belief by the mouth-watering confections in the chocolate shop Vianne 
opens.  Many are predictably opposed and deeply offended by Vianne's opening 
of the chocolate shop just in time for Lent, especially the mayor, Comte de 
Reynaud (a cartoon-like Alfred Molina), who will stop at nothing to put her 
out of business.  On the other hand, the shop is a delight to others, 
including the cranky Armande Voizin (Judi Dench), who sits day by day in 
Vianne's shop, telling the single mother about her unfortunate detached 
relationship with her grandson (Aurelien Parent-Koening), which comes as a 
result of his mother (Carrie-Ann Moss) believing Armande is a bad influence, 
as she does not hold the same, strict religious beliefs that she does.  Also 
a fan of the chocolate is the nervous wreck Josephine Muscat, whose husband 
is constantly beating her, to whom Vianne offers a home and befriends.
Juliette Binoche is charming and honest as Vianne, genuinely capturing her 
character's determination to turn the narrow-minded townspeople into more 
happy, independent human beings, but most of Chocolat's success is 
unquestionably a result of the remarkable performances of the supporting 
actresses.  Lena Olin, previously nominated for an Oscar in 1989, deserves 
her second nomination for her earnest, moving portrayal of a lost, scared 
woman torn between staying true to her battering, manipulative husband or 
leaving him to live the life which for which she longs.  Judi Dench is sharp, 
incisive, and occasionally greatly touching as Armande Voizin.  Carrie 
Ann-Moss, in what is likely to be her first largely noticed (and acclaimed) 
role since The Matrix, shows a more solid side of her acting skills not 
previously seen, crafting a character that the viewer both sympathizes with 
and despises simultaneously.  Victoire Thivisol shows much promise as Anouk, 
a young girl hoping her always-on-the-move mother will eventually settle 
down.  A trade ad for Chocolat sums up best the power the actresses have on 
screen with the tagline: "Five extraordinary women, one extraordinary movie."
That's not to say the men don't do their share, though: Alfred Molina makes 
for a sly and utterly repugnant antagonist, Hugh O'Conor adds quite a bit of 
comic relief as the priest who seems to not even know why he is who he is, 
and Johnny Depp gives a strong performance as the pirate Roux, who enters the 
film late in the game and sparks the romantic interest of Vianne.  
The technical aspects of Chocolat are strong across the board: Lasse 
Hallstrom directs his enchanting fable with great care, perfectly balancing 
the elements of each genre to be found within the film.  Cinematographer 
Roger Pratt brings an atmospheric, fairy tale look to the film, and Rachel 
Portman's masterful score is her best and most memorable since The Cider 
House Rules.           
Chocolat, adapted by Robert Nelson Jacobs from the Joanne Harris novel, is a 
wonderful little treat of a film, one that will most likely win over the 
hearts of audiences and the votes of Academy members this winter, and the 
aggressive backing of Miramax Films assures the latter.  While not as 
powerful as The Cider House Rules, Lasse Hallstrom's Chocolat is a film which 
works on all levels-as a drama, a comedy, a fable, a romance, and a fairy 
tale.  And it even lives up to its name: It is delicious to savor the taste 
of, easy to digest, and, like all excellent chocolate, it is memorable for 
days afterward. 
THE BOTTOM LINE: Chocolat is pure pleasure.

Title
Review for Anywhere But Here (1999)
Anywhere But Here (1999) by John Sylva    Rating: A
Director Wayne Wang (Smoke) and two time Academy Award winning writer Alvin
Sargent (Ordinary People) bring us Anywhere But Here, a touching, powerful film
based on the hit novel of the same title by Mona Simpson.  Anywhere But Here
tells a tale often told, but the actors and masterful screenplay make this one
of the year's best films that succeeds at being moving, without being overly
sappy.   
Anywhere But Here tells the story of Adele (Susan Sarandon) and Ann August
(Natalie Portman), mother and daughter (respectively), and their journey to
find freedom, independence, and success.  The duo lives a simple life in Bay
City, Wisconsin, a quiet, ordinary town in which the majority of residents
don't escape from once growing old.  Fourteen year old Ann is an intelligent,
bright girl who spends her leisure time with her cousin and best friend, the
always happy Benny (Shawn Hatosy), who understands and loves Ann with all his
heart.  When Ann learns her mom as decided to pick up and run off to Beverly
Hills, California with her, she is instantly crushed, as leaving Benny and her
hometown is not an easy transition to make.  The two travel across the country
in their gold colored Mercedes, having their share of laughs, but also their
share of fights. Ann feels constantly unhappy and frustrated during their trip,
as she always has around her mother.  Her mother is a woman who always wears a
gleaming smile, even when her daughter screams, "I hate you!"  Adele is rarely
hurt by Ann's cruel words, as she knows it is just part of Ann feeling
frustrated, and she's simply releasing cruel words, although they are only
somewhat true, to release that anger.  The two can get along better then any
pair of best friends at times, giggling and dancing around with joy, but when
Adele starts bringing in issues of where she wants and expects Ann to go in
life, the smiles fade, and the tears start running.  
The pair arrive in Beverly Hills, and from the get go they realize it's not all
that they were hoping for.  It's hard enough for them to find a place to live,
let alone to make a living there.  As hard as it is, Ann starts a new life
there, making new friends and taking on a new lifestyle.  Adele gets a job
working at a large school, which pays their bills.  They have made it this far,
but how much longer can Ann take Adele's manipulating ways?  
The relationship between Adele and Ann is composed of strong sincerity and
realism.  The mother/daughter relationship is one of the most real, honest
situations in a movie this year.  The dialogue, the fights, the troubles,
everything about the pair is so true to life, it's scary.  I get a kick out of
one of the most real situations in the movie, in which Adele and Ann are
cruising down a long, calm road, listening to the snappy music of The Beach
Boys on the radio.  Adele is tapping and singing happily, and doesn't seem to
have a care in the world.  Ann is slumped in the corner of her seat looking
truly unhappy.  Ann turns the radio off and quotes, "I hate the Beach Boys." 
Adele turns the radio back on, and simply replies, "No one hates the Beach
Boys."  For all us children in the world, this happens day in and day out to
us.  It is wonderful to see such realistic phrases used in a movie about
bonding, as through watching Anywhere But Here, some of that frustration felt
within a child can be released, and that child can find humor in situations
that they are presented with daily, because it is on screen, all part of a
fictional story.  Although Anywhere But Here is fiction, much of the film feels
like reality, in that it captures the parent/child relationship perfectly, and
lets the viewer relate every step of the way.  I often so myself in Ann, seeing
her pain in the exact situations I have been in.  It's astonishing how Alvin
Sargent captures such reality in his script.  
Anywhere But Here tells it like it is, and doesn't make an exaggerated, over
the top metaphor about growing up.  Unlike most teen movies to be released this
year, Anywhere But Here contains lines that teens and parents actually say, and
puts the characters in situations that people are really in- compared to the
teeny bopper movies, where all kids have it perfect, and parents don't care
what their children take part in. 
The relationships between all of the characters are shockingly real, as when
Benny and Ann are together, you'll think that Wayne Wang was videotaping real
teens, catching them in their most natural state.  Unlike how friends are
portrayed in most movies, Benny and Ann share a connection that you can feel
just by seeing them together, as the actors bring their teen characters to life
extraordinarily.  
Sarandon is astonishing as her eccentric, charismatic character, as she
convinces you of her deep, impassioned love for her daughter, and lets you feel
the fact that Adele may seem over the top, or a little nuts at times, but she
just doesn't want to let go.  Sarandon gives her second Oscar worthy
performance in two years, (the other being her role as a cancer diagnosed
mother in 1998's Stepmom) but she has never shined in a role like she does in
Anywhere But Here.  Susan succeeds at being funny without being ridiculous, as
she easily resembles any parent of a child out there today.  At times, you feel
sympathy for Adele, as you understand her cautions of letting go, but at times,
you downright despise her, as she is unnecessarily rude to Ann on numerous
occasions, but in the end, it's easy to understand: It's all out of love.
Although Sarandon is captivating, she is upstaged by Natalie Portman, who at a
ripe 18 years old, is one of my favorite actresses.  Most recently seen in last
summer's Star Wars Episode 1: The Phantom Menace, Portman gives an Oscar worthy
performance that I doubt any other actress her age, or even two times her age
at that, could master as well as she does.  Portman's character couldn't be any
more realistic, as the 14 year old has frequent mood swings, feels consistent
conflicted feelings, and is frustrated with her life and where it is going. 
Portman lets the viewer feel every possible emotion with her character, making
you relate, sympathize, and understand her character through every moment. 
Natalie gets her first, largely publicized, leading role here, and proves that
she is going to become a screen legend in the years to come. 
Anywhere But Here features an all star, powerful soundtrack used effectively in
the film.  The right song at the right moment makes you feel more emotion then
the actors do themselves, and this film uses this tactic to the fullest.  In an
especially powerful scene, Sarah McLachlan's "I Will Remember You" is used,
letting you feel unspeakable sadness for the characters.
All in all, Anywhere But Here is remarkably flawless.  You'll laugh with the
characters, you'll cry with them, and you'll change with them.  Anywhere But
Here is a movie of unspeakable realism and power, and should be cherished by
anyone that has ever gone through the troubles of being a kid.  Anywhere But
Here hardly covers any new material, but because the characters and the
relationships between them are so complex and genuine, the film engrosses you
from start to finish.  The message behind the film is an important and real
one, and told in a way that makes Anywhere But Here for boys and girls, of all
ages.  Wayne Wang, Alvin Sargent, and everyone else involved with the film
should be proud of themselves, and realize what an achievement they have
accomplished: crafting one of the year's most memorable, finest, real films.  
The Bottom Line: Like Ann says about her mother... "There is some romance, some
power about my mother," there is some romance, some power about this movie that
gives it a special place within me.

Title
Review for Unbreakable (2000)
Last year, M. Night Shyamalan's The Sixth Sense took the country by surprise 
when its twist ending shocked audiences across the nation, introduced us to
the exceptional talent of the young Haley Joel Osment, received 6 Academy
Award nominations, and went on to become one of the highest grossing films of
all time.  Since the announcement of Shyamalan's follow up to Sense,
Unbreakable, the country has been asking the questions-"Will Shyamalan
deliver again?  Will he be able to top The Sixth Sense?  Can he create an
ending more shocking than Sense's?"  The answer to all three of these
questions can now be told: The answer is yes-and with flying colors.  A
chilling masterpiece of the unexpected and the supernatural, Unbreakable,
unlike Sense, will divide critics and audiences alike, but its imagination
and ambition is what propels it past the quality level of The Sixth Sense. 
Bruce Willis (who also starred in Sense) is wonderfully subtle as David
Dunne, who, after miraculously being the lone survivor in a train crash,
begins coming to strange realizations after a strange note is left on his
windshield;  He cannot recall a time when he was sick nor injured - somewhat
strange for a grown man, eh?  Dunne searches for the identity behind the
eerie note he received, and is lead to Limited Edition, a comic-book art
gallery, owned by the mysterious Elijah Price (an afro-sporting Samuel L.
Jackson).  Price offers an unrealistic, far-fetched explanation for Dunne
surviving the crash and never being sick: David Dunne is unbreakable, his
bones do not break.  His cells react to bacteria and sickness in a different
way than anyone else.  Price on the other hand, is on the opposite end of the
spectrum.  Ever since birth, Price's bones have broken effortlessly.  Price
relates these two characteristics to that of comic book characters, as Dunne
is just first discovering his "trademark", or his special powers as a
super-hero.
Shyamalan knows audiences are coming into Unbreakable expecting a
conventional tale of the supernatural;  He knows audiences want a twist
ending that will leave them breathless;  He knows audiences want a film that
will send them back into the theater several hours later to re-watch the
film's twists which are reflected in the ending.  And what does he do with
this knowledge?  He, quite frankly, slams it in the viewer's face and laughs
at you for it.  Unbreakable will undoubtedly leave audiences disappointed,
leaving them asking "What was that all about?" and most likely stating what a
"rip-off" it is.  Shyamalan knows this.  Shyamalan has not made Unbreakable
for the mainstream audiences, he has made it for his personal satisfaction, a
tribute to comic books.  He has made a film that proves a film's advertising
campaign does not necessarily reflect the film's true intentions or theme. 
And ultimately, he has made a film that tells the audience to not walk into
his films with any expectations whatsoever, or he will, as seen with
Unbreakable, slam them in your face.  (And then laugh at you for it.)
Certainly not a rehash of The Sixth Sense, Unbreakable succeeds in a way like
no other film this year has for one reason:  It does not care how the
mainstream will react to it.  Shyamalan crafts Unbreakable in a way that the
viewer is truly unclear of what they're watching-is this a supernatural
thriller with a twist ending, or is it a comic-book adventure tale?  The
answer is not revealed until the film's final revelation, which will leave
some with smiles spread wide across their faces, and will leave others
scoffing in disbelief and disgust.  But either way the ball bounces,
Unbreakable is still a daring, unconventional piece of cinematic art.  When
the credits began to roll, I could only think about one thing: The sequel. 
THE BOTTOM LINE: Unbreakable is a uniquely poetic and haunting film that
proves M. Night Shyamalan is truly unbreakable.

Title
Review for 28 Days (2000)
28 DAYS (2000) by JOHN SYLVA, associate of OFCS (www.ofcs.org)    
Consider it for a moment.  Think about having to give up your hobby or passion
for 28 straight days.  Whether it is smoking, gambling, a loved one, or in my
case the internet- How could you possibly survive those grueling days without
it?  Every ordinary American has an addiction, and Gwen Cummings, an ordinary
American, has an addiction, and for her that addiction is alcohol and pain
pills.  After a troubling turn of events, Gwen will be admitted to a
rehabilitation center for 28 days, not able to have an ounce of alcohol, or
even one her pain pills that she so loves. As the film progresses, we see her
learn and grow as a person, as she realizes that her lifestyle is no way to
live.  The plot sounds schmaltzy and shallow, but the Betty Thomas flick "28
Days" brings the pain that Gwen (Sandra Bullock) must live through into a
touching reality, in a way that is both humorous yet dramatic, powerful yet
light.
Gwen Cummings is a character of charisma, tragedy, and self centeredness; What
one would consider the life of the party.  That is, before she gets a life. 
After making a scene (not to mention ruining it as well) at her sister's
wedding, followed by a house/car accident, Gwen is admitted to the Serenity
Glen rehabilitation center, where every night and day is filled with plenty of
soberness, chants, prayers, and "Lean on Me."  Gwen slowly comes to the
realization that she needs to grow up and give up what has made a complete mess
of her life, alcohol.  Along the way, Gwen befriends a number of other
patients, including her coke addict roommate Andrea (Azura Skye), and clean cut
baseball player Eddie Boone (Viggo Mortenson), whom she grows a deep affection
for.
"28 Days" bends between a fine line of comedy and drama it's entire 103 minute
running time, presenting both the comedic and dramatic elements of alcoholism
and ultimately overcoming it.  The latter is shown mostly through effective
flashbacks, showing Gwen's mother's problems with alcohol that resulted in her
death, and the comedic element brought through the rehab center's obsession
with the campy soap opera "Santa Cruz."  The pacing is perfect, with everything
meshing together nicely, thanks to Susannah Grant's superb screenplay.  
Almost everything is shining brightly in "28 Days," but nothing is shining half
as bright as Sandra Bullock.  Bullock digs herself out of a hole that she was
in as a result of films such as 1998's horrid "Practical Magic" and 1999's
mediocre "Forces of Nature."  Bullock is realistic and touching as her troubled
character, fulfilling her character's hardships as an alcoholic flawlessly.  
"28 Days" is a film that doesn't delve deep into the psychological aspects of
addiction, instead it just focuses on the lighter human aspects, ones that any
human being can relate to and understand with ease.  At one point, we see Gwen
at a stage so horrible that she is shaking, her face pale as ghost; She's at a
stage of total hazard.  Scenes like this in "28 Days" make it easy to relate
to, although we never completely understand all of the elements of Gwen's life
or her background, or how her mind works, but the point is that we don't need
to.  Because the film is so effortless and light, anyone can sit down and
relate to her character's life.  "28 Days" has its flaws, but if you can look
past the fact that the story has been done before, and that it's not
necessarily the best thing since sliced bread, you'll find yourself a nice
little slice of life.
The Bottom Line: Bullock gives an amazing performance in a simple, touching
film. A treasure.

Title
Review for Drive Me Crazy (1999)
Drive Me Crazy (1999) by John Sylva    Rating: C+
http://twowebmasters.cjb.net (OPENING NOVEMBER 16th!)
1999 has definitely set a new record.  For the first quarter of the year, a
teen film was released almost every week, the majority of them ending in a prom
sequence. During the summer, only one or two were released, and it appeared
that Hollywood had moved on.  Well, in the tradition of Arnold Schwarzenegger's
annoying yet classic line, "I'll be back," the teen genre is back for the fall,
but hopefully not for long.  Director John Schultz brings us Drive Me Crazy, an
ordinary teen film, with the ordinary premise, and the ordinary soundtrack,
which includes tracks by teen favorites, the Backstreet Boys and Britney
Spears.  
Drive Me Crazy is yet another film that teens will flock to, because they know
in movies such as this one, the character's worlds are perfect- they have
thousands of dollars for clothes, their dances are fancier than the Academy
Awards, and they are completely happy and satisfied with their life- they will
be able to escape their non-perfect lives, and become the perfect characters in
the film for an hour and a half.  Films like Drive Me Crazy are for teens only,
as their portrayal of high school and teen life is just a metaphor, but those
who attend these films want to so they can live that metaphor.
The premise of Drive Me Crazy (which is derived from the novel How I Created My
Perfect Prom Date by Todd Strasser) sounds like the opposite of last winter's
fun teen comedy, She's All That.  In She's All That, a guy gives a girl a
make-over as a bet to make the dorkiest girl in the school into a prom queen,
and in Drive Me Crazy, the girl is making over the guy.  You could call this
one, He's All That, eh?  Melissa Joan Hart stars as Nicole Maris, popular,
peppy student at Timothy Zonin High School, who is eagerly awaiting the
Centennial Dance, a dance celebrating the 100th anniversary of the school.  In
her perfect plan, basketball star Brad (Gabriel Carpenter) is going to ask her
to the event of a lifetime, and they will have the night of their lives- but
who does he ask?  A cheerleader who he accidentally falls on while playing in a
basketball game.  
At the same time, class clown Chase Hammond (Adrian Grenier) has been dumped by
his goth girlfriend Dulcie (Ali Larter).  One night after returning from a
party, he gets a call from his next door neighbor, who happens to be the now
dateless Nicole, who proposes that they go to the Centennial together, and
convince everyone that they're an item, but she has to "clean him up" first. 
Chase agrees, and he gets a new wardrobe from Nicole, changes his way of life,
and now hangs with the "in" crowd, along with Nicole.  Will their agreement
turn into something more?  It's a feel good teen movie, what do you honestly
think?
Melissa Joan Hart and Adrien Grenier give surprisingly strong performances as
their desperate characters who start falling for each other in this
predictable, cliche, yet entertaining film.  Hart, who will hopefully break
into mainstream film after her role here, has had a more than respectable
career- she starred in the cult Nickelodeon show "Clarissa Explains It All"
from 1991-1994, is currently starring in the popular show, "Sabrina: The
Teenage Witch," and had a minor, yet hilarious role in the underrated 1998 teen
party film, Can't Hardly Wait.  Drive Me Crazy is Hart's first leading actress
credit, and she handles herself quite nicely, for a teeny-bopper movie.  Hart
effectively expresses every day teen emotions with the same sort of Scream-ish,
Dawson's Creek-ish edge that makes films such as this one so entertaining. 
After seeing Drive Me Crazy, the question arises- Can Hart act outside of the
teen genre?  So far, my answer would be no, as at the age of 23, she hasn't
shown any extreme talent.  If Hart wants any sort of career past the age of 25,
she needs to get off her current television show.  Now.
Drive Me Crazy packs on the usual situations, jokes, and characters that the
majority of today's teen films do.  It follows the same formula the majority of
the teen films do- Boy meets girl, they fall in love, they get in a fight, and
then comes the always predictable conclusion.  Rob Thomas' fun, yet flawed
script, suffers only two major flaws that make the film less entertaining than
most teen films- an overly exaggerated character that goes around stealing her
friend's boyfriends, and the parents of the our two main teens are constantly
questioning if their children are on drugs, and don't pay attention to them
excluding their rude accusations.  Although flawed, the script has positive
morals galore, and makes for an enchanting, inspiring film for teens.
The Bottom Line: In the tradition of 80's films like the classic, Sixteen
Candles, Drive Me Crazy is a hip, yet mediocre film, and for teens ONLY.

Title
Review for Cider House Rules, The (1999)
The Cider House Rules (1999) by John Sylva    Rating: A
What is the true purpose of film?  If you ask me, the true goal of a film is to
affect the viewer to no end, letting them feel the storyline and the
characters, making them feel what they are watching is genuine.  No genre of
film affects me, or succeeds at this, more than one, that being the priceless
coming of age story.  If well executed, a coming of age film will soak you in
its plot, absorb you in its characters, deliver a satisfying, often heart
warming resolution, and leave you hypnotized, dying for more of its magnificent
treasures.  Director Lasse Hallstrom ("What's Eating Gilbert Gape") brings us
"The Cider House Rules", an uplifting, inspirational tale about finding
yourself, finding yourself and discovering to truly live for the first time. 
Based on his novel of the same name, John Irving pens the screenplay of this
warm drama, filling his masterful script with unspeakable emotion, power, and
three-dimensional characters who are put to life by a stellar cast.  All of the
characteristics I named that should be included within a wonderful coming of
age drama are gone above and beyond in "Cider," which stands as one of the, if
not the, best films of 1999.
Set in the war stricken mid 1940's, the beginning scenes of "The Cider House
Rules", which play like a first chapter to the film of sorts, set up the
magical story at a peaceful, isolated St. Clouds, Maine orphanage, where Homer
Wells (Tobey Maguire) has resided his entire life.  He was born in that
orphanage, left to be up for adoption, but through his childhood years, he
never found a permanent family other than the family he had at the busy, large,
cozy building where he had grown up in.  The only mother or father figure Homer
ever has had is the caring, gentle Dr. Wilbur Larch (Michael Caine) who has
worked as a doctor in the orphanage for decades.  As he has grown, Dr. Larch
teaches Homer the basics of being a doctor, and gives him the honor of
delivering a number of babies, and being his assistant.  In the film's opening
minutes, we get to know a number of children who await their adoption, and we
are allowed to feel the close bond that they have with Homer, and in turn a
close bond with the viewer, as they look up to him as a father figure, for he's
been with them their entire lives, and win the audience's hearts with their
attractive personalities and wonderful dialogue. 
In the film's second "chapter," soldier Wally Worthington (Paul Rudd) and Candy
Kendall (Charlize Theron), a high class couple, arrive at the orphanage to have
an abortion performed, but after this task is finished, the welcoming couple
instantly befriend Homer, taking him with them back to their hometown.  Thus
begins a new chapter in Homer's life, leaving the one place he could call home
to see the world for the first time.  From here, Homer looks for his place in
life, something different than the life that he left, which was somewhat
restricted.  Eventually, after Wally is called to duty for the War, a romance
is sparked between Candy and Homer, resulting in Homer's first true love.  As
the relationship between Candy and Homer strengthens, Homer becomes a pro apple
picker with number of African American workers who don't accept the first timer
at first, but end up becoming close to him.
The character of Homer Wells is an amusing, curious one, much like the
characters were in last year's coming of age drama "Pleasantville."  Like the
characters in the underrated â€˜98 flick, Homer is a stranger to the world. 
He's never seen a lobster, never seen the ocean.  "Cider" takes Homer on an
extraordinary journey about getting a taste of life for the first time, and
becoming a man.
At the ripe age of 24, Tobey Maguire is undoubtedly the most natural male actor
under the age of thirty, rehearsing his characters effortlessly.  Robbed of any
recognition for his role in last year's splendid "Pleasantville," Maguire
shines in "The Cider House Rules," letting you relate and feel for his
character who grows mentally throughout the powerful course of the film. 
Michael Caine gives a strong, Oscar worthy performance as his sickly character,
rehearsing his lines boldly and realistically.  The standout performance is
from Charlize Theron, who has that old fashioned movie star look and feel about
her, giving her strongest, most memorable and likable turn as an actress yet.
"The Cider House Rules" is beautifully shot, capturing the true beauty of fine
Massachusetts landscapes. (It was filmed in Massachusetts, but set in Maine.) 
Set against some of the most memorable, hauntingly beautiful settings in a film
this year, "The Cider House Rules" is an uplifting film that couldn't have been
better.  The musical score helps to give "Cider" an old fashioned,
inspirational feel to it that leaves a smile  spread across your face once the
credits start rolling.  Within its 131 minute running time, the film tells the
story of finding your place in life, finding close friendships from those who
you would least expect, bonding with a different race, doing the right thing,
and eventually letting go of things you've experienced.  But over all of its
high qualities, perhaps the element I admire most about "The Cider House Rules"
is the fact that it portrays characters as wonderful people, although they make
some bad choices along the way.  "Cider" will open your mind to letting
individuals into your life, even if they have done a bad thing or two, as the
film shows that good people do mess up, but if given a chance, they can shine
just as much as anyone else in the world could.  Rarely does a film pack so
much into it that it comes off as an awesomely overwhelming experience.  "The
Cider House Rules" blends comedy, drama, and romance into a rather short
running time for its kind, becoming one of the most admirable, memorable films
of 1999.
The Bottom Line: Corny I know, but this "Cider" really does, "rule."

Title
Review for Violon rouge, Le (1998)
The Red Violin by DeWyNGaLe (John Sylva)    Rating: A
http://members.aol.com/DeWyNGaLe/MoviePED.html
Francois Girard directs this arty movie which consists of five languages,
English, German, French, Italian, and Mandarin Chinese. The Red Violin follows
the travels of a violin built in 1681 by Nicolo Bussotti, (Carlo Cecchi) who
spends hours working on perfecting his violin.  After the death of his wife
Anna (Irene Grazioli) during childbirth, Nicolo commemorates the violin to
Anna, building it to perfection.  After around one hundred years, the violin
resurfaces in Austria.  At an orphanage, the young Kaspar Weiss (Christoph
Kocnz) plays the red violin with great talent.  After seeing Kaspar play the
instrument, music teacher Georges Poussin (Jean-Luc Bideau) takes on the
responsibility of preparing Kaspar for a concert in front of the Vienna
emperor.  From Vienna, the violin ends up in Oxford, England where musician
Frederick Pope (Jason Flemyng) has possession of the violin, and with his great
technique and playing style, Pope quickly becomes a famous violinist.  From
England, the violin is shipped to Shangai, China, where Xiang Pei (Syvlia
Chang) owns the violin, but must keep it hidden because China considers music
pointless and offensive.  The last journey the violin goes on in the film is to
Montreal, Canada, where Charles Mortiz (Samuel L. Jackson) is investigating if
the violin is authentic for an auction that is going to take place.  In each of
the five stories, the violin brings good fortune, followed by bad fortune. 
Each chapter of the film unfolds as Cesca, (Anita Laurenzi) a fortune teller,
turns over a new tarot card, telling Anna Bussotti her future, which
mysteriously becomes the fortune of the violin's.  Director Francois Girard
makes this film seem like five short movies, all starring one main character,
the red violin.  Over the three hundred years that the film takes place, we are
bombarded with dazzling costumes, realistic set pieces, and beautiful,
classical music written by John Corigliano.  The music is mysterious and sets
the mood for the different sections of film.  Joshua Bell, who composes the
solo violin pieces, executes each song with great feeling, just as every actor
playing the violin does.  The music matches each section well, as the sections
become closer to the present, the music seems more fresh and modern. 
The Red Violin has no lead human character, only about fifteen actors that
support the performance of the lead character, the red violin.  Each supporting
character gets around fifteen minutes of screen time, making the best of their
time, performing to their potential.  Each character had their own, unique
personality which was developed well in the short time they had on screen.  The
strongest performances come from Samuel L. Jackson and Sylvia Chang, whose
performances are effective as they perform every line with great feeling.
Leaving the theater, I felt spellbinded by what I saw.  The Red Violin, with
its mixture of mesmerizing music, vast settings, and the innovative way of
presenting the film makes for a film that left me stunned when the credits
started rolling.  The Red Violin is an international movie, using five
different languages, so the dialogue cannot be understood by the average
citizen of any country.  Although those five languages may not be familiar to
one individual, The Red Violin has a language everyone can understand,
wonderful music.  Being a musician, and a music lover, The Red Violin may
appeal to me more than many others, but all of the elements of the film work
and make a great movie.  It is amazing that one violin has been through much
more than any human will ever be through, and the film got me thinking.  Where
has the penny in my pocket been?  Where has my trumpet been?  I am left with
one final question about the film- Like the violin whose story was told, the
film is high quality.  Where will this movie go, concerning awards and the
thoughts of the viewers?
The Bottom Line- The Red Violin was music to my ears.

Title
Review for Sleepy Hollow (1999)
Sleepy Hollow by John Sylva    Rating: C+
Tim Burton is one of the few directors in Hollywood that can realistically
label himself as a true "artist," rather than simply a "moneymaker" or just a
plain, old "director."  Burton brings a high level of originality to each of
his films, whether it be through breathtaking scenery, fast pacing, or oddball
themes.  Also the director of 1989's masterful Batman and its 1992 sequel
Batman Returns, Burton can take the most unoriginal or mediocre of scripts, and
transform them into spellbinding pieces of art.  Unfortunately, for the first
time I can remember, Burton doesn't deliver his usual promise as an artist,
creating one of his few films that aren't absorbing from start to finish.  The
screenplay for Sleepy Hollow, written by (Andrew Kevin Walker), the classic
tale of the headless horseman, told by any older brother or sister to their
younger siblings to give them a fright, ruins what could have been a
mesmerizing masterpiece, riding on the same mediocre level of many modern
Hollywood films.
Exactly like the tale of "The Legend of Sleepy Hollow," originally written by
Washington Irving, Sleepy Hollow takes place in a small, eerie town of the same
name where constable Ichabod Crane (a lighter Johnny Depp) ventures to
investigate the murders of several persons, in which the head of each victim
hasn't been found.  Townspeople gossip about the cause for the common
atrocities is the Headless Horseman, a fierce, menacing and well,  headless
character who rides through the woods on his dashing horse, beheading those who
he pleases.  The story behind the villain frightens the clumsy Crane, as he
will be the one venturing into the wilderness to find and explore the legend
that haunts the minds of the townspeople.
On his first night of visiting Sleepy Hollow he meets Katrina Van Tassel (the
fabulous Christina Ricci), daughter of Baltus (Michael Gamdon) and Lady Van
Tassel (Miranda Richardson).  From that night on, Katrina will serve as a
sidekick of sorts to Ichabod, standing by his side for much of the remainder of
the film.  These two along with a large ensemble cast, including Casper Van
Dien and Jeffrey Jones, fight to survive, as the Headless Horseman strikes
numerous times over the course of the film.  Once the exposition of Sleepy
Hollow is pieced together, the film becomes a beautifully told, yet lifeless
thriller that certainly has its moments of brilliance, but all in all fails to
deliver.
The cinematography in Sleepy Hollow is indescribable.  From the first frame of
film to the last, the settings are magnificently beautiful, every little thing,
from a tree to simple grave, Sleepy Hollow brings forth spellbinding images,
fog floating abound in almost every scene, the sky always at a twilight gray. 
For this reason, Sleepy Hollow will be looked at by me as a clever work of art,
not for it's script or acting, but for the scenery.  Sleepy Hollow sets a new
standard for how shockingly wonderful a movie's backdrop can be, not for a
second looking the least bit ordinary.
Johnny Depp, who was starting to become one of the downright creepiest actors
in the business, lightens up a few notches from his role in last summer's
surprisingly good film, The Astronaut's Wife.  Depp is flawless as his
character, even if the lackluster screenplay does feed him a few laughably
ridiculous lines here and there, giving him more than enough lame humor to act
out.
Christina Ricci matures more and seems more sophisticated in every role she
appears in, as she went from playing the little girl in Casper to Ichabod's
sidekick in a film based on perhaps one of the greatest, most frightening
legends ever to be told, in just 5 years.  Ricci shows increasing promise with
each performance she delivers, a promise showing that in coming year,s she will
be looked upon as this generation's Susan Sarandon, or even Jodie Foster. 
Ricci conducts herself with such wisdom and perfection here, it's disappointing
the film isn't as compelling and as satisfactory as her performance is.   
Never did I think I'd be comparing Tim Burton films to low grade, campy slasher
fare, but Sleepy Hollow is nothing but a mediocre slasher flick with beefed up
visuals.  What makes Sleepy Hollow lesser of a film compared to other
kill-â€˜em-by-the-numbers flicks is that in the 1996 masterpiece Scream, and
many films with similar themes to it, the predictability level is low because
the battles are between two humans, and anything could be the result.  In
Sleepy Hollow, the battle is between a super human and regular man, resulting
in no suspenseful sequences, as we can always tell who is going to win in a
showdown.  Without a few rare, choice sequences, and the astounding
cinematography, Sleepy Hollow would be as bad as they get, resulting in one of
the worst films of the year, but thank goodness Tim Burton is here to save the
film from such an awful fate.    
Tim Burton has everything established for a bang up, shocking culmination, but
Sleepy Hollow's resolution is lifeless and mediocre, not suiting the capability
of the film.  A visual heaven it may be, but Sleepy Hollow cannot stand on
images alone.  Although Burton isn't at fault, his latest venture into his own
genre is better saved for a weekend movie rental, said even though Sleepy
Hollow is without a doubt the most beautiful movie of the decade.   
The Bottom Line: A visual masterpiece.  A technical flop.

Title
Review for Erin Brockovich (2000)
Erin Brockovich (2000) by John Sylva    Rating: A
Sheryl Crow's hit song "Every Day is a Winding Road" couldn't be more
appropriate to play in the end scenes and credits of the emotional powerhouse
"Erin Brockovich."  Steve Soderbergh's follow up to the 1999 thriller "The
Limey" is an amazing, profound motion picture that will leave you in awe.  The
title character of the flawless film is a heroine, a role model for the new
century- An unemployed single mother of three who eventually becomes
responsible for the largest money settlement in a direct action legal suit in
American history.  Soderbergh shows his strongest outing as a filmmaker yet
with his sharp, fast paced direction, and shows potential for many remarkable
films in years to come.  Soderbergh's film showcases the best acting
performance to date from who could arguably be called the world's biggest movie
star, Julia Roberts, and a memorable, astounding performance from British actor
Albert Finney.
The highly energized must-see film stars Julia Roberts as the title character
of Erin Brockovich, an energetic, charismatic character who supports her three
children alone, without a cent coming in.  Knowing there are bills to pay, and
children to feed, Erin applies- more demands- a job at a privately owned legal
firm in California, headed by Ed Masry (Albert Finney).  Reluctantly, he keeps
Erin as an employee, but little does he know that she will soon become the most
successful woman he will most likely ever work with.  While reading through a
few court cases, Erin finds the fact that blood samples and medical records are
being incorporated into a real estate case, so she decides to look into the
subject a few steps- more like a mile- further.  Without knowing her true
intention, Mr. Masry allows her to head out to Hinkley, California, where she
will discover that a large utility company, PG&E, is responsible for the
contamination of drinking water in the entire city, which has resulted in
hundreds of fatal sicknesses.  Eventually, Erin teams up with her boss to take
the company to court, which results in the largest settlement in a
direct-action legal lawsuit in American History- 333 million dollars turned
over from the multi-billion dollar company.   
Julia Roberts is a knockout as her offbeat character, showing her strong acting
skills are far from dead.  Roberts takes on a much more serious, dramatic turn
as Erin Brockovich, much more so than she did in the double line up of 1999
romantic comedies, "Runaway Bride" and "Notting Hill."  Roberts brings such
dramatic and emotional tension to the screen, her performance is stunningly
overwhelming- A sure bet for next year's Oscars.  As her sidekick of sorts,
Albert Finney also gives a top notch performance, delivering some of the film's
best lines and laughs.  In supporting areas, Aaron Eckhart provides a strong
character as boyfriend of Erin, and Marg Helgenberger does equally as well as a
victim of the contaminated water. 
Never feeling forced or generic, "Erin Brockovich" owes a great deal to its
screenplay, penned by "Ever After" scribe Susannah Grant.  Grant paces the
happenings in the film well, always keeping the viewer on edge as to where
Brockovich's ambitions will lead her next.  Unlike many legal dramas,
"Brockovich" doesn't plod along, but races full throttle, straight to the
finish line. 
"Erin Brockovich" is a film that is fully aware over the power it has over the
viewer.  It consistently delivers the perfect line, the perfect facial
expression, or the perfect set of musical notes at a certain spot in the movie,
bringing a whimsical spell across the viewer.   As stated earlier, "Every Day
is a Winding Road" couldn't be more suitable for the film.  Every day in the
life of our main personae is a winding road- complex, unpredictable, fun, and
provocative.  The same goes for the film, as "Brockovich" is certainly a
winding road. You don't want the credits to ever roll.  It entirely hooks you,
sucking you right into its enticing story line and 3-D characters.  You can't
get enough of the dramatic tension, the masterfully developed characters, the
well timed one liners, and the one thing that you really can't get enough of
is, Erin Brockovich.
The Bottom Line: Strong performances from Julia Roberts, Albert Finney, and
perfect direction and writing make "Brockovich" a stunner.   

Title
Review for Three Kings (1999)
The year is 1991.  War has broken out between the United States and Iraq,
causing the battle known as Desert Storm.  Flash forward to the end of the war.
 Many men have died, some wounded, some survive without injury, except for
their painful memories that haunt them with images of death and sadness.  Most
survivors would travel from Iraq back to the U.S. to visit their loved ones,
reassuring them they are fine.  This doesn't go for four certain U.S. troops. 
What do they do instead of heading back home?  Go out to steal gold.
Three Kings focuses on four soldiers who have one duty they wish to accomplish
before returning home to the U.S. after Desert Storm has ended- Get rich. 
Major Sargent Archie Gates (George Clooney), Sgt. Troy Barlow (Mark Wahlberg),
Conrad Vig (Spike Jonze), and Chief (Ice Cube) team up to read a map they found
while strip searching an Iraqi soldier, that leads to Saddam Hussein's gold. 
This task is easier said then done, as the four encounter difficult obstacles
throughout their journey to obtain the gold, and must question what's more
important to them- being rich, or saving the lives of the innocent people who
are being threatened by Iraqi troops.
Three Kings has a strong ensemble cast, with every actor putting forth the
necessary effort to create three dimensional, likable characters.  It's safe to
say Mark Wahlberg gives the most impressive performance of the four
protagonists, as the film's most touching and best scenes are left for him to
carry.  Wahlberg's character appears to be the center of attention of Three
Kings, as he is a nice, realistic, family man, whom we care about because the
film introduces his wife and daughter, and shows the close bond the family has.
 In a powerful scene where Wahlberg's character is taken prisoner, and finds a
phone to call his wife, we see the upset and hurt in his wife's eyes as she
hears her husband being beaten.  A similar situation took place in 1998's
extraordinarily powerful Saving Private Ryan, where a mother learns two of her
sons have died.
Clooney, Jonze, and Cube all turn in solid performances, yet their characters
aren't deep enough to bring them any Oscar or Golden Globe nominations. 
Clooney acts with the same cockiness he does in all of his films, always adding
an extra touch of sarcasm, or throwing in smirks here and there, making his
characters seem real.  As usual, Clooney recites parts of his dialogue without
believability, but that has just come to be a common factor in any of his
performances.
When Desert Storm took place, I was only five years old, but although I was
still extremely young, I remember the impact of the war on America.  I remember
my parents watching the television every night, hoping for updates, asking me
to leave while death tolls were discussed on T.V..  I learned from Three Kings
what all the fuss was really about, how Saddam Hussein's people were so very
loyal, how the American troops had difficult decisions to make, and how strong
the impact of the war was on soldiers' families.
David O. Russell, known mainly for the 1996 romantic comedy Flirting With
Disaster, pens and directs this moving and often entertaining war drama. 
Russell's script contains a few major flaws that bring Three Kings down to the
"B" level, as these flaws aren't just a few out of place lines, but flaws that
if Three Kings didn't have vibrant direction, a strong, positive message, and
Oscar worthy acting, this movie could be a total disaster.  The script can't
decide whether it wants to be a saddening, realistic war drama, or play cops
and robbers with its characters, as it does both, but not without roughness. 
One moment Three Kings will be effectively showing the feelings of the Iraqi
and Arab people, making the viewer feel sorrow and guilt, but at the next
moment, the film features our four main characters selfishly only caring of
their own priorities.  The entire gold plot line isn't one that is necessarily
vital to the film, as the best, most moving times are when Three Kings is doing
the usual war movie stuff- having battles, throwing some belly laughs at the
viewer, and letting you feel the pain of those involved in the war.  When gold
stealing is the main focus of the film, the interest level for me dies down
quickly, as the entire plot line is only an excuse to call Three Kings a dark
comedy.
Russell's direction isn't nearly as weak as the flaws in his screenplay,
however.  His techniques of showing the actual damage done to a human being
when a bullet tears through their skin is simply mesmerizing.  Russell also
effectively shows what is actually happening in war battles.  Unlike Saving
Private Ryan, Three Kings often puts the battle scenes into slow motion, so you
can see the bullet actually enter the victim's body, allowing the viewer to
understand that person's pain.  Russell's offbeat camera angles are eye candy,
as the camera darts to and fro constantly, giving you all angles of the action.
 The entire film seems to be a khaki color, with the only contrast being in the
blue sky, which also makes for visually magnificent sequences.
Three Kings is a clever film with some creative aspects not explored in last
year's war hits, Saving Private Ryan and The Thin Red Line.  Instead of only
making you sympathize with its main soldiers, it makes you feel for almost
every character on screen, never letting the viewer judge a character.  Every
character is explored enough so that even if they are on the "bad" side, in a
light, they seem like the good guys.  The wiser route with Three Kings would be
to eliminate most of the gold plot line, and focus more on human drama, yet the
screenplay flip flops between the two themes too often to make the film as
touching and moving as it potentially could have been.  
The Bottom Line: A strong film with good acting and cinematography, although
the morals of the film don't need a robbery plot line to shine through, and
touch the viewer. 

Title
Review for Children of the Corn 666: Isaac's Return (1999) (V)
Children of the Corn 666: Issac's Return (1999) by John Sylva    Rating: F
Can a horror movie truly be called a horror movie if it has no scares,
suspense, or even eerie elements?  I think not, but that's what Children of the
Corn 666: Issac's Return wants us to believe.  The sixth installment in the
horrible, worn out series is by far the worst to date.  Unlike the other five
chapters, Children of the Corn 666 is a confusing, brainless thriller that
takes the psychological horror route rather than slasher horror, but either
way, none of these movies are the least bit scary.  The film follows Hannah
(Natalie Ramsey) a teen looking for her mother in Gatlin, Nebraska, on the eve
of her 21st birthday.  What starts out as a daughter in desperate search of her
long lost mother turns into the story of Hannah being the first daughter of the
children of the corn, who roam the cornfields looking for adults to murder. 
That's about all that's understandable in the film, as after we learn this
much, Issac (John Franklin) who led the children of the corn in a previous
chapter, now an older, strange man, is looking for Hannah to fulfill his
prophecy.  And this is supposed to make sense.  Really.  From the start the
film is unclear of where its going, not developing any characters or throwing
any concrete plot details across the table, constantly introducing new
characters without personalities or the slightest hint of an individuality, and
sub plots that have nothing to do with what seems to the main focus of the
film.  The film runs at a short 78 minutes, but it seems to be more in the
vicinity of two hours, as the bleak, slow pacing makes Children of the Corn
666: Issac's Return excruciatingly boring.  Plot holes are everywhere in Tim
Sulka and John Franklin's unbelievably horrible script, as nothing is
accomplished or clear when the film reaches its conclusion.  Everyone and
everything involved with Children of the Corn 666: Issac's Return, namely
writers John Franklin and Tim Sulka, along with director Kari Skogland, should
crawl under a rock, and hope no one sees their horrible work of trash.
The Bottom Line: Horrible, horrible, horrible.  Another attempt to revive this
worn out genre falls flat.  And what's with that title?  The devil has nothing
to do whatsoever with this film.  Let's pray that this is the finale in one of
the worst current film series.  One of the worst horror films in years.

Title
Review for Bowfinger (1999)
http://hometown.aol.com/DeWyNGaLe/MoviePED.html
Bowfinger, a Frank Oz film, stars two of today's Kings of Comedy, Eddie Murphy
and Steve Martin.  Murphy has been in a slump lately, as his last three films,
Life, Holy Man, and Dr. Doliitle, have come no where near where Murphy's
comedic talents were in 1996's The Nutty Professor.  Martin has been in a
comedic slump, as his last two mainstream comedies, The Out of Towners, and
Sgt. Bilko, are nowhere near as funny as Martin is in 1979's The Jerk, or his
Saturday Night Live performances.  Both actors are trying to redeem themselves
here with Bowfinger, but although their performances are hilarious, Bowfinger,
for the most part, fails to do so.
Bobby Bowfinger (Steve Martin), founder and owner of Bowfinger International
Films, is pushing 50, and still hasn't gotten his big break in the film
business.  After his accountant, Afrim (Adam Alexi-Malle), feeds him a
screenplay, entitled "Chubby Rain," in which aliens come down to earth in
raindrops, Bowfinger is determined to get Hollywood's top action star, Kit
Ramsey (Eddie Murphy), in the lead role.  After Kit declines any involvement
with the film, Bowfinger, with cast, including Daisy (Heather Graham), an
Ohioan who came to Hollywood to pursue acting, Carol (Christine Baranski), who
is still trying to get her big acting break, crew members Dave (Jamie Kennedy),
and a few Mexicans that he rallied up, decide to film around Kit, having his
actors walk up to him, rehearse their lines, and hope to get the right lines
back out.
Love the setup- Too bad the Steve Martin screenplay can't sustain the
cleverness it starts out with.  As Bowfinger is just getting started, while the
cast and crew follow Kit around constantly, the film is at its best, bringing
strong laughs, and snappy dialogue- but this is where everything tumbles
downhill. Bowfinger realizes that he can't get Kit for the closeups, so
therefore hires a look a like, Jiff (also Eddie Murphy).  Jiff is a nice,
innocent guy, whose only experience in the film business is renting actively at
Blockbuster and attending the cinema.
Eddie Murphy works well in both roles, but the film doesn't have room for both.
 The film, at a short running time of 95 minutes, could work better if only
Jiff or Kit were the main focus, but the limited plot isn't strong enough for
both story lines.  If the main focus was filming Kit the entire time, without
him knowing it, Bowfinger could have been one of this year's funniest films. 
It's not that the character of Jiff isn't funny, it's that the two storylines
running against each other are uneven, and don't particularly work.  Now, maybe
if Jiff was there from the start, Bowfinger could have worked better, but once
Jiff enters the picture, the screenplay, and film, becomes a total mess. 
Martin's screenplay works at times, as it pokes fun at Hollywood producers and
the entire Hollywood style.  Yet at other times, the screenplay has its major
difficulties, as it continuously throws lame jokes at you.  For example- Daisy
is supposed to spoof Hollywood actresses, and their disposable boyfriends, but
soon after weare informed of Daisy's sleazy ways, the character becomes
obnoxious, as jokes of Daisy's fall flat.
Bowfinger never seems to take off, as the entire film seems to hit the same
notes, repeatedly.  The only times we get variation from these notes is when
Christine Baranski is present, whose character in Bowfinger is completely
clueless as to why she can't meet Kit Ramsey, and in Chubby Rain is a knife
wielding alien who gives the film's best lines.  Baranski overdoes all of her
Chubby Rain lines, with extreme exaggerations in her voice, making for the
funniest character of the film.  Baranski is the standout here in Bowfinger, as
she turns the character that is given only two dimensions by the screenplay,
and forces it to three.
Heather Graham attempts comedy again here, after giving an applaudable
performance in Austin Powers: The Spy Who Shagged Me, and succeeds once again. 
Although the screenplay gives her an annoying character to work with, Heather
Graham makes the most of the it, and she delivers some big laughs as acting in
Chubby Rain, but when she isn't, she is simply a background image. 
Eddie Murphy is stuck in another mediocre movie, but in this one, Murphy gives
an over the top, hands down hilarious performance.  Bowfinger isn't the usual
Eddie Murphy material, as Steve Martin is the main focus, but Murphy does his
share to add to the mediocrity of the film.  It's not fair to call Steve Martin
and Eddie Murphy a comedic duo, for the two barely have any screen time
together, but both give funny, credible performance as their developed
characters.
The screenplay uses many characters as Daisy does boyfriends, one after
another, for basically no reason.  Jamie Kennedy's talent goes to waste, as he
is used simply used to locate Kit at all times, or to obtain camera equipment. 
If the screenplay is going to bring characters like Kennedy's Dave in, it could
at least give personality/character development.  In another example, the
entire cheap/Mexican crew idea brings laughs at first, but did the film have to
carry them along the entire way?
Some of the gags in Bowfinger work, as the dog walking in high heels in an
empty parking lot, scaring Kit senseless, comes to mind, but many of the jokes
that have potential to be funny are dragged out, as we are supposed to be
laughing hilariously, but only a small grin may appear across your face.  Frank
Oz and Steve Martin have a good idea going for them, and a great cast, but
Bowfinger succeeds about as much as Bobby Bowfinger and crew do while trying to
film Kit Ramsey- Only somewhat.
The Bottom Line- Eddie Murphy and Steve Martin continue their slump of mediocre
films- But at least this one carries a few big laughs. 

Title
Review for Emperor's New Groove, The (2000)
Director Mark Dindal (Cat's Don't Dance) and the animation gurus at Disney 
bring us the holiday entry of The Emperor's New Groove, which is, simply put, 
the best animated film in years. Groove succeeds where Disney films as of 
late have not: Its emphasis is on character development and storyline, rather 
than the appearance of the animation itself.  Unlike 1999's Tarzan and this 
past summer's Dinosaur, Disney's The Emperor's New Groove holds the potential 
to go down as one of Disney's more accomplished films and possibly come to be 
considered an animated classic.  
David Spade brings his sarcastic antics to the film's central character,  the 
self-absorbed, selfish, Emperor Kuzco, who we're told by a poor old man (who 
fell victim to his Emperor's harsh ways) has a "groove," the way in which 
everything in his self-indulgent world works.  Kuzco has recently fired the 
wicked Yzma (voiced by Eartha Kitt), who, in return, along with her ignorant 
right-hand man Kronk (voiced by Patrick Warburton), vows to seek sweet 
revenge.  But Yzma's original hope to poision the Emperor's drink at dinner 
takes an unpredictable turn when Kronk accidentally replaces the poision with 
a potion, and as a result the Emperor is magically transformed into a llama.  
Meanwhile, the llama-herding Pacha (voiced by John Goodman), who previously 
was informed by the Emperor that his hilltop village would be demolished and 
replaced with his summer resort, unknowingly brings the llama/emperor home 
when Kronk idiotically misplaces the bag in which the transformed Kuzco is 
unconscious.  From here, Pacha and Kuzco form an unlikely, unpredictable, and 
unsteady friendship as Pacha agrees to take Kuzco back to the palace, but 
only under one condition: The Emperor must build his summer resort elsewhere. 
 But all does not go smoothly-Kuzco has not yet been cured of his 
snobbishness, and Yzma will not relent in her hope to have the Emperor 
killed.  
Jonathan Roberts and David Reynolds pen The Emperor's New Groove full of wit, 
intelligence, and a sophisticated yet simple storyline with plenty of twists 
and turns to keep the action rolling onscreen.  The morals and lessons 
Roberts and Reynolds fill Groove with are certainly nothing we haven't seen 
before, but for parents looking for a film that will entertain their children 
and quite possibly teach them a lesson or two in friendship and in life, the 
film is more than adequate.    
John Goodman's vocals make for a warm and affectionate protagonist, David 
Spade cleverly shapes his character much like the stereotype a fan of Spade 
would associate the comedic actor with, Patrick Warburton brings big laughs 
to his dumbbell of a character, and Eartha Kitt is sharp and biting as Yzma, 
making for an easily despicable, fun villainess. 
The animation's smooth, vivid colors highlight the vast and majestic 
settings, effectively setting the lively onscreen mood.  
Containing enough gags to hold the interest of younger children, presenting 
numerous pop culture references that will humor teenagers, and holding plenty 
of tongue-in-cheek comedy at which parents will laugh but find zooming right 
over their children's heads, Groove has something to offer to all ages.  The 
film's only shortcoming is: With a swift running time of 75 minutes 
(obviously to suit the short attention span of younger audiences), it all 
ends too soon. 
THE BOTTOM LINE: With the impressive Emperor's New Groove, Disney shows that 
after a long hiatus, it truly does have its groove back. 

Title
Review for Drop Dead Gorgeous (1999)
Drop Dead Gorgeous by John Sylva    Rating: A-
http://members.aol.com/DeWyNGaLe/MoviePED.html
Welcome to Mount Rose, Minnesota. So, you're a teen girl? Make sure to check
out the annual Mount Rose Miss America Teen Princess Pageant while you're here
- It's tradition for young girls. Make sure you've got three things though!
1. Your gun. 2. A bad attitude. 3. A plan to make sure no one else will win.
The ideal human example of what you need to win is the rich, spoiled brat,
Becky Leeman (Denise Richards), whose scheming mother, Gladys (Kirstie Alley),
was winner of the pageant when she was a teen. Becky Leeman is the favorite to
win this year, but has eight competitors, one of which is a serious threat to
her. That would be Amber Atkins (Kirsten Dunst), a dedicated, hard working teen
who works at the local funeral home, applying makeup to corpses before their
burial. Unlike Becky, who lives in an enormous mansion, Amber lives with mother
Annette and occasionally Annette's friend Loretta (Alison Janney) in a trailer.
A crew has come to Mount Rose to film the contestants, and the pageant, for
their documentary film. Through this concept, we get to meet each contestant,
and learn a little about each one of them, including their talents. As the
pageant date comes closer and closer, the number of contestants becomes lower
and lower, as young girls are mysteriously being killed.
Drop Dead Gorgeous is a hilarious mockumentary, which will go down as one of
the funniest movies of the year, and also the best film about making a
documentary. (The overrated Blair Witch Project would be its only competition.)
The clever screenplay, which is written by first time film writer Lona
Williams, features dialogue which is fast, edgy, and funny. Drop Dead Gorgeous
is the type of film that I will be quoting lines from for years to come, as the
dialogue exchanged among characters is hysterical. Drop Dead Gorgeous' dark
humor may turn many off, but this politically incorrect comedy should go down
as a classic to fans of this summer's South Park: Bigger, Longer, and Uncut,
and 1998's There's Something About Mary.
In a summer full of blockbusters and special effects, Drop Dead Gorgeous is one
of the few that is worth the admission price, and of course it will flop at the
box office, as it made only 1.4 million on opening day, unless positive word of
mouth starts flying around fast about this surprisingly funny comedy.
All of the performances are up to par, especially those of Ellen Barkin's, who
is hysterical as the offbeat mother, and Kirsten Dunst, who makes the best of
the screenplay, which gives her much to do. Dunst's character is not only
funny, practicing her tap dancing gig while applying makeup to the dead, she is
downright realistic as a caring and sensitive contestant who realizes the
pageant is turning into something else - Get out before you die! Dunst, who at
17 has appeared in over ten films, including her brief, but funny performance
in 1997's Wag the Dog, is getting her big break with Drop Dead Gorgeous, as her
performance shows the audience the talented actress they will be seeing in many
films to come over the next few years.
Denise Richards is the ideal snob as she walks around, flashing her faky smile
to everyone, as her desperate mother just continues to route her on. Richards
is making a great career decision with Drop Dead Gorgeous, as she has already
done sci-fi (Starship Troopers) and drama (Wild Things), but is now showing off
her comedic abilities, and this fall in the next James Bond installment, The
World is Not Enough, will be showing off her action skills. Kirstie Alley is
equally perfect as her mother, not for a second showing a bit of kindness
towards the other contestants. Alley is making a career saving decision with
Drop Dead Gorgeous, as her television series "Veronica's Closet" is slowly
losing its popularity, and her last film, 1997's For Richer or Poorer didn't
perform to well at the box office, or with critics.
The entire first hour of the film is particularly strong, but in the last
thirty minutes the film starts to lose its edge, as it becomes a good comedy.
Now for me to say that it becomes good, (from great) is a marvelous compliment
for this underrated, overlooked film. A few guys filming a beauty pageant may
not sound particularly creative, but Drop Dead Gorgeous bursts with originality
and creativity, pulling numerous, consistent gags which had me in hysterics.
The Bottom Line- A clever mockumentary with a great script makes for one of the
summer's best films. The title shouldn't be Drop Dead Gorgeous, it should be
Drop Dead Hilarious.

Title
Review for Big Daddy (1999)
In famed comedian Adam Sandler's latest film, he portrays Sonny Koufax, a
thirty some year old law school graduate, unemployed, and care free man.  Sonny
lives with apartment roommate Kevin, (Jon Stewart) who is departing to China on
a business trip, leaving Sonny by himself, but not for long.  The day after
Kevin's departure, a child is left at Sonny's doorstep, Julian. (Cole and Dylan
Sprouse) Hoping to impress girlfriend Vanessa (Kristy Swanson), Sonny adopts
Julian, only to find out his girlfriend has fallen for an elderly man.  Along
the hour and a half the movie takes place, Sonny teaches Julian to express
himself in every way, and not worry what others think.  This is usually a good
moral, but when Sonny is teaching Julian how to spit and urinate on walls, the
moral becomes not so positive.  After meeting lawyer Layla, (Joey Lauren Adams)
whose sister is Kevin's fiancee Corinne, (Leslie Mann) Julian has a ‘mother'
figure, due to her often presence at Sonny's apartment.  After an agency
threatens to take possession of the five year old Julian, Sonny calls in Layla
to help fight for the best interest of Julian in a court room scene, as the
screenplay falls to a common, unrealistic trial in which the outcome is
predictable.
The relationship between Corinne and Sonny works well, as Sonny continuously
cracks on her about past jobs, and her life, while she riffs on him back about
his unemployment and his life, which seems to be headed towards a black hole. 
Leslie Mann deserves more screen time, as her character's personality was
humorous and her character delivers funny dialogue, but unfortunately Mann was
only able to show off her acting abilities sporadically.  Joey Lauren Adams'
character was in drastic need of development, whose only past facts are that
she is a lawyer and Corinne's sister.  Joey Lauren Adams isn't to blame that
the screenplay, written by first time writer Steve Franks, had her going around
smiling rather than saying anything.
Big Daddy is an enjoyable movie, reaching beyond Adam Sandler's The Waterboy
(1998), which was Sandler's career lowpoint, as the humorous scenes were shown
in their entirety on trailers and advertisements for the film, and even those
weren't anything special.  Adam Sandler is at the height of his career with Big
Daddy, winning various people's choice awards, releasing films every few
months. After Big Daddy, I think America will move on from Sandler, and look
back to Jim Carrey, who has ruled the comedy industry for almost the entire
decade, as he is scheduled to appear in more than three movies in the next year
or so.
Adam Sandler is likable in Big Daddy, but his dialogue is repetitive, becoming
unfunny after about twenty minutes.  I doubted that Sandler would be able to
make any more successful movies after the low quality, The Waterboy, but
Sandler pulls it off.
Big Daddy is powered by an all star soundtrack, featuring the talents of Sheryl
Crow and Garbage.  The use of the song "Sweet Child of Mine" by Sheryl Crow
during Sonny's heartbreak when Julian may be taken from his possession was
intelligent, as the scenes and the emotional song make for the film's best
sequences.
Big Daddy tries to be funny, using comedy cliches, such as gay jokes, or
hurting people, but these repetitive jokes aren't funny anymore.  The frequent
sequences in which Sandler and Julian are taking pleasure in that of collapsing
roller blader's pain, laughs are forced, but die down as the pain of the roller
blader's becomes stronger, and I begin to question if injuring people is
humorous .  With Big Daddy, Sandler travels back around four years ago to his
Happy Gilmore days where he was an amateur comedian, fresh from Saturday Night
Live, defining his own genre.  Your own comedy genre should be something to
applaud, but Adam Sandler hit the same chords in each of his films, trying to
be funny by yelling and hurting people.  In 1998's The Wedding Singer, Sandler
got a boost from Drew Barrymore,  mixing his trademark comedy with romantic
comedy, creating a beyond satisfactory product.  Sandler's previous films have
been dawned with hundreds of millions of dollars at the box office, being
subject of many teenager's video collections, and have put Sandler in a
position where he is one of today's most loved comedians.  Sandler is very
likable and funny, but his films need to cover a larger variety of genres,
exploring other types of comedy, and possibly someday drama.
The Bottom Line- A feel good comedy, which couldn't come at a better time for
Sandler, the busy box office season that is the summer, and the high point of
his career.  Unfortunately, Big Daddy falls to Sandler's other movie's cliches.
 Director Dennis Dugan (Happy Gilmore, Problem Child) and writer Steve Franks
are to blame, not Sandler.

Title
Review for Antz (1998)
Antz is the first animated effort form Dreamworks Pictures. It comes with
promise, and delivers extraordinarily. Featuring the voices of Woody Allen,
Sharon Stone, Jennifer Lopez, Sly Stallone, and Danny Glover, Antz becomes one
of the most visually beautiful, compelling films of the year. Being completely
computer animated, Antz's animation seems unbelievably real, as the movement of
characters is particularly smooth.  Ants that walk and talk may seem like a
stretch, but after viewing this film, you'll think it's a reality.  Watching
Antz, you are put into the mind of a creature much smaller than yourself, and
you see how scary being an ant might really be.  Todd Alcott, Chris Weitz, and
Paul Weitz have put together a screenplay so clever, you wonder why garbage
like A Night At The Roxbury ever makes it to theaters.
Antz tells the moving story of Z, voiced by Woody Allen, a nice, rather shy
working ant and his journey to find freedom.  Z is your typical ant, rather
scrawny, and a hard worker, who hangs out with Weaver (voiced by Sylvester
Stallone), a mighty, well known and respected ant.  Z thinks his ordinary ant
life is going nowhere, until he meets Bala (voiced by Sharon Stone), the
charming princess of the ant colony.  The first real groundbreaking sequence in
Antz is between Z and Bala, as they tango away late at night at an ant bar. 
After a few obstacles, the two end up on a journey to find the land of
Insectopia, which is believed to be, metaphorically speaking, ant Heaven. 
Along their journey, they encounter wicked insects, menacing children, and much
more, which all provide for vast, beautiful scenery, animated to perfection.
Like the 1995 adventure from Disney, Toy Story, Antz is a meaningful film that
will open your eyes to the other beings alive in this world.  Unlike Toy Story
though, Antz features some adult humor that may be out of the league for many
children, who are the primary targets here.  Antz is an epic that children and
adults alike can enjoy together.
The Bottom Line: Funny, beautiful, and well-written.  The best animated film of
1998.

Title
Review for Mystery Men (1999)
http://hometown.aol.com/DeWyNGaLe/MoviePED.html
The horror genre was spoofed in 1996's Scream.  The "mob" genre was spoofed in
1998's Mafia!  Virtually every genre has been spoofed at one time or another,
but what about the comic book/super hero genre?  Don't worry, the Mystery Men
are here!  Mystery Men, the directorial debut of Kinka Usher, who has directed
the talking Taco Bell Chihuahua ads, among other television commercials,
features one of the best ensemble casts every assembled featuring a handful of
today's most talented and popular stars.  The premise is great, original- too
bad screenplay writer Neil Cuthbert had to screw up what could have been the
year's best comedy.
Welcome to Champion City, ala Batman's "Gotham City", a high tech, futuristic
town, which has been under the guard of the heroic Captain Amazing (Greg
Kinnear), who bares exact resemblance to the city's wealthiest man, Lance
Harbor, but no one can figure out who Captain Amazing is.  Lance Harbor wears
glasses, Captain Amazing doesn't.  I wonder who Captain Amazing could be?  This
clever gag comes from Batman as well, as Bruce Wayne, who is a billionaire, and
also Batman, had the identical looks of the caped crusader, and the same voice,
but Gotham City could never figure out who Batman was.
Meanwhile, at the city's cuckoo hospital, Dr. Cassanova Frankenstein (Geoffrey
Rush) is released, after he is declared "cured." (He tried to destroy Champion
City.)  Frankenstein takes Captain Amazing hostage, taking away the city's
protection, as a part of his plan to destroy Champion City.  Hearing of Captain
Amazing's disappearance, three wannabe super heroes, Mr. Furious (Ben Stiller),
Blue Raja (Hank Azaria), and The Shoveler (William H. Macy), decide they must
retain Captain Amazing, but not without help from the city's other talented
super heroes.  The Bowler (Janeane Garofalo), The Spleen (Paul "Pee Wee Herman"
Reubens), and Invisible Boy (Kel Mitchell) jump on board the talented group
that plans to save the Champion City.
With the "ticking time bomb of fury" Mr. Furious, the shoveling talents of The
Shoveler, the bowling ball with The Bowler's father's head encased that has a
mind of its own, the flaming flatulence from The Spleen, the capability to
disappear when no ones looking by Invisible Boy, and the spoon and fork
wielding Blue Raja, The Mystery Men are prepared to do what is needed to carry
out their difficult task.  Doing so will require paying a visit to Dr. Heller
(Tom Waits), who will supply the misfit super heroes with weapons, and also The
Sphinx (Wes Studi), who will guide them in the use of their powers, and working
as a team, ala Professor X, who teaches a team of mutants how to use their
powers in the comic X-Men.
The film starts off on a good note, with the wise cracking Greg Kinnear doing
what he does best, comedy, and when the new super heroes, who The Shoveler
calls "the other guys", first meet.  From here, Mystery Men turns more into the
genre of film it is spoofing, with only a few gags pulled here and there,
creating a lighter super hero/action movie than the regulars, such as 1997's
Batman and Robin, but Mystery Men's clever sequences are washed out by the time
this 122 minute film's credits roll.
Mystery Men, one of three particularly clever, comedic films released this
summer (Dick is the other one), doesn't live up to hype, or the wonderful cast,
but I recommend  it, as when gags are pulled, they are hilarious, and every
cast member and character, excluding Invisible Boy, adds their share to this
fun movie.  Most laughs come from The Spleen, whose voice does become an
annoyance at times, but his flaming flatulence is funny enough to cancel out
any negative thoughts that might have come to mind during the film.  
Janeane Garofalo, one of today's funniest actresses, is great in her
underwritten role, and takes the two dimensional character that the screenplay
gives her, and turns it into three.  I can always count on Garafalo to bring me
laughs, whether it be her performance as the outrageously rude Heather Mooney
in 1997's Romy and Michele's High School Reunion, are watching her talk to her
dad's skull here in Mystery Men, Garofalo always delivers.  Garofalo, who also
up showed Uma Thurman in 1996's The Truth About Cats And Dogs, has around ten
movies coming out in the next year, so make note of each and everyone of them,
and seek them out immediately.
William H. Macy, who steals the show in virtually every movie he is a part of
(1998's Pleasantville and Psycho), is given some acting competition here in
Mystery Men, with Garafalo, Stiller, and Rush making it impossible for him to
steal Mystery Men, but he still gives a solid, hilarious performance, as he
delivers one liners such as "God gave me a gift. I shovel well," every few
moments.
Geoffrey Rush, one of my personal favorite actors, brightens up with Mystery
Men, after performing in two of 1998s darker films that were in the running for
Best Picture at the Oscars, Shakespeare in Love and Elizabeth.  Rush isn't
given enough to do with the screenplay, creating a villain which isn't so
villainous, but Rush does what he can.
The talented Ben Stiller is great here, especially in the sequence in which the
Mystery Men attack Frankenstein's limo, and shows Hollywood the great talent
that he has, which he is only marginally able to show in 1998's There's
Something About Mary, which has a weak screenplay that doesn't give Stiller
enough to do.  Stiller's character isn't even threatening here in Mystery Men,
which makes the film funnier when Stiller unleashes his power- extreme anger. 
Mr. Furious takes himself extremely seriously, but comes off as a joke.  I mean
what is he going to do? Yell at you?
Mr. Furious isn't the least threatening character though, that title would go
to Invisible Boy, who is always tagging along, but hardly says anything or does
anything.  Kel Mitchell, a Nickolodeon star that is popular among young
children, is given nothing do do with the screenplay, therefore making it
impossible to judge his performance.  Seeing him perform on Nickelodeon's "All
That", I know he is a talented actor, and deserves better roles than Invisible
Boy.
Last but not least is Blue Raja, who delivers an abundance of laughs, while he
throws his forks and spoons rapidly, not for one second coming off
intimidating.  The relationship between Blue Raja and the other characters,
including his confused mother, is downright hilarious.  At one point, Blue
Raja's mother tells him, "I wanted to save these for your wedding day," as she
hands him silverware for his journey against Frankenstein.
Mystery Men doesn't take itself seriously, but the characters do, and that's
what makes Mystery Men worth admission price.  Luckily, the film isn't just
another "summer movie," it's a funny, fun, and satisfying motion picture.  The
outstanding visuals had me in awe for the entire running time, as the vibrant
Champion City bursts with color and brightness, creating an environment that
makes the viewer want to reside there.  Mystery Men had potential to be a cult
classic, but like many potentially wonderful movies, this one has a major flaw,
the screenplay.  Kinka Usher's direction is fun, fast, and smart, with in your
face camera angles, and quick transition from scene to scene.  The cast is what
powers Mystery Men the most, as the performers out perform the screenplay,
making the best of their roles.  Hopefully, Mystery Men will be a path to an
entire saga of Mystery Men films.  Heck- It would be a lot better than 100
Batmans, eh?
The Bottom Line- It will remain a "mystery" why the screenplay went so wrong,
but the brilliant visuals and a hip cast make Mystery Men a fun experience.

Title
Review for Scream 2 (1997)
SCREAM 2 by DeWyNGaLe (John Sylva)    Rating: A
In 1996, Scream took moviegoers by storm, giving them a new type of film to
enjoy and look forward to.  The slasher genre was reborn, and a new generation
was introduced to the popular 80s film type.  Many were skeptical about a
sequel to the classic film, saying that the entire horror genre was destroyed
by sequels, and if a sequel to a great one was released, it would ruin it once
again.  That's not the case with the worthy sequel Scream 2 though.  
Neve Campbell reprises her role as Sidney Prescott, now a student at Windsor
College, a nice school in southern Ohio.  She has moved on from the terror the
occurred when she lived in Woodsboro, California, where her mother, and a
various amount of friends were murdered by a killer dressed in a black robe and
a ghostface mask.  Since the events two years ago, survivor Gale Weathers,
played by the returning Courteney Cox, has written a book based on the events
that she experienced, called The Woodsboro Murders.  Much to Sidney's
disliking, a movie based on the popular book has been made, called "Stab." 
After the murders start occurring once again, Dewey, another survivor from the
original makes his way from California to Ohio to protect Sidney.  Along with
Dewey, Sidney's friendly roommate Hallie, played by the lesser known Elise
Neal.  She is the most likable character in the movie, and Neal makes you feel
for her character, especially when she comes face to face with Mr. Ghostface.  
Also attending Sidney's college is survivor Randy Meeks, played by the funny
Jamie Kennedy.  Now that all of the survivors are together once again,
including Gale Weathers, the killer has them right where they want them.  The
killer begins copying what Billy Loomis and Stu Macher, the killers from the
original, accomplished two years ago, only this time they want Sidney, Dewey,
Gale, and Randy dead.  The killer ends up going beyond the point where they
just want to kill the surviving foursome, killing anyone that they have a
problem with or that gets in their way.
Compared to the original, Scream 2 lives up in almost every way. One key point
that didn't live up, which hurt the overall effect, to the original was the
opening sequence.  In the original, (spoiler) Casey Becker, played wonderfully
by Drew Barrymore, was murdered while getting ready to watch a movie in her
very own home.  Scream 2 tries to copycat the original, making another
horrifying opening scene, but falls short in predictability. (End spoiler)  
Throw together Neve Campbell, Sarah Michelle Gellar, Jerry O'Connell, Jada
Pinkett, Jamie Kennedy, Courteney Cox, and David Arquette, and you get one of
the best teen casts you could ever ask for.  Neve Campbell and Sarah Michelle
Gellar's names alone will bring hundreds of teenagers to the movie, wanting to
see their teen idols.  Just because Scream 2 appeals to teens, and mostly
teens, that doesn't mean it isn't a high quality film.  It's amazing what an
actor can do when you throw a killer with a knife at them.  For that two hours
the film lasts, Neve Campbell and company become different people, and you feel
like you are watching real beings, not characters that were created by Kevin
Williamson's imaginative mind.  Especially in the eerie movie theater scene, I
felt a little like I was in the movie myself.
The entire premise of the film is that sequels are bad movies, but Wes Craven
made a film about sequels being bad without actually making the movie bad. 
Writer Kevin Williamson must have had a lot of courage to write a screenplay
this edgy.  Speaking of Williamson, he is becoming one of today's best known
movie scribes.  After penning the marvelous Scream and Scream 2, I Know What
You Did Last Summer, The Faculty, and the upcoming Teaching Mrs. Tingle, he
should become a legend.  I felt that in Scream 2, Williamson tried a little bit
too hard to make it as good as the original, where he didn't need to at all.
On the edge of your seat is where you will be while viewing Scream 2, because
the suspense level is much greater than in the original.  More chase scenes,
more hiding scenes, and yes- more gore.  Scream 2 lowers the level of the
original on pop outs, which is disappointing, but the chase scenes are very
memorable.  Unfortunately, Scream 2 falls to the predictability level at some
points, as many slasher films do.  Those trailers gave away a little too much
if you can piece it all together.
Scream 2 will open up the door for the slasher genre even more.  It already has
somewhat, with films being released such as Halloween : H20, Urban Legend, I
Still Know What You Did Last Summer, among many others.  All of these have been
worthy horror films, but they are starting to go downhill.  Let's hope Scream
3, which will be in theaters December 10th, will revive my faith in brilliant
horror films. 
The Bottom Line- Keep us screaming Neve! 

Title
Review for Deep Blue Sea (1999)
http://hometown.aol.com/DeWyNGaLe/MoviePED.html
Deep Blue Sea is this summer's second monster in the water film, (The first was
the mediocre Lake Placid) and it is trying so hard to be a summer blockbuster,
it makes me cringe.  Making a high budget film with loads of special effects
and well known actors is the formula used to make Deep Blue Sea, but if
screenplay writers Wayne Powers and Duncan Kennedy actually focused on writing
a good movie, I would have to say that is the biggest lie I've ever heard. 
Hollywood frustrates me at times, make that many times, as they have the
potential to make wonderful, spellbinding movies, but instead decide to make
100s of films relying on hype, special effects, and action to make them good. 
Deep Blue Sea is supposed to give you thrills and chills, but instead is a
disappointing film that people will be lashing out those dollar bills for. 
With today's technology, and the actors that have the capability of acting
well, Deep Blue Sea should have been an extremely thrilling, intense, fun
summer film.  If that's what you want from Deep Blue Sea, you will marginally
satisfied. Go see The Blair Witch Project, a classic film that doesn't use any
special effects, or any gore, and features 100 times the chills.
Deep Blue Sea takes place in Baja, California, at the world's most advanced
research center, where Dr. Susan McAlester (Saffron Burrows) and a team of
scientists and assistants, which includes Carter (Thomas Jane), Dr. Jim
Whitlock (Stellan Skarsgard), Tom Scoggins (Micharl Rapaport), marine biologist
Janice Higgins (Jacqueline McKenzie), and chef Sherman Dudley (LL Cool J) are
all working hard for a cure to the nasty disease of Alzheimer's.  Three deadly
sharks are the test subjects for Susan's cure for reactivating brain cells, as
handled by shark expert Carter.  Russell Franklin (Samuel L. Jackson), who is
about to live another survival situation (He was lost in an avalanche), is the
financial backer of the experiment, and has come to the research center to see
investigate the experiment, that has the potential to save thousands of lives.
In result of the cure being tested on the sharks, they "got smarter."  The
sharks can now recognize objects, and hunt like they've never hunted before. 
What results from a great setup is a 110 minute, exciting movie that is all but
impressive, but instead just summer fun.  It's not that hard Hollywood.  To
make a good movie, you need character development, good acting, a strong
screenplay, and good scenery.  It's not so difficult- Especially when the plot
outline, which is barely paid attention to in Deep Blue Sea, is as clever as it
is.  Although the other 90 minutes which are spent by sharks chasing humans
isn't the most original thing to be seen on screen this summer, the film is
powered by a strong soundtrack, a few choice performances, and rather clever,
intense horror sequences here and there.  Other than that, Deep Blue Sea feels
like the 1998 film I Still Know What You Did Last Summer, in which four teens
are deserted on an island, to be stalked by a fisherman in a slicker, only this
film features sharks.    
LL Cool J shines in Deep Blue Sea, as his character is one we care about, with
his funny one liners, and his lovable little parrot.  Cool J puts feeling into
his three dimensional character, as he did in his last film, 1998's Halloween:
H20.  LL Cool J, whose real name is James Smith, started out in the rap music
business, has turned to acting, and this transition was smart, as a very
talented actor he is. Aside from Cool J's Dudley, there are no other likable
characters, all having one dimensional personalities, but performed well by
those actors who portray them.  Saffron Burrows, who gave the only performance
worth watching in last spring's Wing Commander, does what she can with her
character, but the screenplay has her talking smart rather than showing human
emotion.
Deep Blue Sea's screenplay features no clever dialogue, lacks originality, as
it steals ideas from 1975's Jaws, Alien (1979), and Anaconda (1997), and spends
no time developing characters.  The screenplay features the focus characters
running from water and sharks for almost the entire running time, but doesn't
spend one second of the time making you care for the characters, excluding LL
Cool J's Dudley.  On the positive side of the screenplay, who is going to get
eaten by the vicious sharks is as unpredictable as the 1996 horror hit Scream.
 Once the main characters start getting torn to shreds, you know that anyone
could be next.  Instead of doing what movies should do, Deep Blue Sea relies on
the special effects and intense chase sequences to pull the viewer in, which it
occasionally does.  The special effects have nothing to do with the intenseness
of the film, as the computer generated sharks are unbelievably fake.  They swim
around as if they were anacondas, and when are shown close up, they look like a
rubber model of a shark.  With today's wonderful technology, you think they
would be able to at least succeed with the main focus of the film- the sharks.
The Bottom Line- A fun, yet frustrating summer film.  Such strong potential. 
Sigh. 

Title
Review for Pay It Forward (2000)
Kevin Spacey, Helen Hunt, and Haley Joel Osment are out to make the world a 
better place-and no, this isn't the sequel to X-Men.  (Of course it 
isn't-Hollywood wouldn't be stupid enough to let Mimi Leder helm a comic book 
flick, only films that would be great if it wasn't for her involvement with 
them!)  This time around, Leder (The Peacemaker, Deep Impact) lends her awful 
directing techniques to Pay it Forward, a film which proposes an idea of the 
same title: Do something for someone else, something they cannot do by 
themselves, and instead of that person paying you back, they pay it forward 
by doing three good things for three other people.
The concept, whose auter is seventh grader Trevor McKinney (Osment), 
intrigues his social studies class as well as his teacher, Eugene (Spacey), 
who, on the first day of school, gives his class the assignment of conceiving 
an idea to change the world.  Trevor carries out the idea of paying it 
forward, his first good deed being that of allowing a homeless heroine addict 
(James Caviezel) into his home, which doesn't go over too well with his 
alcoholic mother Arlene (Hunt). 
For Trevor's second "pay it forward," he decides to try and hook up Eugene 
and his mother, but as Arlene states, "You can't just put two people together 
and make them like each other."  Or can he? The relationship between Eugene 
and Arlene-which at times overwhelms the "pay it forward" concept of the 
film-is consistently poignant and touching, if not predictable.  The climax 
of their complicated relationship is captured in one of the most moving and 
powerful sequences seen in a film this year.
The character of Trevor is never fully realized, thereby resulting in the 
viewer never knowing what makes the creator of "pay it forward" tick or what 
makes him who he is.  The detachment from his mother is obvious and bluntly 
shown, but the origins and history of Arlene's alcoholism are only touched 
upon.  Attempting to justify Arlene's behavior and problems, the film 
introduces his once abusing, claimed sober ex (Jon Bon Jovi), but Jovi's 
restrained presence fails to make ends meet with the subplot.
After appearing in last year's Academy Award Winner for Best Picture, 
American Beauty and this spring's preachy The Big Kahuna, Kevin Spacey takes 
a different approach towards his character in a different kind of film, 
showing a different side to his two-time Academy Award winning acting skills. 
 Spacey's multi-layered performance is effective and commanding, resulting in 
yet another praise-worthy performance.
One of 1999's greatest success stories, Haley Joel Osment (who received an 
Oscar nomination for his supporting role in The Sixth Sense), makes what he 
can with his character's limited dimensions, and provides quite a bit of 
comic relief while attempting to set up Eugene and Arlene.
Helen Hunt's follow up to her Oscar-winning performance in 1997's As Good As 
It Gets strengthens my belief that she will become the next big thing in 
Hollywood.  Her work in Pay it Forward is undoubtedly the strongest aspect of 
the film, taking a character that could have been an obnoxious stereotype (an 
alcoholic working two jobs to pay the bills), and turning her into a 
fully-developed, strong individual who the viewer grows to appreciate and 
sympathize with. 
Compelling performances and moments of poignancy are undermined by nonsense 
plot devices and a parallel story that runs throughout the film, which 
involves Chris Chandler (the horrid Jay Mohr), who, after receiving a brand 
new Jaguar from a total stranger and being told to just "pay it forward," 
goes on a cross-country search of the originator of the concept.  Constantly 
cutting between this and the Trevor/Arlene/Eugene story, Pay it Forward tries 
to pack too much into one film.  The ambitions of Leslie Dixon's screenplay 
are obvious with the reporter subplot-to show how one idea can spread across 
a great distance-but as the film continuously traces certain people who have 
been affected by "pay it forward," the term and idea become overused.
Leder sets up Pay it Forward like a two hour advertisement directed at the 
Academy, pacing scenes and subplots as if the film's sole purpose is to 
receive Academy Award nominations.  Throughout the film, scenes might as well 
have a flashing subtitle stating "OSCAR CLIP," but come this February, when 
the nominees are announced, Leder should find herself sorely disappointed.
Aside from Leder's direction, all technical aspects of the film are superb: 
Thomas Newton's bouncy and fun musical score adds liveliness to the film and 
Oliver Stapleton's cinematography captures the diverse settings of Las Vegas, 
ranging from bright and shining casinos to the squalor of the homeless.
All of the happenings in Pay it Forward build up to a climax which rides a 
fine line of being tragic and being manipulative, but because the film does 
not dwell on its final twist, its damage done to the film is minimal.  
Although, a brief note to Leder and Hollywood both: I am perfectly capable of 
feeling emotion without the aid of hokey and overly-sappy songs.
The Bottom Line: Despite numerous flaws, the awkward Pay it Forward is a film 
that deserves to be seen, if only for its three central performances.

Title
Review for Austin Powers: The Spy Who Shagged Me (1999)
AUSTIN POWERS: THE SPY WHO SHAGGED ME by DeWyNGaLe (John Sylva) Rating: B+
http://members.aol.com/DeWyNGaLe
Mike Myers, you certainly did throw us a ‘frickin' bone here in what you call
‘the biggest Austin Powers adventure yet.'  Austin Powers: The Spy Who Shagged
me is the sequel to the 1997 smash comedy Austin Powers: International Man of
Mystery.  Many are skeptical about sequels, saying that the sequel is never
better or as good as the original, but Austin Powers: TSWSM goes beyond the
first film.
Austin Powers: The Spy Who Shagged Me stars Mike Myers in three different
roles.  He reprises his role as the title character, Austin Powers, the
shagadelic spy whose body was frozen in 1967, and unfrozen in 1997 to stop his
long time nemesis Dr. Evil, also played by Mike Myers, from destroying the
earth.  TSWSM leaves off where the original stopped, with Dr. Evil's ‘Frisch's
Big Boy' space capsule floating through space.  Dr. Evil returns back to earth
by ejecting from his capsule, plotting to go back in his time machine to the
year 1967, in which he plans to steal Austin Powers' "mojo", what keeps Austin
going with spy talents.  Upon his return to his secret lair, which is now a
Starbucks coffee shop, Dr. Evil learns that his evil henchman, which includes
the returning Robert Wagner as Number 2 and Mindy Sterling as Frau, have
created a 1/8 size clone of Dr. Evil, which is later named Mini Me.  The evil
Mini Me replaces Scott Evil, played by Seth Green, as Dr. Evil's son in the
madman's mind, because Dr. Evil thinks of Scott to be only "quasi-evil."  Dr.
Evil has always wanted a son that is evil just like him, and now he has one. 
Dr. Evil tells Mini Me, "You complete me," in a loving manner.  Dr. Evil
loving? Wow!  Mike Myers' third role is as Fat Bastard, a Scottish henchman of
Dr. Evil's, who is sent to steal the mojo from Austin Powers' frozen body.  
Austin Powers learns of Dr. Evil's trip back into the 60s, and uses his own
time machine to take him back to 1967, to try to save his mojo before Fat
Bastard gets a hold of it.  Once arriving in the year 1967, Austin travels to
his "pad", his smashing home/dance club, where he meets Felicity Shagwell,
played by Heather Graham, a CIA Agent who is willing to help him in his journey
to stop Dr. Evil.
As the film progresses, hilarious one liners are thrown at us, mainly by Dr.
Evil, for example, "Don't go there, girlfriend!" to the President of the United
States.  Many witty gags take place, note the entire tent scene, and just
plain, funny scenes which are so stupid- they're funny come a dozen per fifteen
minutes.  Take for example, Scott Evil going on The Jerry Springer Show
complaining about how evil his father is.  The way Austin Powers: TSWSM uses
its humor is clever, throwing a hilarious scene at you, followed by five
minutes of one liners, followed by another outrageous scene, so you never stop
laughing.  There was honestly not one moment in Austin Powers: TSWSM where I
wasn't laughing.  The last film that I laughed so hard in, was well, Austin
Powers!  It is apparent that Mike Myers knew how funny this film was while
writing it.  The film even makes fun of itself in a line, something along the
lines of, "It's funny how England and southern California look nothing alike." 
TSWSM was filmed in southern California, but was supposed to take place in
England.  I can tell you one thing- He is having a lot of fun with this
enormously popular character, which is all over television, newspapers,
magazines, and the movie theaters.
I believe that Dr. Evil got more attention in the TSWSM than Austin Powers did.
 Dr. Evil provided more laughs, more memorable moments, and more interesting
dialogue than Austin did this time around, who seems to missing the funny touch
that he had in the first film.  I felt that Austin really did have his mojo
taken away, but from screenplay writer Mike Myers, not Fat Bastard. 
Also making a great addition to the series is Mini Me, who is played by Verne
Troyer.  Even though the midget actor is 30 years old, he is adorable by Dr.
Evil's side constantly.
The first Austin Powers film had barely any sentimental quality, such as lack
of character development,  barely any detailed plot characteristics, and barely
any good acting, but Austin Powers TSWSM actually shows some quality behind the
frequent humor.  Mike Myers, with his three roles, acts as Eddie Murphy did in
The Nutty Professor, disguising himself completely in one of the roles. (Fat
Bastard) All three characters are different, and Mike Myers does do a good job
handling each one of them.  Heather Graham made a great addition with her
talent to TSWSM, and does a much better job than Elizabeth Hurley did, who gave
a very flat performance in the original, speaking her lines without any feeling
or emotion.  Speaking of Hurley, she can be seen in TSWSM for a few brief
moments.  Hopefully, Graham tags along for future Austin Powers adventures.
The Bottom Line- A groovy sequel that Mike Myers put all of his mojo into
writing.

Title
Review for Stigmata (1999)
http://members.aol.com/DeWyNGaLe/MoviePED.html
Rupert Wainwright brings us Stigmata, a high powered, clever thrill ride that
stands as one of the most intriguing and spellbinding films I've ever seen. 
Stigmata's depthful plot revolves around Frankie Paige (Patricia Arquette), a
23 year old, Atheist hipster, whom after receiving Rosary Beads that belonged
to a now deceased priest from her mother in Brazil, is inflicted with the
wounds of Christ, a.k.a. the stigmata.  From there, Frankie's life goes
downward, as the wounds become more violent and serious, and her body becomes
possessed by the unknown.  The Vatican sends Father Andrew Kiernan (Gabriel
Byrne) to investigate the matter, and when he sees the case he has on his
hands, he is forced to question his own faith, as Frankie is going through
something a little more serious than a flu bug.
Stigmata's cleverness is only somewhat derived from films such as "The Exoricst
" or "The Omen", as Stigmata's alternate world is something so original and
haunting, the film itself will stand as a representation of 90's horror films. 
The film shows slight signs of inspiration from "The Exoricst", mainly during
the multiple episodes that Frankie is involved with, but there are enough
twists to tell the two films apart.  
By the time Stigmata reaches its 100 minute conclusion, you feel exhausted,
from all the thinking your mind does while viewing this mesmerizing piece of
art, yet at the same time you're uneasy, as you may question organized religion
altogether, and wonder why so many people gather at church every Sunday. 
Stigmata's religious themes are so strong and convincing, and the message from
the film is so inspirational, and true, some may question their own religious
practices.  Stigmata will have the Catholic Church complaining for years to
come, as they are more or less made fools of here.  Although some believe this
element of Stigmata is offensive and mean spirited, I believe the writers of
Stigmata are only expressing their opinions, and expressing them through film. 
Just because one doesn't agree with the message in Stigmata, shouldn't mean the
film is a bad one.  And for those of you who believe Stigmata is mean spirited,
look at comedies such as Drop Dead Gorgeous, in which girls kill each other to
win a beauty pageant, or South Park: Bigger, Longer, and Uncut, in which
numerous ethnic groups are made fun of. 
The performances aren't anywhere close to brilliant, as there is no stand out,
or any performance that I could actually call great, but the entire cast gives
decent performances.  Patricia Arquette is terribly monotone in her role,
delivers most of her dialogue with no feeling or emotion, and comes close to
believability at times, but only convinces you half way.  Luckily, everything
else in the film, aside from the acting, is up to and above par, which takes
some of the restraint off of her rather weak performance.  Arquette's
performance is the only deciding factor between an A film and an A- film, as
for her character of Frankie to completely work, you need an actress capable of
convincing an audience of her upset and troubles, which Arquette doesn't do.  
Arquette's character reminds me most of Anette Bening's in last winter's clever
thriller, In Dreams, in which a woman was stalked by a serial killer in her
dreams, as both characters are clueless as to what is going on, both are
accused of being psychotic, and both are given some over the top dialogue which
they have to try extremely hard to say them, and have them come across as
realistic.  A veteran actress like Bening, who perfected her character in In
Dreams, could work better in Frankie's role, as while Arquette only delivers
two masterfully acted scenes, Bening masterfully acted an entire film.
The screenplay, written by Tom Lazarus and Rick Ramage does have a few holes
and flaws here and there, but the main religious themes are overwhelmingly
powerful, and the holes are ones that don't particularly stand out after
watching the film.  The main problem with the script is the way it romantically
links Frankie and Father Kiernan, as it tries to develop a relationship between
two characters who have nothing in common, have a large age gap, and one is
being possessed by unknown forces.  The relationship is unconvincing, yet it
does add some respect for Byrne's character throughout the film, as many
characters would have ditched Frankie and let them handle their own problems.
The cinematography seems to be a touch of Heaven, with bright colors
glistening, color and camera angles always perfect, and characters always
glistening with a sparkly touch.  The cinematographic style seems like
something out of a music video, which many think is a negative thing, but
watching the beautiful sites Stigmata brings for around two hours is just fine
with me. 
Stigmata stands as the eeriest film of the year to date, as it easily
out-creeps August's The Sixth Sense, or July's The Blair Witch Project.  The
atmospheric and pulse pounding style contributes many scares, but the big
scares occur while Frankie goes through her "episodes", where things get a
little out of hand, to say the least.  The direction by Rupert Wainwright is
nothing short of brilliant, while he always keeps the interest level up, the
soundtrack booming, and the scares coming.  I commend Wainwright mainly for his
portrayal of how the stigmata are imprinted on Frankie, using graphically
realistic flash images of nails being driven into her hands, feet, and well,
you get the picture.
The Bottom Line- Stigmata bursts with cleverness, chills, and strong,
convincing religious themes, all combining to create a spellbinding, thought
provoking, unforgettable motion picture.

Title
Review for Haunting, The (1999)
http://members.aol.com/DeWyNGaLe/MoviePED.html
Loosely based on the Shirley Jackson novel The Haunting of Hill House, and the
1963 film The Haunting, The Haunting is the first memorable haunted house flick
since 1979's The Amityville Horror.  The film's trailers appeared to be
sporting a psychological, eerie horror flick, but while The Haunting is eerie,
special effects are overdone, therefore making it impossible for your
imagination to scare you.  Unlike the 1963 adaption of the novel, The Haunting
explains what is happening at almost all times, therefore creating constant
tension, but few scares.  The first adaption never actually explained what was
happening when strange noises or images would pop up, allowing your imagination
to take off and allow fear to be felt.
Nell Vance (Lili Taylor), Theo (Catherine Zeta-Jones), and Luke Sannerson (Owen
Wilson) have all been hand picked by Dr. David Marrow (Liam Neeson) to be
subjects of an insomnia study which will be held at the eerie, gothic, New
England mansion of Hill House, which "sits all alone," after "something bad
happened."  After one night at Hill House, Nell believes it is haunted with
spirits of children, and is targeting her to live in the creepy home.
As the film prepares you for the exciting second half, we view Hill House,
inside and out, making Hill House the real star of the show.  The $10 million
sets are unbelievable, and if it weren't for all the special effects that come
in the film's climax, The Haunting's environment could have served a much
greater purpose.  The screenplay, written by David Self, and the direction of
Jan De Bont (Twister) take their marvelous sets for granted, as the stunning
visual effects are overused, and the house is used as a backdrop for these
events to occur.  Sure we see plenty of Hill House during the guest's arrival,
but the house is never used in a scary way, unlike the 1963 adaption.
The screenplay is particularly weak, as we hardly get to know the characters,
and there are so many scenes with horrifying potential that go down the drain
due to special effects, which should have been watered down about 50%.  I felt
like I was watching 1997's Austin Powers at times, as David Self's screenplay
has what Richard Pryor would call, "The Honky Syndrome." There is an abundance
of plot gaps, including - After Liam Neeson unlocks the gate to Hill House to
let out his injured assistant, he seems to have forgotten later on when he
needs the key, that he actually has it.  Even I could make a screenplay that
makes more sense then that of David Self's, as could anyone else with the
education of a 5th grader.
Nell is the only developed character, as in the film's opening moments, we see
Nell thrown out of her apartment carelessly by her family, leaving her no place
to go, except Hill House.  Nell decides to go to Hill House for the experiment
in which she will be paid $900 a week, hoping the experience will be a standout
from her otherwise ordinary, normal life.  Lili Taylor pulls off the role for
the most part, but come the second half of the film when Nell totally loses it,
not Lili Taylor, nor anyone could pull off some of the actions and lines that
Nell presents.
Catherine Zeta-Jones, who makes her third appearance as the popular actress she
is today, does what she can with the weak character she has, as in the first
half of the film Theo's presence is noticeable, as she delivers line after line
of witty dialogue, but in the second half, the film concentrates only on Nell,
as Theo, along with Liam Neeson's Dr. Marrow and Owen Wilson's Luke become just
a background image.
Liam Neeson, who has come to be one of today's most distinguished actors, after
portraying Jedi Qui Gon-Jinn in Star Wars Episode 1: The Phantom Menace, and
receiving an Oscar nomination for Schindler's List.  In The Haunting, Neeson is
given nothing to do at all, as Dr. Marrow doesn't take action at anytime, and
only listens to the characters as they share their experiences.  Neeson is used
as the doctor to setup the plot, but is used no further, as the special effects
are unleashed.
Although The Haunting suffers major flaws, mainly due to its screenplay, the
film is still extremely enjoyable, and it does call for me to bring up a few
good points.  The Haunting is suspenseful, as the creaks and cracks in the
night are eerie, and the visual effects are amazing, as we see ghosts swim
through bed sheets, and a room literally comes alive.  The Haunting gets the
title of "summer- blockbuster-popcorn flick," but the film is fun enough and
keeps your attention for the full 2 hours it runs, and therefore I recommend
this creepy, fun film.
The Bottom Line- Although The Haunting may be this year's Armageddon, it is
still worth your time and money.

Title
Review for Haunting, The (1963)
The Haunting (1963) by John Sylva    Rating: A
http://members.aol.com/DeWyNGaLe/MoviePED.html
Robert Wise directs this clever thriller based on the classic novel The
Haunting of Hill House by Shirley Jackson.  The Haunting terrifies you with its
intense, powerful sound and simple visual effects, creating a truly horrifying
experience.  The line from the 1996 film "Scream" best sums up my feelings with
the line, "I'm shakin' in my boots," as The Haunting scared me to the point
where I was in a standstill.  
Hill House, the eerie environment of The Haunting is unbelievable, vast
staircases that seem to be be endless, towering walls with windows, that seem
to be, and might actually be, starting at you, and an exterior that should have
earned The Haunting an Academy Award for Cinematography.  The atmosphere of The
Haunting sends chills down my spine, depicting Hill House a human being, having
windows for eyes, walls for its skin.
Hill House was born bad, as it brought death to many that inhabited it,
throughout its history.  Dr. John Markway isn't one terrified of the legend,
but fascinated by it.  Planning to conduct an experiment to prove the existence
of the supernatural, Dr. Markway chooses Hill House as the environment for his
studies.  Dr. Markway has three individuals involved in his experiment, who
have all encountered the supernatural at a time. The study will consist of
Eleanor, (Julie Harris) the most sincere of the group, a paranoid woman who
believes that Hill House will complete her life, the arrogant Theodora, (Claire
Bloom) and the wise - cracking Luke. (Russ Tamblyn) Upon the arrival of the
four characters, it is safe to say, all hell breaks loose.
The characters of The Haunting are memorable, well developed, as the actors
portraying them give flawless performances.  The relationships between
characters, particularly the Theodora/Eleanor relationship help strengthen the
characters, as the viewer can relate to their feelings, due to wonderful acting
by Claire Bloom and Julie Harris.
Hill House targets Eleanor, sending personal messages to her, to the point of
insanity.  Theodora in particular doesn't respect Eleanor's thoughts, creating
tension among the two, who share a room.  Julie Harris perfects her role,
acting brilliantly as Hill House centers on her, but the screenplay written by
Nelson Gidding has Eleanor hearing voices constantly, which become obnoxious,
as they are overused.
The Haunting is one of the most memorable films I've seen, capturing the terror
that Hill House brings to these four people, simply, but quite effectively,
using a moving, tense score, and the eerie atmosphere.  The film moves out a
slow, intense pace, without violence, but concentrating on the terror the four
feel while inhabiting Hill House.  
The Haunting's foggy resolution is disappointing, leaving many gaps open, such
as what is haunting Hill House, and what becomes of Hill House .  The film's
brief running time of 112 minutes could have been stretched into 212 minutes,
and could have still been satisfactory, explaining more about the birth of Hill
House, the hauntings of Hill House, and the future of Hill House.
Director Wise (The Sound of Music) creates the film which opens up the door for
the "haunted house" genre of horror, with many copycat films following it, such
as The Amityville Horror. (1979)  The Haunting, much like Psycho, messes with
the viewer's mind, turning the fear of ghosts, and cheap motels, into a fun
film which I can't get enough of.
The Haunting overwhelms me, as I find it hard to picture a 1963, black and
white, Rated G movie to be as terrifying as it is.  I recommend this film to
any movie lover, as The Haunting stands as one of the few horror films that
give me goosebumps, and create an insomniac out of me, as I had trouble
sleeping upon the night of my viewing the classic film, The Haunting.
The Bottom Line- A clever thriller, overlooked thriller, which stands as one of
the most terrifying films to date.

Title
Review for Detroit Rock City (1999)
http://hometown.aol.com/DeWyNGaLe/MoviePED.html
The English language consists of hundreds of thousands of words, one for almost
anything that occurs or could occur in life.  Detroit Rock City can best be
summed up by one, simple word- energy.  At least that word is more positive
than my expectations going into this 70's teen film- I expected the words that
would sum the film up to be "horrible" and "cliche."  Being released the same
weekend as a smart, innovative teen film, "Brokedown Palace", Detroit Rock City
couldn't come at a better time, as many teens prefer "energy" over "quality,"
which will in turn boost Detroit Rock City's box office gross.  Along with
"Dick", a clever spoof on Watergate, "Brokedown Palace" was the second smart
teen film of the summer, but the streak ends here with Detroit Rock City. 
Unlike "Dick" and "Brokedown Palace," Detroit Rock City isn't about anything.  
Four pothead kids, Hawk (Edward Furlong), Jam (Sam Huntington), Trip (James
DeBello), and Lex (Giuseppe Andrews) are our protagonists of sorts, who instead
of party to the then popular disco beats and bright clothing, jam to a
different beat, the beat of Kiss.  For the past three years, the foursome have
been attempting to scam their way into the annual Detroit, Michigan Kiss
concert, but have been unsuccessful- What will this year bring?  Will they make
it to their idol's concert this year, or will they be stopped by misfortune and
strict parents?
Some plot, eh?  Luckily, the weak screenplay (written by first timer Carl V.
Dupre) is brought to life by director Adam Rifkin, who presents Detroit Rock
City with so much energy, there's not a dull moment in the film.  Rifkin, whose
oddball camera angles and fast pace make Detroit Rock City interesting and fun
to watch, keep you involved with the film, until you realize that apart from
the slick direction, a few credible performances, and a few choice gags,
Detroit Rock City is as lost as the main characters are.
As the ultra religious mother of Jam, Lin Shaye's performance steals the show,
as she despises Kiss- with a passion.  According to her, the name stands for
"Knights In Satan's Service", and their music shouldn't be listened to by a
single soul.  Whenever Detroit Rock City's high energy level is down, Lin Shaye
rescues the film from dragging.
Our four main characters are all performed with strong energy and pizzaz from
the actors, but then again, it doesn't take much to walk around and scream. 
The only standout performance is from Sam Huntington, who is given more to do
from the screenplay than act wild and crazy.
The screenplay features no twists or turns, only one character with
development, and an ending that could have been seen just by hearing Detroit
Rock City's plot.  The climax of the film is awfully quiet, and isn't as
exciting as the rest of the film.  The definition of climax is- The height of
the film, or the turning point, which leads to the falling action- Not a
predictable, short snippet of film which isn't followed by anything except the
end credits.  Carl V. Dupre- Don't count on your screenplay career to take off
anytime soon.
Back to the word "energy."  Detroit Rock City's strong soundtrack doesn't
feature your stereotype 70's tunes, but instead includes a Kiss dominated
soundtrack, and believe me- It's LOUD.  Not even Star Wars Episode 1: The
Phantom Menace could win against Detroit Rock City in a loudness contest.  The
constant musical energy helps the film take off, but by the time this 95 minute
film's credits roll, you should have a pounding headache.
Although most of Detroit Rock City is loud and obnoxious, a few choice,
hilarious moments sneak in, which burst with originality, but seem out of place
in such a mediocre film.  The strong energy level makes Detroit Rock City worth
seeing at the dollar theaters, but non-Kiss fans could find themselves covering
their ears, and eagerly awaiting the moment when Detroit Rock City ends.  If
you are looking for a good rock and roll movie, and not a Kiss fan, like
myself, then check out 1996's That Thing You Do!, a much more fun, likable
motion picture.  Detroit Rock City is a variation on the average teen movie,
but I rather be watching "She's All That"s and "Varsity Blues"s than films like
this one.
The Bottom Line- Detroit Rock City will only "rock" a select few audience's
worlds, but the high energy level, and clever direction keep the film flowing.

Title
Review for Talented Mr. Ripley, The (1999)
The Talented Mr. Ripley (1999) by John Sylva    Rating: A
In forty years or so, as people do now with such movies as "Bringing Up Baby"
or "Gone With the Wind", people will look back on one film that starred a chunk
of the A-list of actors that made their mark in the movie industry during the
early years of the 21st century.  The cast of this movie will consist of the
next Audrey Hepburn-s, the next Clark Gable-s, and so on.  That film is "The
Talented Mr. Ripley," a haunting, stunning thriller that follows the same form
legendary director Alfred Hitchcock uses in films such as the 1960 spellbinding
classic, "Psycho".
His last film being 1996's war/love story "The English Patient", Anthony
Minghella writes and directs this masterful, chilling character study with one
of the most appealing, talented casts of any film this year.  Adapted from the
Patricia Highsmith novel of the same name, the screenplay for "The Talented Mr.
Ripley" is written to perfection, starting with a long, thorough exposition
that leads to a phenomenal climax, followed by probably the most clever,
thoughtful ending of the year.  From first frame to last, "The Talented Mr.
Ripley" gives you your money's worth with humor, suspense, and not one, not
two, but four Academy Award worthy performances that will certainly enhance
each actor's career.
On the surface, "Ripley" may appear to be just another entry into the ongoing
dice â€˜em up flick genre, but the film goes much deeper than anything has in
that area, making a film comparable to the brilliance of "Psycho."  Thomas
Ripley is a Norman Bates for the new millennium, a tragic, unsettling character
whom you want to associate with and feel for, but in the end you can't help
hoping he fails in his conquest of murder and lies.
The film, set in the 1950's follows a young sociopath named Thomas Ripley (Matt
Damon) who is persuaded by a man who is impressed with Tom's piano skills,
Herbert Greenleaf (James Rebhorn) to go to Italy and retrieve his wealthy,
first-class flirt of a son, Dickie (Jude Law).  Ripley accepts the offer, and
sets off to Italy.  Upon his arrival at a crowded airport, he runs into
Meredith Louge (Cate Blanchett), a wealthy business woman who works in the
textile industry, whom he will introduce himself to as Dickie Greenleaf.  From
here, it's apparent Ripley would like to live the life of Dickie instead of his
own, and upon his first meeting with Dickie, that thought becomes an obsession,
which becomes a murder.  
"Ripley" has Tom posing as an old classmate of Dickie's from Princeton, and as
a result, Dickie and girlfriend Marge Sherwood (Gwyneth Paltrow) automatically
befriend him and Dickie invites Tom stay at his home.  Tom falls in love with
the lifestyle that Dickie and Marge live daily, and also with Dickie as a
person.  Where things get even more complicated is when Tom decides to assume
Dickie's life, creating himself a fake I.D., and introducing himself to
everyone except Marge as Dickie Greenleaf.  As the plot unfolds, Meredith will
start to date Dickie, and once things really get going, a fair number of lives
have been taken.  It will be Ripley's ultimate task to maintain his fake
identity, but the goings get harder for him once Meredith, who knows him as
Dickie, and Marge, who knows him as Tom, start interacting.
"The Talented Mr. Ripley" is similar to last fall's oddball comedy "Being John
Malkovich" in a variety of ways, although in "Malkovich," being someone else is
as easy as crawling into their brain through a portal, but in "Ripley," you
must continue killing and lying to maintain your new identity.  These are two
of many recent films that focus on a character wanting to be someone else. 
What is it about changing one's identity that perplexes so many filmmakers to
the point where they write feature films about the subject matter?  "Ripley" is
the only one that can be classified as film noir, and is the most effective of
all in that this is undoubtedly, the best thriller of the year.
Matt Damon first broke into Hollywood two years ago with "Good Will Hunting,"
and ever since has had the boy next door, goody-goody reputation following him.
 His performance here in "Ripley" is one that will erase his old reputation,
and bring on a more sophisticated feel to him.  His performance two years ago
in "Hunting" was a shock, but Damon is as it his best yet in "Ripley,"
delivering his lines with an eerie, powerful sense.  Damon would seem to be the
last person who could realistically play a villain in a film, but here he
proves he can be the good guy just as well as he can the bad.
Jude Law, a lesser known actor who has appeared in fiction flicks as "Gattaca"
and "eXistenZ," also turns in a fine performance as his charismatic character. 
Dickie is a mostly realistic, yet somewhat over the top character who will be
your best friend one moment, and the next be your worst enemy.  
Gwyneth Paltrow is even more Oscar worthy here than she was in last year's
Academy Award Best Picture "Shakespeare in Love," showing off her gleaming
dramatic chops in the film's final forty five minutes.  Paltrow's character is
too light during the film's first half to get any award recognition for her
performance as the confused, devastated Marge, but now Paltrow shows comedy
isn't the only genre she can master.
As far as supporting roles go, "Ripley" has an array of fine actors who are
underused as their interesting characters.  Among them being Cate Blanchett,
who was robbed last year of an Oscar from one of this film's co-stars, Gwyneth
Paltrow, in the dazzling film "Elizabeth." A second Oscar nomination in a row
is most probably out of the question for Blanchett, as although she shines as
her important character, she is only fed ten to twelve minutes screen time from
Minghella's screenplay.  Blanchett's role should have and could have been
enhanced, as Meredith Louge is not just another part of Ripley's life, she is
the link between the real world and the world that Ripley has created for
himself.  On the other hand, Phillip Seymour Hoffman comes of rather restrained
as his wise cracking, obnoxious character of Freddy Miles, a close friend of
Dickie's who steals the attention that Tom gets from Dickie around halfway
through the film.  Other supporting actors who deserve more screen time include
Jack Davenport as a close friend of Marge's, and Jack Rebhorn, as the concerned
Herbert Greenleaf.
"The Talented Mr. Ripley" is an unpredictable, unforgettable motion picture,
that will certainly hold its own at the Oscars in March.  Every element of the
film is haunting, from the lively musical score to the beautiful Italian
locations, "Ripley" will follow you in your mind for days after your viewing
it.  Anthony Minghella's wonderful masterpiece is clever in the way that it
absorbs you, making you believe the friendship between Tom and Dickie, and then
throws numerous plot twists at you, wrapping you around its story even more. 
And that's where the film truly succeeds, in a way that it will challenge your
thoughts about being another person, as the violent images that occur from
Ripley's longing to become Dickie are reason enough to just be happy with
yourself.
The Bottom Line: Brilliant screenplay and direction make "Ripley" a thrilling,
haunting drama.

Title
Review for Teaching Mrs. Tingle (1999)
Teaching Mrs. Tingle by John Sylva    Rating: B-
http://hometown.aol.com/DeWyNGaLe/MoviePED.html
Teaching Mrs. Tingle, the directorial debut of Scream scribe Kevin Williamson,
is his final attempt in his own genre of teen movies, as he will be "leaving"
the genre, excluding his role of producer and co-writer of this fall's Scream
3, and move onto the romantic comedy genre next, where he hopes to do the same
for that genre, as he did for the entire teen/horror genre, which would be-
revive it with a new feel and edge.  Kevin, you did great while you were in
teen genre, as your biggest hits, Scream and TV's Dawson's Creek, both carry a
cult following, and your name is one of the few movie writers/directors that
any teen could recognize.
Like Williamson's cult phenomenon Scream, Teaching Mrs. Tingle focuses on a
central group of diverse, and offbeat characters, who join forces once
realizing the trouble that could evolve from the situations that are put forth
at them.  Straight A student, potential valedictorian recipient Leigh Ann
Watson (Katie Holmes) wraps up her history project, the grade that will be the
control in receiving a scholarship, and the Valedictorian  honor- A diary
covering the Salem Witch, who was burned at the stake- and she, along with
waitress mother Faye (Lesley Ann Warren), know she has an A project on her
hands.  The only thing standing her Leigh Ann's way of becoming the most
successful student in her class at Gransboro High- the wickedly evil Mrs. Eve
Tingle (Helen Mirren).  Of course, Mrs. Tingle shares not the same gratitude
and excitement as the ambitious Leigh Ann, but instead repulsion, jealousy.  
The above is our introduction into this fun, somewhat clever, sometimes
thrilling film, which slows down for not a second, which isn't necessarily a
good thing, as just as the decisions and choices the lead characters make
aren't so great, Williamson doesn't make the best decisions either, creating a
somewhat mediocre film.  What results from the setup, that does everything it
should- make you hate this evil witch- Teaching Mrs. Tingle transfers to the
dark, wicked type humor used in this summer's Drop Dead Gorgeous, or last
spring's Jawbreaker- Which by the way, holds no such quality as this film.
Jo Lynn (Marisa Couglan), an aspiring actress, who is loyal best friend to
Leigh Ann, is willing to take any risks to get Leigh Ann where she wants to go
in life- to become a writer.  When the two best buds and junkie student Luke
Churner (Barry Watson) get caught in a scandalous situation in the school's
gymnasium, which could potentially ruin the three's entire futures, by Mrs.
Tingle, the three are desperate to redeem their futures from Tingle, at her
home, where they offer their apologizes.  Of course, Tingle rejects any such
apology, and the night changes from trying to make up for wrong doings, into 
an extreme wrong doing- Holding Tingle captive in her own home, tied to her
bed, gagged, only fed sparingly. 
For the rest of the film, Teaching Mrs. Tingle delivers its share of big
laughs, suspenseful moments, and strong performances.  The latter mainly stands
for the devilishly clever performance by Helen Mirren, who conducts herself as
if she were Queen Elizabeth, strutting around school passing out failing
grades, and spewing downright nasty dialogue, creating an unlikable, yet
fun(ny) antagonist.
Katie Holmes' great talent for acting is fighting for a bigger, more mature
character, but Holmes continues to go into teen roles like this one, and in
1998's Disturbing Behavior, in which she will be limited to in her career,
unless she gets out of the role as Joey Potter on T.V.'s Dawson's Creek. 
Holmes adds a needed edge on the hit T.V. show, but more serious, mature roles
are out there, which Holmes could grab in an instant.  Holmes shined in last
spring's Go, which was her first attempt outside of the teen genre, but she
falls back into it here.  Although Holmes portrays her character with a touch
of sympathy and reality, her acting skills, which can be seen best in Go and
Dawson's Creek, are way beyond Leigh Ann Watson.
Marisa Coughlan, a relative newcomer, gives a hilarious, often over the top
performance, delivering the strong dialogue and gimmicks (The Exorcist
imitation comes to mind) perfectly from the screenplay.  Barry Watson, who
appears on the television hit 7th Heaven, doesn't bring his character to life
as he could have, but the way the screenplay has him conducting himself is
enough to form a semi strong character, even though Watson doesn't carry out
the duty fully.  
Williamson's lead four characters are so vivid and bursting with life, you wish
they could have landed roles in a film that is as full as they are, but like
last winter's The Faculty, which Kevin also wrote, Teaching Mrs. Tingle's
characters and cast are the standouts, as the screenplay, setting, etc. become
only an afterthought of the overall product.  The screeplay isn't highly
original and doesn't exactly break new ground, and shows signs around the edges
of the average teen flick, which is a strong weakness, but Williamson's writing
edge, which can be seen in every one of his movies, is shining big and bright
here - The quick, sarcastic, snappy dialogue, the stereotypical characters, the
dark humor, the suspense- What one could call Williamson-esque.  
Teaching Mrs. Tingle is the most mediocre Williamson works as of yet, as the
film isn't always interesting, as in the second half, repetitiveness becomes a
strong problem for the film, but the characters power Teaching Mrs. Tingle from
start to finish, as the screenplay just plods along.  
It's impossible for a movie to be completely character driven and still be a
great one, and that's where the problem lies in Teaching Mrs. Tingle.  It's
obvious that not much time and effort was spent bringing the potentially great
screenplay to the big screen, as Williamson has stated many times that he is
very busy with his upcoming television show, WasteLAnd, but if Williamson
really wanted to add another strongly successful title to his genre, he could
have at least polished up the screenplay with more originality and twists,
instead of only concentrating on his quirky characters.  Williamson's
screenplay redeems itself for the most part in the final moments of the film,
in the suspenseful, and hilarious climax, that you actually start feeling bad
for the evil witch, that is Mrs. Tingle.
The Bottom Line- Teaching Mrs. Tingle isn't as clever or as edgy as
Williamson's other works, but the stereotypical characters and strong
performances from Mirren, Holmes, and Coughlan allow Tingle to be entertaining,
summer fun.    

Title
Review for Jawbreaker (1999)
http://twowebmasters.cjb.net   (COMING SOON!)
>From writer and director Darren Stein comes Jawbreaker, the poorly told tale of
what can happen when an innocent birthday prank goes wrong.  At Reagan High,
four girls are sitting on top of the world.  Courtney Shane, played by Rose
McGowan, holds the title of meanest, most disrespectful soul in the school. 
Everyone hates her, but everyone envies her due to her popularity.  Courtney is
the "leader" of her clique, which also includes Julie, played by Rebecca
Gayheart, Liz Purr, played by Charlotte Roldan, and Marcie, played by Julie
Benz are the other three in the group.  It is Liz's seventeenth birthday, and
Julie, Courtney, and Marcie concur that they will play a seemingly innocent
prank on her, but the prank results in the death of Liz.
Just like stupid teens in any teen directed film such as this one, the foursome
decide to cover up the death to make it look like a murder committed by someone
else.  And also just like in other teen directed movies, one of the four don't
agree with hiding it, this time that character being Julie.  And finally, just
like in other teen movies, there is a witness outside the group trying to hide
the truth.  This time that character being Fern Mayo (Judy Greer), who is
subject to many cracks from Courtney's group, as well as the entire school. 
>From here, Jawbreaker turns into a predictable tale of revenge, bad morals, and
at least trying to do the right thing.
Not only is the script weak, on a whole the acting is horrid thanks to a large
amount of the main cast.  Judy Greer is undeniably awful as her one
dimensional, annoying character, as she overacts every line she has.  Also on
the bad side of acting is Julie Benz, almost falling to the annoying factor
that Greer delivers.
On the positive side of acting, Rose McGowan performs well here, but doesn't
match her wickedly clever performance as "Tatum", in 1996's Scream. McGowan's
role is annoying, but this only adds to the film.  She is wickedly mean, and
even though she a well-written character, you downright hate her.  Faring even
better than McGowan is Rebecca Gayheart, who is always exceptionally believable
as her roles.  When the script feeds her a one or two dimensional character,
she turns it into three, always putting strong emotion and power into her
roles.  Gayheart isn't given as much to do here as she was in 1998's Urban
Legend, but you can still get a strong taste of her acting skills in
Jawbreaker.
Jawbreaker drifts and mianders different sub plots throughout, hardly throwing
anything for the viewer to get absorbed in.  We get way off of the topic of the
jawbreaker incident, and get into things that don't have anything to do with
the actual film.  The beginning and ending are strong, it's just the middle
that needs a lot of help.  During the body of the movie, it is undeniably
repetitive, never progressing towards a conclusion.  Nothing to grab the
viewer's interest is around, and the same, extremely annoying song plays over
and over again. 
Jawbreaker tries to get off on the same time of humor used in the 1995 film
Clueless, but falls flat.  The few gags that actually work die off quickly and
die off with a bang.  All in all, a horrible disappointment.  
The Bottom Line: The tagline reads, "Even the sweetest candies are sour as
death inside."  Yes, that is too true.  No matter how good this film may have
looked, it fails to deliver.

Title
Review for Three to Tango (1999)
http://twowebmasters.cjb.net    (OPENING NOVEMBER 16th, 1999!)
Assume nothing.  The phrase is perhaps one of the most used of the 1990's, as
first impressions and rumors are hardly ever what they seem to be.  The phrase
especially goes for Oscar Novak, an architect who is the main focus of Three To
Tango, a delightful, funny romantic comedy about assumptions and being
yourself.  Novak (Matthew Perry), a shy, clumsy, Chicago based architect, along
with openly gay partner, Peter Steinberg (Oliver Platt), fights for projects
day in and day out.  One of these is the job of restoring a popular building
for Charles Newman (Dylan McDermott), a rich, well-known businessman.  Charles
immediately takes a liking to Oscar, as he enjoys his personality and sense of
humor.  Seeing Oscar as someone he could trust, Charles asks him to watch his
girlfriend, an unpredictable, adventurous girl named Amy Post (Neve Campbell),
who makes a living by blowing glass.  Charles wants to know who she talks to,
what she does, and where she goes.  The point?  To make sure she's not seeing
someone else, of course.  Oscar gladly takes the job, and meets Amy at an art
show of hers, and sparks fly between the two from the get go.  Oscar feels he
has found the one meant for him, and he is content with the idea of being with
Amy.  Well, another popular phrase of the 90's is "All good things must come to
an end," and this stays true for Oscar as well.
Charles walks in on Amy and Oscar having a drink one night, as Oscar and Amy
have become great friends, but he doesn't seem to mind.  Why is this?  He
thinks Oscar is gay.  He's not afraid to share this with him either.  Oscar
stands in shock after the words, "I swear if you weren't gay Oscar, I'd have to
kill you," are muttered flamboyantly from Charles' mouth.  The word spreads
instantly through town.  Will Oscar "come out" of his supposed gayness, or will
he tell everyone that he isn't?  One would immediately think he would deny the
fact, but numerous occurrences come to Oscar, which result in the fact that if
he denies the fact, he could lose his job with Charles.
Matthew Perry doesn't escape his character as Chandler on the already classic
T.V. comedy "Friends," as both Oscar Novak and Chandler are clueless, shy, and
sensitive.  Nonetheless, Perry is hilarious here, and shows that he can handle
drama, as obviously, his character suffers quite a bit here.
It's wonderful to see Neve Campbell outside of a horror movie, (She was the
star of Scream 1 and 2, and the upcoming Scream 3) as she handles comedy
superbly here.  Her voice, smile, and personality are more than perfect for
romantic comedies- Stay with this genre, Neve.  Neve is delightful as her
conflicted character, who feels love for Oscar, but knows, based on rumors,
that he is gay.  As usual, Campbell is likable as her likable character.
Unlike the other two leads here, Dylan McDermott is flat in his dialogue, and
is never convincing.  When his character his present, McDermott sets a dull
tone to the scene with his horrible acting.  Stick to the T.V. Drama, The
Practice, Dylan.
The major weak spot in Three To Tango is the direction of Damon Santostefano. 
No originality or technique is used whatsoever.  Three To Tango is lucky that
the script is so edgy and that Perry and Campbell are wonderful in comedy, or
else the film would have been a disaster, as it is just plain boring to look
at.    
Three To Tango is a film done many times before, as the plot is suspiciously
close to 1998's The Object of My Affection, but the plot has never been
completed so well.  Three To Tango's script, written by Rodney Patrick Vaccaro
and Aline Brosh McKenna is fun, fast, and funny, delivering not only original,
hilarious gay jokes (not your run of the mill material), but a certain
snappiness in the dialogue between characters that always keeps you smiling.  
Unlike last summer's South Park: Bigger, Longer, and Uncut and 1997's In & Out,
Three To Tango is a comedy in which the gay element is not crude or vulgar. 
The script is wise to take this route, as gays can't (I don't think so, anyway)
be offended by this light, playful comedy.  (To prove this, a gay couple was in
the audience who were laughing constantly.)  Three To Tango's climax is a
hilarious, clever scene that is pure irony based on the outcome of most
romantic-mistaken identity comedies.  Three To Tango is a gem.  
The Bottom Line: Three To Tango is a light, sharp, snappy romantic comedy with
a superb ending, and great stars.  One of the better romantic comedies of 1999.

Title
Review for Can't Buy Me Love (1987)
http://twowebmasters.cjb.net   (Coming soon)
Patrick Dempsey stars as Ronald Miller, a geeky teenager in Can't Buy Me Love,
a mediocre, yet mildly entertaining film directed at the teen audience that
hopes it's target audience won't realize how average it really is.  Steve
Rash's uneven film focuses on Ronald and his journey to the top of his school,
and predictably back to the bottom.  After saving popular cheerleader Cindy
Mancini (Amanda Peterson) from having to spend $1000 on an outfit of her
mother's she ruined, she agrees to act as his boyfriend for a month.  Ronald
sees this as an opportunity to become the popular idol he's always wanted to
be, but Cindy sees it as the opportunity to crush her reputation and lifestyle.
 Can't Buy Me Love is a highly predictable film whose screenplay (written by
Michael Swerdlick) is so formulaic and cliche, it's sickening.  Of course, just
like present day teeny bopper flicks, the featured couple slowly fall in love,
and end up going to the prom, which by movies like these I'm led to believe
prom is the most important thing in life, but then at that prom, they get in a
fight, and their entire, one-dimensional world collapses!  Oh no!  The film
pulls a few admittedly funny gags, and Patrick Dempsey is impressive as his
well-written character, but the true highlight of the film is the use of the
Beatles' masterful tune, "Can't Buy Me Love," in both the opening and closing
credits.  It's awkward that the filmmakers couldn't make a movie to complement
the song, but rather the Beatles hit is used to complement the movie.
The Bottom Line:  Can't Buy Me Love can't buy my interest!

Title
Review for Scream 3 (2000)
SCREAM 3 (2000) by JOHN SYLVA , associate of OFCS (www.ofcs.org)
It's sure been a rocky road to the third and final chapter in quite possibly
the most talked about and celebrated slasher series in history.  In May of
1999, Kevin Williamson, breakthrough writer of the first two "Scream" films,
dropped out of the project to finish his directorial debut, "Teaching Mrs.
Tingle" (Which was slammed by critics, and struggled to reach 10 million
domestically), leaving writing duties to relative newcomer Ehren Kruger
(Arlington Road).  The question everyone on everyone's mind:  How can the third
film live up to its predecessors when the man responsible for the edge of the
series is gone?  Well, after seeing "Scream 3," it's obvious that it can't
entirely; But Kruger certainly gives it a shot, ending up making a film that is
more of a loner than part of a series.
Our reigning heroine, Sidney Prescott (Neve Campbell) has gone into hiding
after the turn of events at the southern Ohio Windsor College, and works for
California Woman's Crisis Counseling in her solitary home in the hills of
Monterey.  Down in Hollywood, production on "Stab 3: Return to Woodsboro," a
fictional account inspired by the characters of the first two "Scream" films
has begun, under the direction of Roman Bridger (Scott Foley) at Sunrise
Studios.  As filming begins, so does the body count, as it's apparent this
killer doesn't want "Stab 3" to finish production.  Along for the ride are the
ambitious reporter Gale Weathers (Courteney Cox Arquette) and goofy cop Dewey
Riley (David Arquette), both returning from the previous two films, along with
Cotton Weary (Liev Schreiber), once convicted killer of Sidney's mother,
Jennifer Jolie (Parker Posey), over the top actress who portrays Gale Weathers
in "Stab 3," Detective Mark Kincaid (Patrick Dempsey), who is assigned to
investigate the murders, Sarah Darling (Jenny McCarthy), a spunky actress who
is unhappy with her role in "Stab 3," Angelina Tyler (Emily Mortimer), a
suspicious and downright weird woman playing Sidney in "Stab 3," Steven Stone
(Patrick Warburton), Jennifer Jolie's bodyguard, Tyson Fox (Deon Richmond),
struggling African American actor, and John Milton (Lance Henriksen), producer
of "Stab 3" who seems to know a little too much about Sidney, and her mother.
The large ensemble cast is one of diversity and talent, with everyone handling
their share of the work, even if its one scene, with ease. The current "Scream
Queen," Neve Campbell, handles her character with care and emotion, as she has
in the past as well.  Sidney has always been the one character that the
audience can relate to and sympathize for, because her character has always had
an overwhelming amount of authenticity to it.  Once labeled the "indie queen,"
Parker Posey is hilarious and sharp as her well-written character.  Posey gives
a performance that is meant to mock today's mainstream actresses that usually
star in films like this one; She's a complete riot.  Courteney Cox Arquette and
husband David Arquette both fit their character's shoes as well as they did in
the previous two films.
Wes Craven, who has helmed all three films, directs "Scream 3" with
intelligence and care.  Craven certainly knows how to stage good jump scenes,
but his ability to cause suspense in the viewer seems to be vanishing. 
Craven's direction is accompanied perfectly by Marco Beltrami's slick, powerful
score that at times is a bit overwhelming, but the score lives up to his
previous work in the "Scream" films.  The cinematography is rather dull this
time around, unlike the eerie and bold photography seen in the previous two
films.
"Scream 3" is a completely different film than one would expect; It's campy,
fun, light, and rather predictable; What the "Scream" films are not known for. 
"Scream 3" is more of an excellent spin-off of the first two rather than a part
of the series.  Kruger's script holds hardly any suspense, many characters flat
as cardboard, but he tops it all off with an amazing and poignant ending that
couldn't have been more perfect.  The premise of "Scream 3" is something to
scream about all in its own, but it's too bad that aside from Jennifer Jolie,
none of the actors or crew on "Stab 3" are around long enough for us to get to
know them before they meet their bloody death.  By the time all is said and
done, there is a body count so large, it's difficult to even remember who bit
the dust.  (Unlike the first two films, where the characters were individuals,
characters who seemed like real people.)
It may not completely be a "Scream" movie, but on its own merit, "Scream 3" is
one witty and rewarding ride.  The pacing is brisk and the dialogue is snappy;
This is where the film totally lives up to its expectations.  But what "Scream
3" has that the previous two don't is a certain level of campiness, one at
which you're laughing more than you're screaming, jumping more than you're
screaming.  I was reminded of the 1985 classic "Clue" at many moments, as the
character's reactions to one's death are more entertaining than the death
itself.  The last 30 minutes of "Scream 3" are a complete riot- Unbelievable,
superb, and tense fun.  The idea of whether or not this is a "Scream" film
completely slips your mind by the time it reaches its conclusion, as although
it's hardly suspenseful or unpredictable, "Scream 3" is without a doubt the
most entertaining of the three.  It'd certainly be interesting to see what
Williamson would have done with the final chapter; Whether or not he'd try and
match the previous films' atmosphere or take the road of being an individual,
as Kruger did.  Either way, "Scream 3" is a satisfying and fun film.  Hands
down to a fine conclusion to an even finer trilogy.  We can all breathe a sigh
of relief now. The most shocking, fresh, and unpredictable slasher series of
all time is complete.
The Bottom Line: Some diehard "Scream" fans may be disappointed, but all in
all, "Scream 3" is a guaranteed good time.  As the first two "Scream" films,
"Scream 3" is destined to become a cult classic. 

Title
Review for Deep End of the Ocean, The (1999)
The Deep End of The Ocean (capsule) by John Sylva    Rating: B
http://hometown.aol.com/DeWyNGaLe/MoviePED.html
Michelle Pfeiffer stars as Beth Cappadora, mother of three, wed to husband Pat
(Treat Williams).  When she loses her three year old son, Ben (Michael McElroy)
at a busy Chicago motel, Candy Bliss (Whoopi Goldberg) steps in on the
investigation, and the search to find Ben.  What results from an unrealistic
setup (How many mothers would leave their children in a busy lobby, all alone?)
is a touching drama that has its obvious problems, but are watered down by a
few choice, touching family scenes.  After a long, nine year period, Beth
believes that she has found her son, who now goes by the name of Sam (Ryan
Merriman), and lives just blocks away.  Michelle Pfeiffer gives a strong
performance as her three dimensional character, as we see the effects of losing
a son, and the awful hardships this brings to a family, even nine years after
they occur.  Stephen Schiff's screenplay, based on the best selling novel, is
the major weak spot in The Deep End of the Ocean, as many scenes and lines seem
out of place- "Your legs are longer," comes to mind.  The film doesn't seem
complete, as it is losing a final touch.  The editing is particularly choppy,
and the film is uneven.  The Deep End of the Ocean's flaws are somewhat covered
up by the strong cast, some very touching scenes, but all in all, I was hoping
for more.  
The Bottom Line- The Deep End of the Ocean makes for a fun, yet rather
frustrating film to watch, and is definitely worth the price for a video
rental.
