Authors
Chew Joo Siang
Number of Reviews
2

Title
Review for Independence Day (1996)
50's `ALIENS VS. EARTH' IDEA REVAMPED!
If you have been following the movie news over the net, you could not 
have escaped the hype over ID4. It promises to be THE summer film of the 
year and it has all the elements necessary. ID4 opened in the US on 2nd 
of July, and up till now, only after a week of release, it has nearly 
touched the US$100 million mark, a phenomenon last observed when JURASSIC 
PARK was released back in 1993. The premise of the movie is disgustingly 
simple: Earth defends itself against the Aliens, a typical and highly popular 
50's Hollywood theme which manifested itself in many films produced in that era.
The movie opens via STAR WARS, however unoriginal it may be, it worked. 
The aliens have sent a large mother ship (supposedly to be 1/4 size of 
the moon) to attack Earth by deploying attack ships 15 miles in radius to 
all the major cities on Earth. The US President (Pullman) does not know 
of the aliens' intention but soon finds out when David (Goldblum) a 
scientist, discovers that the Aliens are counting down to a synchronised 
attack on all the major cities. Capt. Hiller (Smith), a hot-shot F-18 
pilot are one of the hundreds assigned to take out the hovering alien 
attack ship over Washington DC. His squadron came under heavy alien fire 
after discovering that their weapons were useless against the invaders, he 
crash lands after a spectacular 1-on-1 chase over the Grand Canyon, one of the 
many highlights of the movie. ID4 features many characters and we are 
shown the impact on them as the story progresses. Acting on the whole was 
OK although I thought that Bill Pullman was a bit unsuitable for the 
president role but he did make a very rousing speech before sending his 
troops into battle (do we smell a bit of BRAVEHEART here??).
No prizes for guessing how ID4 ends, its just plain obvious. ID4 borrows 
heavily from STAR WARS, RETURN OF THE JEDI, ALIEN and in some parts of 
the movie, I could even sense a bit of X-FILES on screen. If I were to 
critically review this movie, ID4 is full of plot holes, corny dialogue, 
and ridiculously dumb aliens. However below that wafer-thin plot and 
on-screen flaws, ID4 scored well in playing with the appealing idea of 
the entire world giving up their petty differences to unite themselves as 
one force against the alien invasion. An idea which will have the 
audience strongly rooting for the united front throughout the movie, thus 
maintaining a screen-viewer interaction that virtually render any holes 
in the movie acceptable, no matter how ridiculous.
ID4 was produced under a modest budget of US$68 million, a film of such 
magnitude would have easily been another WATERWORLD but director ROLAND 
EMMERICH (UNIVERSAL SOLDIER, STARGATE) and producer DEAN DEVLIN assembled 
a team which did their own special effects rather than commissioning it 
to ILM or any other special effects company. Some of the effects are not 
too good but most of it are very believable, especially the epic 
standoff between 150 F-18's and 250 alien saucers, reminiscence of the 
classic space battle featured in RETURN OF THE JEDI.
ID4 is a movie for all. Though there are many explosions and implied 
deaths, there are no gory scenes of human destruction, thus young kids 
should be able to take it. Sit back and don't be too critical, chances 
are you will be absorbed into the movie just as I was. If you are not 
planning to watch any movies this year, please, at least make time for 
this one. This film is best watched on the big-screen.

Title
Review for Sgt. Bilko (1996)
STEVE MARTIN SHINES BUT SGT.BILKO FAILS TO IMPRESS
Based on the popular 50's sitcom, SGT. BILKO follows the string of 
old-sitcoms-to-movie conversion fever. Remember THE BRADY BUNCH MOVIE or 
THE BEVERLY HILLBILLIES released sometime back? (BRADY BUNCH was a 
moderate hit in in the US while HILLBILLIES flopped). I do not really 
know whether the Hollywood minds are running out of good ideas or just 
being plain lazy, but the TV-conversion-movies are hitting our screens 
like wildfire, sad to say, with mixed success. Such movies are mostly 
targeted at US viewers since they are usually followings of such series 
over there and the larger the following, the more likely the sitcom will 
be made into a movie. SGT. BILKO (frankly, I have not seen any its 
original TV version), even with the charm and wild antics of funnymen 
STEVE MARTIN and DAN AKROYD; failed to entertain.   
Sgt. Ernest Bilko is the man behind the motor pool (place of vehicle 
storage and repair) of Fort Baxter. Though totally unskilled in the field 
of work that he is supposed to be in charge of, he has an almost 
superhuman ability and zeal to sniff out money-making opportunities; 
from running a gambling den in the military garage to 4-D pools. Though 
materialistic in mind, Bilko's methods has thoughtfully `enriched' the 
lives of the men of Fort Baxter, providing them with some form of real 
recreation within the camp and the people love him for that. Colonel Hall 
runs the entire fort and thanks to his inborn `blissfully-confused' 
state, Bilko has managed to hide his operation, though nearly every 
living person in the fort knows about it. Bilko's state of ascent is 
suddenly under-fire when the Pentagon sends Major Thorn, a tough cookie 
on army regulations, to check on the progress on the $70 million 
Hovertank project, a new weapon under development within the fort's grounds. 
To add to his problems, Thorn is determined to bring Bilko down in 
retalliation of a major `sabo' done on him by Bilko during their younger 
army days. 
Director Jonathan Lynn, who directed MY COUSIN VINNY (In which Marisa 
Tomei won an oscar for best-supporting actress) managed to pull SGT. 
BILKO through with suitable pacing and some exceptional moments of 
laughter, but that is about it. There are really not enough 
laughter-packed-moments in SGT. BILKO to fully entertain the average 
movie-goer. Still, Steve Martin's Sgt. Bilko is played with finesse and 
full-force by the renowned comedian. Without him, SGT. BILKO would have 
just fell flat on its face. SGT. BILKO did moderately well in the US box 
office early this year but I doubt it will earn much elsewhere around the 
world.   
The current trend in mixed successes in such tv-conversions may be a 
blessing in disguise, really; at least it will force Hollywood to re-think 
any of its initial intentions to turn another tv-idea into a movie or at 
the very least approach those ideas with more creativity.
Unless you are a fan of the TV-series or love to watch Steve Martin in 
action, you can skip this one when deciding which movie to catch in the 
local theatres. I'm sure there are better ones around.
