Authors
Larry Mcgillicuddy
Number of Reviews
20

Title
Review for Independence Day (1996)
**** (out of 4)
Directed by Roland Emmerich
Starring Bill Pullman, Jeff Goldblum, Will Smith, Margaret Colin,Robert 
Loggia, Mary McDonnell, Judd Hirsch, Randy Quaid, Harry Connick Jr., 
Harvey Fierstein, Adam Baldwin, Andrew Keegan, Devon Gummersall
Review-   Stargate was one of the worst science fiction movies I've ever 
seen. It was dull, moronic, and not exciting for a minute. Roland 
Emmerich directed that movie. Someone named Roland Emmerich directed this 
movie. Before I saw Independence Day, I thought it was the same person. 
Now I'm not so sure. There is nothing dull or moronic about this movie, 
and I was gripped the entire way through. In short, Independence Day 
delivers exactly what it promised.
Independence Day provides us with an old reliable scare story. What if we 
were visited from another planet? What if the visitors were not so 
friendly? How would we react to this situation? All of these questions 
are answered in an exciting, intelligent, and humorous way. 
Aliens have entered our atmosphere. At first we're not so sure what to 
expect. All the world can do is wait. Then a mathemetician played by Jeff 
Goldblum (big stretch, huh?) discovers the aliens are using our 
satellites against us. In doing so, he is able to warn the White House so 
they can get out of Washington DC soon enough, saving the lives of many, 
including the president, played by Bill Pullman. A fighter pilot, played 
by Will Smith, survives a dogfight with an alien spaceship, and drags the 
alien from its damaged spacecraft to a secret base. Many cities have been 
destroyed and not much time is left. The Americans must discover a way to 
fight back. 
A stellar cast of reliable character actors was assembled for this movie. 
Bill Pullman plays the president with great dignity and honor, and a 
speech he gives to the troops on the night of  the counterattack had me 
cheering, along with the rest of the audience. jeff Goldblum, one of my 
favorite actors, is just as quirky, original, and amusing as he always is.
 His offbeat line readings are always a great pleasure, and they work 
very well here. Will Smith is quickly becoming a major movie star, and he 
is the best hotshot fighter pilot since Tom Cruise. He also gets much 
funnier things to say than in Bad Boys, for example. And then there are 
the special effects. Not for one second were any of them unbeleivable. 
The over 2 hour running time, which never feels long, leaves room for 
enough romantic subplots that even Jeff Goldblum gets one.  If you want 
to see some Americans banding with the rest of the world to "get up there 
and woop ET's ass" go see Independence Day. I'll probably be in line with 
you when I see it again. This movie was worth the hype.

Title
Review for I Know What You Did Last Summer (1997)
The slasher movie was reborn last year with the success of  
Scream, a clever self aware thriller written by Kevin       
Williamson. Scream was notable for it's characters          
commenting on the very cliches that they found   
themselves placed in. But I think the reason it was so good 
and so successful was that it didn't insult the intelligence
of it's audience. When the slasher movie began to die out in
the late 80's (remember Jason Takes Manhattan?), it was     
because they had hit rock bottom in terms of acting,        
writing, and production values  Kevin Williamson understands
that his audience is smarter than that. His follow up to    
Scream is a smart and terrifying horror movie that works on 
nearly every level.                                         
Suddenly it's one year later, and Julie (Hewitt) has come   
home from college. One of the things that makes this movie  
work is that it creates actual characters and gives them a  
few scenes of development. It's alot scarier when a         
character you care about is in danger. Most of this occurs  
here, as the movie depicts how the characters have grown    
apart and never recovered from the incident. Anyways, when  
she arrives home, Julie gets a note that says you know what.
Suddenly, they are all being stalked by an unknown man in a 
fisherman outfit. The lighting and camera work, which hide  
his face, are extremely effective in making this figure very
frightening. The screenplay throws in numerous suspects,    
trying to fool the viewer as to the identity of the killer. 
But this is not a whodunit. It's a slaher flick, and it is  
the best possible example of that genre.                    
The acting is top notch across the board. Jennifer Love     
Hewitt (Scott Wolf is awaiting the next Williamson script)  
is just as good as her Party of 5 co-star Neve Campbell was 
in Scream. Sarah Michelle Gellar, from TV's highly          
entertaining Buffy the Vampire Slayer, has a terrific screen
presence and is a star in the making. And Anne Heche has a  
creepy cameo as the demented sister of the accident victim. 
First time director Jim Gillespie seems like a pro the way  
he creates a spooky atmosphere and hits the viewer with one 
scare after another.                                        
In the old days of slasher movies, they hired actors based  
on who could scream the loudest and who had the biggest     
breasts. During this rebirth, they find talented actresses  
from quality tv shows and seem to actually be auditioning   
for the supporting characters. This movie is told pretty    
straight, and makes no excuses for being a slasher movie.   
This is a good thing, because I am a fan of this genre and  
it's about time talented people started to work in it again.

Title
Review for Kiss the Girls (1997)
**** (out of 4)
Directed by Gary Fleder
Starring Morgan Freeman, Ashley Judd, Cary Elwes, Jay O. Sanders, Bill 
Nunn, Tony Goldwyn, Jeremy Piven
Great characters can carry a substandard story very far. If you can 
become involved in them, it overshadows the weaker plot aspects and makes 
a movie entertaining. On the other hand, if you have a solid, if somewhat 
familiar story, great characters can make that movie a memorable viewing 
experience and one of the most entertaining films of the year. Kiss the 
Girls is that kind of movie.
Morgan Freeman stars as Alex Cross, a forensic psychologist who comes to 
North Carolina to investigate the disappearance of several young women, 
one of whom is his own neice. Cross is a quietly intense man who could be 
ready to break out in rage at any moment.  The police chief warns him 
about not overstepping his bounds in one of the more cliched scenes in 
the movie, but as the movie progresses there is no attempt to derail 
Freeman's involvement in the investigation.
All of the kidnap victims are beautiful, strong, and talented women in 
their 20's So the first time we see Ashley Judd appear in the movie, we 
know what's going to happen. Judd plays a lonely medical intern who 
trains at kickboxing. She is kidnapped from her house, in a terrifyingly 
effective sequence that would make Wes Craven proud.
The kidnapper's dungeon has an errie and creative design. While spending 
time in the dungeon, Judd goes through a range of emotions and this is 
when her character really start to take focus, and Judd gets to display 
her expansive range. Then in an absolutely brilliant suspense sequence, 
Judd makes her escape, blinded by the first sign of light and lost among 
the dizzying pattern of the forest. The sequence ends with an effective 
lift from the Fugitive.
>From then on, the movie takes the form of a buddy movie, as Freeman and 
Judd team up to find this mysterious kidnapper. The teaming up of two of 
the most natural actors in Hollywood proves to be a terrific casting 
decision. Freeman and Judd work off each other like seasoned pros and 
their unforced chemistry in every scene is fascinating.
Kiss the Girls does run into a few problems, but it's hard to remember 
them now. With such talent on hand, the flaws are remembered for a couple 
minutes and then are just an afterthought, if that. Gary Fleder shows an 
impressive ability in staging his suspense and action sequences, and in 
between, he lets Freeman and Judd do their stuff, unhindered by lame 
pseudo-fancy camera shots that many younger directors think make a great 
film these days. Kiss the Girls may have a story with some familiar 
aspects, but the execution is near perfect from all involved.  Let's get 
Freeman and Judd together in another movie immediately.

Title
Review for Eddie (1996)
Whoopi stars as Eddie, a die hard knicks fan and limousine driver, who
does play by play for the other limo drivers.  Then one day, the Knicks
are sold to a millionare cowboy (Frank Langella, who seems to be
spoofing Jerry Jones). The Knicks coach (Farina) is unhappy with this
new arrangement and quits, but not until after Langella has rigged a
contest so Eddie can be the honorary coach for a game. The crowd loves
her, and Langella names her the new head coach.
Sports movies like this are a dime a dozen. You can pretty much tell
whats gonna happen throughout each part of the movie. Will the Knicks
lose many games until Eddie learns some motivational technique that
inspires them to break the losing streak? Will the ex-coach be named
replacement at another team who will just happen to be the opposing
team in the deciding game at the end? Will the tall foreign center's
weakness of not being able to take a charge come into play at the end?
If you don;t know the answers to these questions you have not seen many
movies.
All of this would be forgiveable, of course, had Eddie been funny.
Well, it is funny at times, but not nearly funny enough to overcome the
obvious route this film is taken.  Director Rash takes this film too
seriously, trying to actually direct this movie. You don't direct a
movie like Eddie. You turn on the cameras and let Whoopi work. Rash is
a ballhog, and save for some moments where Whoopi gets the rebound and
goes the length of the court, she isn't given nearly the opportunity
she should have been given.Eddie has a great premise, a genuinely funny
star, and some good basketball action, but the movie ultimately falls
flat because the director tried to make too much of it.

Title
Review for Doom Generation, The (1995)
Review- Early on in Greg Arraki's The Doom Generation, one of the 
characters spys on a couple having sex. He masturbates, and when he is 
finished, he licks the fluid off of his hand. Perhaps the most disgusting 
and repulsive scene in recent memory, the scene wouldnt be so bad if it 
actually had a purpose. It didn't. It was only an attempt by Arraki to 
gross the audience out. I guess he got what he wanted, but I sure didn't 
get what I wanted.
Duval and McGowan play Jordan and Amy, young lovers who go on a road trip.
 They stop at a convenience store and are held up by the store clerk 
(don't ask}. A drifter named Xavier tries to save them, and ends up 
blowing off the head of the clerk. The head flies off of the screen, then 
we see it land in what appears to be a shopping cart full of food. Then 
Arraki gives us the pleasure of seeing the clerk's headless body with 
gobs of blood spurting out of his neck. Then we get to see the head, yes 
the head, still screaming. Well now, here we got two of the most 
disgusting scenes I have ever scene in a movie since I Spit On Your Grave.
 I have the feeling that if Arraki had directed The Hitcher, he would 
have shown us the scene where the girls body is snapped in half. I don't 
even want to imagine what would've happened had he directed Seven.
After the killing they take Xavier along with them. Then Xavier 
masturbates while watching Jordan and Amy have sex. Then Xavier seduces 
Amy and they have sex. Then some guy waith a mask on comes looking for 
Amy. Then they kill someone else in a scene just as disgusting as the 
other two I mentioned.. Jordan and Amy have sex again. Then Jordan 
masturbates while watching Xavier and Amy have sex. Then they all three 
have sex together. Then I just kneeled down and prayed that this 
nightmare of a film watching experience would end. 
The actors in this movie are beyond incompetent. They don't show any 
talent whatsoever. Their performances are the level of a bad junior high 
school play. Even a cameo by the talented Parker Posey is ruined by 
horiible dialogue and a scene that makes no sense whatsoever. The only 
reason Arraki gave us that scene was to gross us out one more time.Greg 
Arraki throws one gratuitous and disgusting scene after another upon the 
audience, and I hope he never gets the chance to direct a movie ever 
again. 
Theatrical Release 1995. Reviewed on video in 1996. 

Title
Review for Eraser (1996)
Suspension of disbeleif is a necessity when watching an action movie.
For an action movie to be entartaining, it has to feature some things
that are implausible. Arnold Schwarzeneggar has been in Hollywood for
for a decade and a half now, mostly in action movies. Many of them were
implausible. Remember Commando? He took out an entire army by himself.
This works in Arnolds favor, because the majority of the viewing public
has come to accept that Arnold can do things in a movie that others
cannot. So when he gets shot in the shoulder and manages to get back up
and fight like nothing is wrong, it is easier for us to suspend our
disbeleif because its Arnold.
Arnold plays an FBI agent who erases people's identities so they can
testify at trials. His latest assignment is Vanessa Williams, who plays
a computer expert that is asked by the FBI to download some secret
information about arms smuggling that could get some big names in
Washington into serious trouble. She completes her task and Arnold is
assigned to erase her identity. Thats when the fun begins.
There are some intersting twists and turns in Erasers plot.  The plot
is much more entertaining than Mission Impossible's, for an example.
And as you come to expect from an Arnold movie, there are some great
stunts and special effects, such as a scene in a zoo with some nasty
and hungry alligators, and a scene where Arnold goes head to head with
a plane. The plane sequence would've been laughable with any other
actor in the role, but its Arnold, so I began to think Arnold should
pick on someone, or something his own size.
While Arnold is doing his action hero best here, he is also surrounded
by a great supporting cast. James Coburn is dignified in the role of
Arnolds boss. Vanessa Williams gives you everything you'd expect from
an action movie heroine, and does it better than most. James Caan is a
terrific villain. Best of all is Robert Pastorelli, someone Arnold
erased so he could testify against the mafia, and who Arniold enlists
to help him out. Pastorelli is a funny and charming sidekick. Direcot
Charles Russell doesnt bring anything new to this movie, but he
definitely has energy. He gives us what we expected, and what we
wanted. If you're a fan of Arnold, or action movies in particular, here
is a movie you will enjoy.

Title
Review for Arrival, The (1996)
Charlie Sheen stars as Zane, a radio astronomer who listens 
for sounds from other lifeforms. When he finally gets one,  
his boss destroys the tape and fires him. Naturally, Zane is
not ready to give up, and he comes up with an ingenious way 
to do this himself. He is aided by a young neighborhood kid 
and they discover that the sound is coming from Mexico. So  
Zane goes down there to investigate, and runs into a lady   
studying why the temperature of the earth has dangerously   
risen so suddenly. Zane is having marital problems at the   
time, and an offer by her to spend the night with him is    
very tempting. Hearing Charlie Sheen deliver the line, "I   
guess there is something to be said for celibacy" is the    
funniest thing I have ever heard in a movie since Matthew   
Broderick discussed asexual reproduction in Wargames.       
This is just the setup, and I don't want to give too much   
away, because a large part of the movies fun is the         
surprises. Charlie Sheen, who has had a rocky career as of  
late, is in top form here. He is funny, serious, and        
determined to accomplish his goal. Sheen's absolutely       
terrific performance is another big plus to this movie. The 
story is ingeniously devised by Twohy, who also wrote and   
directed the equally clever cable movie Grand Tour: Disaster
In Time. The films major flaw is a very slow pace, and not  
much happens in the earlygoings. Viewers may be growing     
restless for a while, but trust me if you stick around and  
keep your head in it, you will have a good time.            

Title
Review for Peacemaker, The (1997)
*** (out of 4)
Directed by Mimi Leder
Starring George Clooney, Nicole Kidman, Armin-Mueller Stahl, Michael 
Lures, Randall Batinkoff, Michael Boatman
Mimi Leder is probably best known for her stunning work as a director of 
the hit tv-show ER. Her mast famous episode, "Love's Labour Lost", dealt 
with the ordeal of Doctor Mark Greene as he tried his best to save the 
life of a pregnant mother and her child. The way she moved the camera and 
created tension throughout every scene was amazing. There was more 
excitement and adrenaline rushed suspense than just about any of 
Hollywood's big blockbuster movies. So it's only natural that Leder would 
get to direct her very own Hollywood blockbuster. And I have to say, 
after a shaky beginning, she does not disappoint.
Peacemaker deals with the theft of nuclear weapons by terrorists, which 
is obviously nothing new. The first half hour goes into detail, way too 
much detail, about how the weapons are stolen. Despite a few good images, 
including a train collision and a very impressive explosion, none of this 
was very coherent. It's long and drawn out, and I would have settled with 
a more implausible beginning that would have moved the story along better.
Once George Clooney and Nicole Kidman enter the picture, it begins to 
take off. George Clooney is an Air Force colonel with connections all 
over the world. He has a nice sarcastic wit and the rough edges that you 
expect from most Clooney characters. Nicole Kidman is head of a White 
House team on weapons smuggling. There is the usual flirtatious banter 
between the two, but that is dispensed with quickly.
The story takes Clooney and Kidman across the globe, trying to figure out 
who has the weapons and where they are going with them.Clooney goes 
through bouts of sarcasm, frustration, determination, and revenge while 
Kidman works against her own insecurity and self-doubt. This is when 
Leder starts to show her true stuff. She starts us off with a nifty 
little car chase as an appetizer. Then we get Clooney doing heroics in 
and out of a helicopter. Then that leads us to the brilliant final 
showdown on New York City's crowded streets, and a madman with a nuke 
walking among them.
Mimi Leder is a natural at creating suspense. She reminds me of Wolfgang 
Petersen in her ability to make the most routine action sequences 
exciting and breathtaking. Nicole Kidman is an intelligent female action 
hero. You're not gonna find her falling down so Clooney can come back to 
save her. George Clooney is a real movie star. Many of you may have hated 
him as Batman, but this guy is for real. He has a natural screen presence,
 and an ingratiating personality. He'll be around for a while. Dreamworks 
is off to a satisfying start with Peacemaker.

Title
Review for Welcome to the Dollhouse (1995)
Heather Matarazzo stars as a Junior High student with the   
unfortunate name of Dawn Weiner. She is more than just a    
little awkward in her appearance. her brother is a computer 
geek who seemingly only does anything because "it'll look   
good on my college transcripts." Her sister is a ballerina  
who sleeps with her dolls and spends much of the movie      
dancing around in the front yard. Her parents undoubtedly   
favor the other two children over her. Life isn't going very
well for her to say the least.                              
Two people enter her life, which starts causing some        
turmoil. One of them is the lead singer of her brother's    
band, a hunky rebellious type who Dawn is instantly         
attracted to. There is a hilarious scene where she fills him
up with junk food trying to get him to stay at her house    
longer. The other guy that enters her life is Brandon, a    
popular classmate of Dawn's who is very cruel to her. There 
are some very interesting twists involving his character,   
perfectly played by Brendan Sexton Jr.                      

Title
Review for Frighteners, The (1996)
****(out of 4)
Directed by Peter Jackson
Starring Michael J. Fox, Trini Alvarado, Dee Wallace Stone, Jeffery
Combs, Peter Dobson, John Astin, Chi McBride, R. Lee Ermey
Review- Peter Jackson's The Frighteners has received some notice for
setting the record for most computer effects ever in a movie, and still
coming in at the extremely cheap $30 million price tag. But for those
who were dismayed by this year's blockbusters like Twister and
Independence Day, The Frighteners has much more to offer than special
effects. And for those worried wether or not Peter Jackson would
compromise to Hollywood you can rest easily. The Frighteners is as far
removed from Hollywood as a high-profile movie can get.
Michael J. Fox stars as Frank Bannister, a con artist who can speak to
ghosts. He uses this ability to set up a scam in a small town where his
ghost buddies scare the hell out of people, then he comes and pretends
to get rid of them. This is how he has made a living ever since his
wife died in a car crash 5 years ago.
Frank's latest customers are a young couple, played by Trini Alvarado
and Peter Dobson. When Dobson ends up dead, Alvarado starts to take an
interest in Fox. But Dobson's spirit is still around as he refuses to
beleive he's dead. This leads to a very awkward and amusing dinner date
between Fox and Alvarado, with Dobson tagging along as a ghost.
Things start getting complicated for Fox when he is accused for a
series of murders taking place in the town. Fox sees someone named The
Soul Collector crushing the heart of the victims, but noone else can
see that. So when Fox shows up to try and save each victim, naturally
people suspect he is the killer. Fox sees that Alvarado is next on The
Soul Collector's hit list, and the last half hour of the movie deals
with Fox's attempts to save her from this evil spirit.
There are many wonderful twists and turns in the screenplay written by
Peter Jackson and Frances Walsh.  The movie starts off as a black
comedy, and ends up a horror-action film. The mix between these genres
are perfect. No laughs are sacrificed in the name of horror, and vice
versa. One point of contention might be a lackluster score by Danny
Elfman. But that hardly seems like a flaw when you have such a diverse
cast all in top form. Michael J. Fox delivers one of his best
performances to date as a man who hides the sorrow of his wife's death,
and then is forced to confront this later on. Alvarado, looking like
Andie MacDowell, makes a great frightened, tough, and smart heroine.
And Jeffery Combs, as a paranoid FBI agent, is brilliantly bizaare.
The Frighteners never once feels like it is running long. The first
hour is as funny as any comedy this year, and the last half hour is as
thrilling as any of the big budget blockbusters. This movie is probably
what Casper would've looked like if David Lynch directed it. It's
easily the best film of the year, so far.

Title
Review for One Fine Day (1996)
One Fine Day must've seemed like a great idea at the time. Let's pair up 
Hollywood's latest heartthrob with Michelle Pfeiffer. I can see why the 
studio and the stars fell for it. Heck, I even fell for the idea. I was 
eagerly anticipating this movie. Unfortunately, the movie is empty, 
unfunny, and unromantic until the last 10 minutes.
Clooney stars as Jack Taylor, a newspaper columnist whose picture is on 
alot of busses. His wife drops his daughter off because she is going on a 
honeymoon with her new husband. Jack receives very specific instructions 
to call Melanie Parker and let her know if she doesn't need to pick his 
daughter up for a feild trip. Obviously, Jack forgets, and both Jack's 
daughter and Melanie's son miss the feild trip. This begins a long day 
(especially for the viewer) where they go on misadventures around the 
city with their kids, while trying to get their jobs done.
The first problem with the movie is it actually thinks we care wether or 
not Melanie and Jack are able to get their jobs done in time. It also 
thinks we care that Melanie's son has a deadbeat father who is touring 
with Springsteen. I cared about Melanie and Jack, because Clooney and 
Pfeiffer make them into interesting characters that I would like to see 
together. Unfortunately, the movie throws in a dozen subplots, few of 
which are interesting. I mean, I don't care if Melanie's son likes to 
stick things up his nose. I don't care if Jack's daughter has a penchant 
for wandering off. And then there is a scene with a kitten that is just 
so stupid it's not even funny.
There were some good moments in the film. Charles Durning has some 
hilarious moments as Jack's editor. George Clooney shows considerable 
skill at light comedy. He has a natural screen presence, and never seems 
like he's trying to be funny. Michaelle Pfeiffer is is terrific as always.
The final scene between Clooney and Pfeiffer is sweet and touching. 
After waiting the whole time for the movie to end, sudeenly I didn't want 
it to. But then it did.

Title
Review for MatchMaker, The (1997)
Usually when one is debating who the modern queen of the    
romantic comedy is they will bring up names like Julia      
Roberts or Sandra Bullock. Others will mention Meg Ryan. But
for me, it's not even close. Janeane Garofalo is not only   
the queen of the romantic comedy, she is the best comic     
actress in hollywood right now. And it's a good thing she's 
starring in The Matchmaker, because without her presence the
movie would be bland, unfunny, and dull.                    
The movie runs into a few roadblocks. For instance, the     
story is very thin. None of the characters (except the old  
local matchmaker) are nearly as interesting as Garofalo.    
Some of the characters, like the political aide played by   
Denis Leary, have wandered in from a completely different   
movie. I think the director realized this and decided to    
throw in numerous shots of the beautiful Irish scenery, and 
several close-ups of Garofalo's winning smile. The strange  
thing is that it works. Garofalo's charm and the irish      
scenery could carry the thinnest of stories, and it carries 
this one.

Title
Review for Dragonheart (1996)
Quaid stars as a man who has taken up the proffesion of     
dragonslayer after he feels he is betrayed by a dragon early
in the movie. He runs into the last dragon in existence, and
there is a genuinely amusing battle between the two which   
results in a standoff where Quaid is in the dragons mouth,  
but has his sword pointed at the dragons brain. Eventually, 
they decide to call a truce, and they work out a deal. Since
he is the last dragon, he will pretend to die and Quaid will
be able to get paid for it.                                 
Of course, as you can probably tell by the plot, this is a  
silly movie, but it does know when to take itself seriously 
at the right times, unlike Eddie, which was serious all the 
time. You could probably call this a medieval comedy,       
because there are more laughs here than in Eddie and Spy    
Hard combined. Dennis Quaid makes a fine hero. Pete         
Posthlewaite provides some ghreat comedy as a monk who      
journeys with them. Dina Meyer is appealing as the          
sacrificed girl. But lets face it, the movie is really about
the dragon, and what an amazing creation he is. Connery's   
voice and ILM team up to provide us with a truly magnificent
dragon. So, if you are going to see this movie for a strong 
hard core medieval epic, you are going to the wrong movie.  
If you are going because of the dragon, you will not be     
dissapointed, and you will be provided with plenty of laughs
that smooth out the boring parts in the script.             

Title
Review for Cable Guy, The (1996)
Review- Many performers don't take chances. They stick with what made 
them famous and decide to continue with that until people find someone 
else who can do the same thing just as good. Well, Jim Carrey takes a 
chance here, albeit a safe one. He's still up to his old antics, but in a 
much darker and odd way. I admire him for that. 
Matthew Broderick stars as a young executive recently separated from his 
wife. One day, his cable goes out. so he calls the cable company. Of 
course, the cable guy arrives late, and at an inopportune time. Broderick 
slips him $50 to get free cable channels. Chip does it for him, and 
thinks hes found a new friend. Broderick humors him at first, but when 
Chip starts to get a little pushy, such as getting a prostitute for him, 
Broderick tries to back out of the friendship.
The rest of the movie deals with Carrey making a living hell out of 
Broderick's life. The movie is quite creative in the situations the 
characters are placed in. A game called Porno Password is played at the 
home of Broderick's parents. In the movies funniest scene, Carrey 
purposely flirts with Broderick while Broderick is in prison and other 
prisoners are watching. There is also amusing happenings at a basketball 
game, and a hilarious jousting battle between the two at Medieval Times.
Ben Stiller has creativity in almost every scene. He paces the film well, 
and gets amusing cameos from Janeane Garofalo and Andy Dick, both alumni 
of his wonderful tv show, The Ben Stiller Show. Broderick plays it 
straight, and does a very good job of it. But the movie belongs to Carrey,
 of course, and he gives his best performance yet. And at the end, 
Stiller wonderfully explains the message of the movie in a very amusing 
sequence. The Cable Guy has a dark, satrirical edge to it that is very 
refreshing, but may not be embraced by most of Carrey's fans. If you're 
looking for Ace Ventura 3, this is the wrong movie. If you're looking for 
an energetic and intelligent black comedy, see this movie.

Title
Review for U Turn (1997)
**1/2 (out of 4)
Directed by Oliver Stone
Starring Sean Penn, Jennifer Lopez, Nick Nolte, Billy Bob
Thornton, Joaquin Phoeniz, Claire Danes, Jon Voight,
Oliver Stone is one of my favorite filmmakers. His past
films - Salvador, Platoon, Born on the 4th of July, Natural
Born Killers, and JFK - have been among the best of the last
12 years. They've all made some sort of political or
thematic statement and usually caused controversy. This time
out, Stone seems intent on just making a cool modern noir
thriller. Unfortunately, the same things that have made his
past films great work against him here.
Sean Penn stars as Bobby Cooper, a drifter whose car breaks
down in the small desert town of Superior, Arizona. He meets
several offbeat characters, who thwart his attempts to
escape from Superior. He catches the eye of the mysterious
vixen Jennifer Lopez, but unbeknownst she has a husband with
 more than a few screws loose. He also runs into a flirty
teenager played by Claire Danes, whose boyfriend goes insane
whenever she's around another guy.
This story is sort of like a demented acid trip cross
between Doc Hollywood and Red Rock West. The problem is, I
think Stone's material isn't strong enough this time around,
and his directorial style, while visually stunning, fails to
create a true sense of suspense or fear. The first hour is
impressive enough, introducing us to the many offbeat
characters, the most memorable being Claire Danes and a
strange mechanic played by Billy Bob Thornton. The movie
falls apart in the last 30 minutes, when it goes way
overboard with one moronic twist after another, none of
which make much sense in retrospect.
U-Turn features brilliant performances by nearly everyone in
the cast and there are several exciting sequences.
Unfortunately, it fails to come together in the conclusion,
which just piles one twist on top of another. So after
making meaningful and controversial films the past 2
decades, Oliver Stone just wanted to make an entertaining
offbeat thriller. He was almost successful.

Title
Review for Beautiful Girls (1996)
There have been numerous films about twentysomething males  
who have a fear of commitment and worry where their lives   
are headed. Last year's wonderful independent feature       
"Kicking and Screaming" is an example, and Diner is the     
Citizen Kane of this genre. Most of these films follow a 
similar pattern. The guys spend a lot of time drinking beer,
fantasizing about women they cannot have, and forgetting    
about what they have right in front of them. "Beautiful     
Girls", a recent video release, doesn't offer much new to   
the genre, but what it does offer is a literate, laugh out  
loud script by Scott Rosenberg, sound direction from Ted    
Demme, and a first-rate ensemble cast.                      
"Beautiful Girls" is set in a small New England town where  
nothing changes and nobody leaves. One of the few that did  
escape is Willie (Hutton), who has come back for his high   
school reunion. He is uncertain about his future with his   
current girlfriend, who wants him to make a commitment. 
Then suddenly, Willie becomes entranced by two women. One is
a drop dead gorgeous city girl who is knowledgeable about   
sports and does whiskey shooters to boot. She is the ideal  
woman, almost too good to be true. Then after teaching each 
of the guys a lesson, she promptly vanishes almost like an  
apparition. This is the most interesting work Thurman has   
done to date. 
Then there is Marty, the 13 year old neighbor of Willie's   
father. Willie thinks she might be the ideal woman for him, 
and actually considers waiting 5 years for her when she's   
legal age. As played by Portman, Marty is a girl wise beyond
her years. The dialogue given to Marty is almost too        
literate, but it's a credit to Portman that she can actually
pull it off and make it seem like a 13 year old could       
actually talk like that. The scenes between Hutton and      
Portman are magical. We can begin to understand why they    
like one another, and also why they weren't meant to be.    
Aside from the exchanges between Portman and Hutton, there  
are several other wonderful vignettes in this movie. Rosie  
O' Donnell plays the local beautician who delivers a        
blistering monologue about how blind men can be. And the    
film's higlight is a scene in a bar where the gang firsts   
meets Thurman, who asks Willie to play something, and they  
break out into a chorus of "Sweet Caroline". It's a magical 
scene. For one moment, they are able to recapture the       
memories of youth when life wasn't so complicated.
"Beautiful Girls" is a humorous, funny, and touching film. It doesn't  
take any easy routes to its conclusion, and none of it seems
contrived. It belongs with "Diner" and "Kicking and         
Screaming" as the best in it's genre. 

Title
Review for Wishmaster (1997)
** (out of 4)
Directed by Robert Kurtzman
Starring Tammy Lauren, Andrew Divoff, Jenny O'Hara, Robert Englund
The success of movies like From Dusk Till Dawn, The Craft, and especially 
Scream have revived the once dead horror genre. Movies that for the past 
few years have been released by companies like Full Moon entertainment 
are now getting released to theaters. Wishmaster (I refuse to attach 
Craven's name to this) is a current and annoying example of this recent 
trend. Unfortunately, the very flaws that killed this genre in the late 
80's are evident in this movie.
Wishmaster tells the story of a Djinn, an evil genie who must receive 
three wishes from the person who awakens him to conquer the world. He has 
magical powers, but can only utilize them if someone makes a wish. The 
movie begins in medieval times, where a Djinn grants an unwise wish to a 
King and makes a mess of a party in his castle. The king's magician 
advises against a 3rd wish and is able to trap the Djinn in a gemstone.
Flash forward to the present. An art dealer is receiving a shipment of a 
statue. There is an accident however, as the crate comes loose and 
crushes someone underneath. Guess what gem is found in the wreckage?
The gem is taken to a local gemologist (Lauren) for an appraisal, and 
guess who she wakes up? The Djinn escapes during an examination by her 
colleague and longtime friend, who is of course killed.
The Djinn then promptly goes searching around for the gemologist who 
awakened him, so he can receive his 3 wishes. During this, he tricks 
several unexpected victims into making some very unwise wishes. The best 
moments of the film come here, when the film shows the creative ways in 
which the victims are conned.
There is some good material here that could've worked in the hands of a 
talented director. Unfortunately, the direcotrial chores were given to 
Kurtzman, a former makeup and FX artist who was more interested in 
showing us how creative he is with gory makeup and special effects than 
suspenseful sequences with horrific payoffs. The movie turns out to be a 
freak show, as Kurtzman seems to be pissed off he didn't get the Freddy 
vs. Jason job (which unfortunately also went to a makeup/FX guy). I don't 
mind much gore in my horror movies, but this movie goes way too far over 
the top several times.
Tammy Lauren is a very weak and uninspired lead. She doesn't even know 
how to scream right for this kind of movie. Her ineptness kills several 
moments. However, Andrew Divoff (who has a very cool voice) is very 
effective as the Djinn, and veteran character actress Jenny O'Hara plays 
the part of a kooky theater director and expert on Djinn's on the perfect 
note of wide-eyed oddity. 
My advice to Kurtzman: Watch Halloween and Psycho. Look at how much gore 
is in those movies. Look how scary and suspenseful each of them are. 
Learn how to direct a movie. then get back to me.

Title
Review for Soul Food (1997)
**** (out of 4)
Directed by George Tillman Jr.
Starring Vanessa Williams, Vivica Fox, Nia Long, Brandon Hammond, Mekhi 
Phifer, Michael Beach, Irma P. Hall, Gina Ravera
There is a scene early in Soul Food, George Tillman's comedy-drama about 
a large African-American family and the ordeals they go through during a 
crisis, that caught me completely off guard. During a wedding, the groom 
is flirting with some tramp, and in an attempt to to prevent a scene, his 
mother in law, played by Irma P. Hall, comes to the rescue. The way in 
which she does this makes me think Irma P. Hall is one of the greatest 
actresses around right now. However, this is just one magical moment in a 
movie filled with them.
Vanessa Williams, Vivica Fox, and Nia Long star as three sisters who have 
each gone their own way in life. Williams is Teri,  a successful lawyer, 
who is frustrated by her husband Miles attempts at a music career. Fox is 
Maxine, the strongest of the sisters, which can be confirmed by the 
stability of her marriage and the wisdom of her son Ahmad, who narrates 
the film. Long is Bird, a hairdresser who is the last of the three to get 
married. Her husband Lem is an intense passionate individual whose temper 
gets the best of him sometime but never stops loving. At the center of 
everything is Irma P. Hall, as Big Mama Jo.
Every Sunday, the family gathers together for dinner at Mama Jo's house. 
There is lots of conversation, lots of laughs, and the occasional 
controversy. Mama Jo presides over the family like all mothers should. 
She is stern and disciplined, but also caring and forgiving.
Everything is going fine, until a tragedy befalls Mama Jo. All of a 
sudden, a chain reaction of events begin to destroy the family. It gets 
so bad, Sunday dinner is even cancelled. Without Mama Jo's guidance, 
there is noone to keep the family together, which frustrates Ahmad.
Miles and Maxine's marriage begins to fall apart, as he focuses on his 
music and flirts with the troublesome Faith. Lem's temper gets the best 
of him when his convict past starts to catch up to him. And Teri tries to 
prevent Maxine's efforts to sell Mama Jo's house. The third act of the 
film deals with Ahmad's attempts to patch things up. He decides to take 
over where Mama Jo left off, and tries to get the family back together 
for one more Sunday dinner.
The acting by everyone in the ensemble is outstanding, with special 
notices to Irma P. Hall and Brandon Hammond. Hall gives a performance 
that deserves to be recognized by the academy. Her Mama Jo is one of the 
most memorable characters I have ever encountered in a movie. Brandon 
Hammond is an actor with a bright future. He is wise enough not to play 
cutesy and shows an admirable range and depth, and speaks the final lines 
of the movie on the perfect note.
Tillman obviously based this movie on his own memories of growing up. 
Every scene in the movie is purposeful and convincing (except maybe an 
odd flashback sequence). The dialogue is beleiveable and funny. And then 
there's the food. Tillman gives us several close ups of the soul food, 
and it indeed looks very tasty. I can see why Sunday dinners became such 
a tradition for this family. Soul Food is one of the most purely 
entertaining movies of the year. 

Title
Review for Phantom, The (1996)
Everything in The Phantom you have seen many times before   
and there is nothing new presented here. Wincer displays    
absolutely no skill in setting up an exciting action        
sequence. Billy Zane is wooden as the hero. Kristy Swanson  
is given very little to do, and does very little with it.   
Treat Williams, looking like Rhett Butler but sounding like 
Mickey Mouse, is one of the worst villains I have ever seen 
in a movie. Only Catherine Zeta Jones, as one of Williams   
cohorts turns in a good performance. She has energy and     
spunk, which the movie needed much more of. Oh yeah, the    
Phantom also has a secret identity but this is so poorly    
played out you won't even care. About the only things I can 
recommend are a good performance by Jones, and some colorful
scenery. However, if youre looking for a fun family movie,  
go watch the underrated Flipper. This is not a good movie.  

Title
Review for Kicking and Screaming (1995)
Review- This wonderful surprise was hands down the funniest movie of 1995.
 This film tells the stry of four friends who just graduated from college 
but are uncertain what to do with their lives. The plot may sound similar 
andf this story has been botched many times before, but this time it is 
perfect. I loved every minute of this film.
        Josh Hamilton stars as Grover, who on graduation night learns that his 
girlfriend, Jane, is moving to Prague. Grover asks "So how will that work 
if you're living with me in Brooklyn?" Jane responds, "It'll be the same, 
except I'll be in Prague." Jane leaves for Prague, and in a futile 
attempt to get over her, he sleeps with a different freshman each night 
it seems. Jane continues to leave messages on the answering machine, and 
Grover tries not to listen, but he does. The film shows the beginnings of 
their relationship in flashbacks, after we have already seen them breakup.
 This is an intelligent device, and makes the flashbacks all the more 
poignant.
        Chris Eigeman plays Max, the cynical wisecracking Matthew Perry-ish best 
friend of Grover. Max graduates and realizes he has to start all over 
again. "8 hours ago I was Max Beaumont, English major, college senior. 
Now I'm Max Beaumont who does nothing." Max always seems to have a self 
deprecating manner, and apparently is never happy with himself. Enter 
into his life a 16 year old high school student (Buono). They make an odd 
couple, but thats probably what Max likes about her. He couldn't stand 
being with someone like him, so he has to be with someone different. 
        Carlos Jacott plays Otis, the dopey one. He is supposed to go to 
graduate school, but doesn't have enough confidence and decides to take a 
year off. He is constantly doing strange things such as wearing his 
pajamas during the day, coming out of the bathroom unbuckled, and putting 
mascara on. He takes a job at a huge Blockbuster style video store that 
has numerous confusing movie categories such as Dog - Buddy pictures and 
Interesting Failures. This is an obvious attempt at spoofing Blockbuster 
and it is very funny, but seems out of place in this film which otherwise 
mines its humor from real life situations. This is a very minor nitpick 
in an otherwise perfect film.
        Jason Wiles plays Skippy, the naive and carefree one who re-enrolls in 
school after graduating so he has an excuse to stay in town with his 
undergraduate girlfriend, Miami (Posey). This is a very entertainig 
relationship between the two that suffers a crisis, and at the end we 
understand why he has put up with her, and why she has put up with him. 
The last scene between the two is wonderful. We realize their annoyances, 
but we understand their significant charms.
        In the middle of all this is the bartender Chet, played by Eric Stoltz. 
He has been going to college for 10 years. "I did skip a semester my 
sophomore year," he helpfully informs us. Chet is comfortable with what 
he does in life, and isn't looking for a career. He is a college student, 
and thats all he wants to be. 
        "Kicking and Screaming" was written and directed by Noah Baumbach in a 
stunning debut. The depth he puts into each and every character is 
astonishing. Notice for example the scene in the Creative Writing class 
where some characters that only have one or two lines have fully 
developed personalities, especially the teacher, who says only one word. 
The dialogue is highly entertaining and realistic. There are 
conversations here that rival the popular ones in Pulp Fiction, such as a 
discussion on the Friday the 13th films, and on wether you would want to 
fuck a cow or lose your mother. The acting is terrific. There isn't one 
imperfect performance in the bunch, and Jacott's uproarious deadpan 
portrayal of Otis deserved the Oscar for best supporting actor. Elliot 
Gould has a very effective small role as Grover's dad. This little 
independent feature didn't even make 1 million in its theatrical release, 
so I beg you to rent this so we will get to see more from Noah Baumbach 
in the future. This is one of the funniest movies of the decade.
