Authors
Chris Bumbray
Number of Reviews
2

Title
Review for Mask of Zorro, The (1998)
For over a year now the trailers have been playing in theaters, and before
every video released by the film's distributor Sony. I personally have been
dying to see this movie from the moment it was announced. This is probably
one of the best movies I have ever seen, and easily the best of the summer.
                                                            The film begins
with a bond style opening, that has Zorro walking to the middle of the
screen and and slashing a Z. After this we have a 20 minute prologue
featuring Anthony Hopkins as Zorro. Hopkins is surprisingly great as Zorro.
I must say this now, I think Hopkins is one of the greatest actors in modern
cinema. The best part of the prologue is the duel between Zorro (as Don
Diego de la Vega) and the film's villain Stuart Wilson. This backed by James
Horner's excellent score make this extraordinary.  Vega's wife is killed and
his baby taken by Wilson, and Vega himself is imprisoned. Flash forward
twenty years to Vega's escape and subsequent training of the new Zorro
played by Antonio Bandares. Antonio's character seeks revenge for the murder
of his brother at the hand of one of the villain's guards.

Title
Review for Lethal Weapon 4 (1998)
I had the opportunity today to see the long awaited Lethal Weapon 4, being
this it's release date. Let me first mention that I am a very big fan of
this classic action series. The series has changed since it was first
established. It has gone from a hard edged action drama to a more comedic
style adventure series. To some this is bad news, to some this is good news.
I personally enjoy the entire series. Lethal Weapon 4 is similar in essence
to Lethal Weapon 3. It is a highly charged action adventure/comedy drama.
                                                                        The
plot begins simple but throws many curves. Riggs (Mel Gibson) and Murtagh
(Danny Glover) are fishing with Leo (Joe Pesci) in Murtagh's boat. Leo
catches a shark and is trying to determine what to do with it. Suddenly a
massive tanker appears and begins firing on our heroes. They discover the
boat is full of illegal Chinese immigrants sold into slave labor. A family
takes refuge in Murtagh's boat and Murtagh takes them into his home. They
are soon begin an investigation which leads them to a triad boss played by
Jet Li. I don't want to reveal more of the plot so all I will say is this
ends up in the usual bang- bang method with some subplots thrown in
involving Lorna (Rene Russo), Riggs's girlfriend being pregnant with Riggs's
baby and Murtagh's daughter being pregnant by Chris Rock. Riggs's also
confronts feelings of marriage and his dead wife.  The first hour of the
movie is basically a comedy, and the second hour is non stop action with
some dramatic moments thrown in.
I thought the movie was fun and exciting, and that it raised interesting
questions about our two middle-aged heroes getting older. The sole fault in
this movie is it's sappy ending that seems to belong on Family Matters. Joe
Pesci even has a monologue about his pet frog (named froggy) that he had as
a child.  Besides that the movie is riveting and the final incredible
shootout and fight in the factory must be seen to be believed. Jet Li easily
steals the picture as the villain. His martial arts powers are amazing. In
the final fight you even may find yourselves thinking our heroes are done
for!
9.5/10 (It would be 10 if it weren't for the aforementioned sappy ending)
