Authors
Faust667
Number of Reviews
4

Title
Review for Go (1999)
I have become sickened by all the Tarantino rip-offs, too many to
mention.  Almost all have none of the grace, wit or humanity that dear
Quentin invests in his own works. They are like well-designed
wallpapers flung with graphic violence, countless obscenities, and
numerous rock n' roll/rap songs and packaged as something shocking and
new. Some star Michael Madsen, Martin Sheen or Dennis Hopper. "Out of
Sight" was the most dazzling but that had the advantage of a great
author, Elmore Leonard, as its basis, and Steven Soderbergh, a stylish
director. The new "Go" is different - it's as symmetrically close to
"Pulp Fiction" as you can imagine but it has an electric energy and
volume all its own.
The film begins with a supermarket checkout girl named Ronna
(soft-voiced and droopy-eyed Sarah Polley from "Sweet Hereafter") who
establishes a drug connection for two handsome soap opera stars, Adam
(Scott Wolf) and Zack (Jay Mohr). Ronna's drug of choice is ecstasy,
which one member of her elite group nearly overdoses on and imagines
speaking to a cat with Zen subtitles. Ronna has to deal with the seedy
drug dealer, Todd (Timothy Olyphant), who has a propensity for sexual
favors. But when her good friend, Claire (Katie Holmes), another
supermarket checkout girl, is left alone with this devil, things truly
go haywire.
After Ronna's predicament, we flash back to the beginning of
the story told from the point-of-view of a thick-accented, red-haired
Brit, Simon (Desmond Askew). Simon is a drug connection for Todd
(Ronna is the replacement) and goes off to Vegas with his pals,
including the suave Marcus (Taye Diggs) and a stoner who thinks he's
black, Tiny (Breckin Meyer - always the pothead).  Unfortunately,
after a debacle involving backroom lap-dancers ("Do not touch!"), they
are now on the run from a vicious gangster (the terrifically oily
J.E. Freeman). And it is here where we experience one of the most
dazzling car chases ever filmed to the tune of Steppenwolf's "Magic
Carpet Ride."
Then the story flashes back again and we see the story told
from the point-of-view of the two soap opera stars, who are working
undercover under the tutelage of the Teutonic cop Burke (William
Fichtner), a character that makes you squirm. Burke invites the pair
to a Christmas dinner that is fraught with misunderstandings and
unclear intentions. Let's just say it is a howler of a sequence,
guaranteed to keep you laughing at its inevitable payoff.
The characters, as well as the audience, experience one
near-catastrophe after another, and all the characters seem intent to
make a whole 24-hour, Rashomon-like experience as dangerously exciting
as possible with no inhibitions - they will do absolutely anything for
thrills. There are gangsters, awry drug deals, dances to the tune of
"Macarena," distorted visions, extreme violence, conversations about
Tantric sex and the comic "The Family Circus," and lots more to feast
the eyes and the ears.
"Go" is suffused with electric energy throughout - there is
not a moment that is not thrilling or kinetic in any way. Director
Doug Liman ("Swingers") frames his charismatic actors with tension
abounding every step of the way by means of a constantly roving
camera. The opening titles show a stroboscopic club where silhouetted
patrons dance the night away in light blue hues, and the editing is
lightning-paced. This brilliantly sets up the rest of the film's pace,
and sometimes Liman will slow down long enough to study the actor's
faces.
I enjoyed all the actors on screen, but Sarah Polley has a
dole-like quality that is more realistic than the cardboard teens
shown in other films - I could not stop looking at her. Katie Holmes
displays a sensuousness and a charm that made me swoon. I also liked
the merry soul of Taye Diggs, a definite star-in-the-making.
"Go" may remind many of "Pulp Fiction," but this film has its
own momentum, and plenty of style to spare. It's a crazy film that
will keep you on edge - funny, energetic, joyous, jolting, ironic, and
tense. You can't ask for a better time at the movies.
For more reviews, please check out JERRY AT THE MOVIES at
http://buffs.moviething.com/buffs/faust/ 

Title
Review for Terms of Endearment (1983)
A look at 'TERMS OF ENDEARMENT' and 'THE EVENING STAR'
Aurora Greenway is one of those colorful, larger-than-life characters who exist
only in Southern novels, particularly those by Larry McMurtry ("The Last
Picture Show"). In "Terms of Endearment," coincidentally based on a novel by
McMurtry, Aurora (Shirley MacLaine) arose as a tender, full-blooded, fiercely
emotional creature. In the excruciating "The Evening Star," she is depicted as
a bloodless caricature, as if she drifted in from the latest soap opera series.
"Terms of Endearment" is one of the great movies of the 1980's - it is
captivating, unsentimental, brilliantly acted, and superbly directed by James
L. Brooks. The heart of that film was Aurora's troubling yet loving
relationship with her daughter Emma (Debra Winger). The trials and tribulations
they endure evoked a nice balance between humor and heartbreak. For example,
Aurora dates a swinging, hard-drinking bachelor and astronaut (Jack Nicholson),
and a tender love affair begins and ends abruptly between them. Emma marries
Flap (Jeff Daniels, who's been typecast ever since), a professor who teaches
English and has affairs with co-eds. In retaliation, Emma has an affair with a
banker (John Lithgow), and so on. 
"Terms of Endearment" has a wonderful ensemble of actors at their best, and
honest, vibrant writing. The beauty of the film is Brooks's careful balance
between comedy, seriousness and tragedy. "Terms" also never steps into
caricature or droll exaggeration resulting in a film that transcends its soap
opera origins. 
"The Evening Star" is at the opposite end of the pole. It is grossly
exaggerated, wildly uneven, contains numerous caricatures not characters, and
takes an eternity to end. This time, the eccentric Aurora (Shirley McClaine,
again) has Emma's sexy teenage daughter (Juliette Lewis) to contend with, a
grandchild in prison, and Emma's rich, snobbish friend (Miranda Richardson) who
is trying to buy Aurora's granddaughter's love. In addition, there's Aurora's
loving, loyal maid (Marion Ross) who seems more like an intrusion in her life
than anything else. Oh, and there's the local psychiatrist (Bill Paxton) who
has a brief, unbelievable fling with Aurora. 
"The Evening Star" suffers greatly in every department when compared to
"Terms." For one, the casting is actually awful. MacLaine overacts to the hilt
of all hilts - she's actually annoying and boring to watch. Juliette Lewis does
better with her role as a troubled teenager, but it is something she can play
in her sleep. Marion Ross and the late Ben Johnson, in his last role, seem to
be sleepwalking throughout. 
The one actress who is wrongfully cast, and an indication of what's wrong with
some sequels, is Miranda Richardson as the snobbish friend of the late Emma -
she spews seemingly delectable witticisms with a crooked drawl that brings out
the worst in Southern stereotypes and accents. Interestingly, her character was
played by Lisa Hart Carroll in "Terms" with complete restraint - a far cry from
Richardson's manic fits. Where's the dignity of Southerner Billy Bob Thornton
when you really need him? 
"Terms" was a real human drama and completely unpredictable and truthful from
beginning to end. "Evening Star" is utterly formulaic nonsense done with none
of the vigor or honesty of the original (and with a high mortality rate to
boot). The film is so desperate that it even brings back Jack Nicholson for an
unnecessary, heavy-handed cameo. Where's Jim Brooks when you really need him? 
For more reviews, check out JERRY AT THE MOVIES at
http://buffs.moviething.com/buffs/faust/
E-mail me with any questions, concerns or general comments at Faust667@aol.com
or at faustus_08520@yahoo.com

Title
Review for Marvin's Room (1996)
Diane Keaton's portrayal of the frustrated Aunt Bessie is probably her best
role since "Annie Hall." Keaton plays a humane, misunderstood woman who is
trying to come to terms with her estranged sister (Meryl Streep) and her
troubled nephew (Leonard DiCaprio) after discovering she has leukemia. It is a
strong, subtle performance and it deserves to be in a much better movie than
the one provided. 
At the start of the film, we see Bessie's estranged sister (Streep) majoring in
cosmetology, and raising two sons on her own. When her older son (DiCaprio)
burns the house down, he is admitted to a mental institution. Then Streep gets
a call from Bessie revealing her condition and her dire need for a bone marrow
transplant. Streep reluctantly agrees, and brings her two sons to Florida since
they qualify as good candidates for a transplant. 
Bessie lives with her bedridden, senile father (Hume Cronyn) and kooky aunt who
cries while watching soap operas. Predictably, Bessie and her sister do not get
along whereas DiCaprio and Bessie do. I don't need to give away much more of
the tedious plot since you may have guessed the rest by now. 
"Marvin's Room" is basically a TV movie with a better cast and stagy production
values (it is based on a play by Scott Macpherson). As aforementioned, Diane
Keaton is forceful and magnetic to watch - her scenes with Streep are powerful.
Ditto the scintillating DiCaprio who steals the scenes he shares with Streep
and Keaton - the scene with DiCaprio trying to eat chips while Streep insists
on asking permission from Bessie is tense and comical. Meryl Streep is
believably trashy and uptight - a performance that recalls her portrayal in
"Silkwood." There's also the ubiquitous Robert De Niro as an affable doctor who
rides in a bicycle and comes to work wearing a helmet (he's also one of the
producers of the film). De Niro delivers a blast of quiet, comedic touches -
too bad, his role is so short (as in "Sleepers") since he brings the film alive
whenever he's on screen. 
Somehow, "Marvin's Room" follows a very clear, formulaic path from the
beginning and ends just when things start to get really interesting. Every
scene is predictable, and there isn't a sense of spontaneity as you might
expect from such a great cast. Still, what distinguishes it from the norm is
its refreshing lack of overt sentimentality. That and Diane Keaton's bravura
performance warrants a look at this mild, flawed piece. 
For more reviews, check out JERRY AT THE MOVIES at
http://buffs.moviething.com/buffs/faust/
E-mail me with any questions, concerns or general complaints at
faustus_08520@yahoo.com or at Faust667@aol.com

Title
Review for Third Miracle, The (1999)
Finally, we witness a film about priests and miracles that does not condescend
to the audience by featuring superfluous special-effects or a demonic Patricia
Arquette. "The Third Miracle" is a bloody miracle, an extremely well-acted and
thematically rich film by notable director Agnieszka Holland ("Europa,
Europa"). 
Ed Harris stars as Father Frank Shore, a postulator, known by many as the
"miracle killer," who is seen at the start of the film working at a soup
kitchen. He is called back into duty to investigate a woman who may or may not
be a saint but is loved by the people of a Chicago community all the same.
Every November, the people gather to see a statue that weeps blood - this is
coincidentally the month in which Helen O'Regan (Barbara Sukowa) - the supposed
saint - died. There is talk that she cured a young girl of lupus by simply
touching the girl. 
Father Shore has his doubts but the blood is discovered to be real, and the
girl, now a drug-addicted runaway, was cured of lupus. But can there be some
doubt that this is all highly coincidental? Is Father Shore the right priest to
investigate since years earlier he had debunked the myth of another saint and
thus destroyed the faith of an entire community? There is also the question
that a saint would never leave his or her children behind to pursue faith. Such
is the case with the late Helen, who abandoned her daughter, Roxanne (Anne
Heche). Roxanne is angry at her mother and feels she could never be deemed a
saint. 
"The Third Miracle" asks lots of questions and justifiably answers very few of
them. Father Shore may have doubts about his own faith (as most priests do in
the movies nowadays) but this is a job, and it is one he where he must be
nonjudgmental. He has his own emotional flaws, such as the possibility of
falling in love with Roxanne. He also has to fight against the devil's
advocate, Archbishop Werner (Armin Mueller-Stahl), a ferociously stubborn man
who feels the world has no need for more saints or miracles. But sainthood is a
tricky judgment, it has to be proved and tested and Father Shore goes against
all odds in pursuing the truth and, thus, waiting for another miracle. 
Ed Harris does solid work (as always) as the dubious Father Shore, one of the
few actors on the silver screen whom you can tell when his mind is at work. He
has a very touching, effective scene with Heche, as she visits her mother's
grave and they talk about the good Father's flirtations and loss of virginity
in high school. Some of this was also featured in the horrible "Stigmata," but
here Harris makes it all credible and believable. Anne Heche is sprightly and
alive as always...and she shares lots of emotionally implicit scenes with
Harris. 
"The Third Miracle" is not a great film (I am tired of seeing statues weeping
blood, for one, and the ending is abrupt) but it is richly rewarding and
tastefully done. It leaves you thinking about what the church constitutes as
miracles nowadays, and what a saint's credentials should be. Ultimately, it is
a fascinating look at the nature and question of faith in the church. And
thanks to Ed Harris, we almost come close to believing that any miracle may be
possible. 
For more reviews, check out JERRY AT THE MOVIES at
http://buffs.moviething.com/buffs/faust/
E-mail me with any questions, comments or general complaints at
Faust667@aol.com or at jerry@movieluver.com
