Authors
Zak Forsman
Number of Reviews
11

Title
Review for Fargo (1996)
The Coen Brothers' latest film, FARGO is a combination of their earlier
works--specifically BLOOD SIMPLE and RAISING ARIZONA. I think what I'm
trying to say is that FARGO is at one moment hilarious and then sharply
horrifying.  I've always had mixed feelings over violence on the movie
screen. When watching TAXI DRIVER I'd be thinking that it just wouldn't be
the same film without reaching that 'catharsis-through-urban-violence'
finale. On the other hand, I went to see ERASER and felt that the violence
there was indeed gratuitous.  I had always felt that I was holding a
double standard until I realized that what makes violence gratuitous is
the integrity, or lack thereof, of the film exhibiting it. And in the case
of FARGO, I found myself disgusted and horrified at what I was seeing as
opposed to ERASER where alligators ripped arms from their sockets and the
effect on me was minimal.
FARGO, which claims to be based on actual events but isn't, is the story
of a car salesman (William H. Macy) who manifests a scheme to get nearly
one-million dollars in ransom money for the kidnapping of his own wife. 
Her extremely wealthy, grumbling and growling father will be forced to
pay. The film unfolds as nearly everything goes terribly wrong--sometimes
funny, often frightening. We follow a pregnant police detective (Frances
McDormond) as she uncovers the case. I won't go any further in case you
haven't seen FARGO other than to tell you that I was skeptical as to how
involved her character could be considering her physical condition. Let me
tell you her character is well-engaged by the story and her involvement in
the climax/resolution is truly memorable.
The film's screenplay was written with extreme care for detail and
narrative verve, all too often absent from contemporary works. There are
times, and this is a good example, when it is obvious that this screenplay
had reached a fully developed and final draft before principle photography
was started.  The dialogue alone is so new and devoid of clich that the
audience is (and this is rare) anticipating the characters' interaction
instead of predicting it. Even in so called 'talking heads' scenes, we are
mentally engaged by the film and certainly involved. Joel and Ethan Coen
have consistently shown a talent for dialogue, storytelling and the
ability to integrate both into the film's visual elements. They are also
one of the few filmmakers with a signature--when you see a Coen Brothers
film, you know it.
Not one actor in the film would be considered by a studio executive to
headline a movie on their own. This is a cast of all those people you saw
in supporting roles in other films. William H. Macy (Oleanna, Homicide,
ER) is a veteran of David Mamet's plays and performs here flawlessly. He
shapes his character so anxiously weak that we both condemn his for his
acts of cowardice and pity him for his lack of social courage. Frances
McDormond (Blood Simple, Raising Arizona) as the pregnant police chief on
the case has herself one of the most original characters ever written. She
is indeed quirky, and although quirkiness does not necessarily equal
originality, McDormond grounds the character in truly human qualities.
Then there is Steve Buscemi (Reservoir Dogs, Living in Oblivion) who's
been doing similar characters since his supporting role in Martin
Scorsese's short film, LIFE LESSONS from NEW YORK STORIES. Although his
character in FARGO is not much different, this time he does not come off
as though he's playing for the camera with the exception of a very funny,
"total silence" monologue. Buscemi seems to be making a career out of
playing himself and this is another of several films in which it works.
Also, by the end of FARGO, his character is so viciously frustrated that
it mirrors the "hilarious, but horrifying" theme of the film.
Although the screen credit for director goes to Joel Coen and the producer
credit goes to Ethan, they have said that they actually share the two
positions equally.  In directing FARGO, the Coen brothers seem to hold
back a little--using their trademark wide angle lens with more reverence.
They save their more visual shots for sequences in which they won't
smother the actors' performances and the story. In the context of this
film, I think they've struck a perfect balance. Their best scene, I would
say, is the triple homicide sequence at night--part of which was borrowed
from their own BLOOD SIMPLE. I guess practice makes perfect.
Much has been made of the scene where Frances McDormond meets an old
high-school friend, Mike, for lunch.  Later in the film, we learn that
Mike has had psychological problems and that everything he told Frances
McDormond was a lie.  Many claim the scene serves no purpose and, despite
being well-written, should have been cut.  My take on it is that even
though she can deduce genuine facts presented to her, Frances McDormond's
character, until this point, is unable to recognize deceit and human
corruption.  As with Mike, she must accept what William H. Macy's
character had told her because she cannot see the possibility of his
dishonesty.  She just can't conceive such things.  At one point she says,
"I doubt our suspect is from Brainerd," because she thinks of evil as
something abstract that comes from somewhere else.  In this case, the Coen
brothers chose to introduce deceit and corruption through Naturalism. 
Which is to say, something unrelated to the plot, affects and forwards
it.  Once Mike is exposed, she is able to question William H. Macy's
sincerity and returns to press him further.  I feel that each film has its
own universe and many times its ideas, themes and other devices have to be
introduced to the main character for them to be cinematicly valid.  For
example, in TAXI DRIVER, Martin Scorsese plays a man who tells Travis
Bickle that he's going to kill his wife.  He introduces "violence" into
Travis' moral universe.  Once exposed to it, he let's it consume him--and
we all know where it takes him.
Many people have been turned off by their own uncertainty as to whether to
laugh or cringe during this film. I know this was quite intentional and
would expect that the Coens take it as a compliment to their work to have
affected those people in such a manner. Anyway, FARGO is the best film
that's come out all year and I don't see anything coming in the future to
change that. It will certainly be nominated for Best Original Screenplay
if not Best Picture. Joel Coen has already won the Directing Prize at the
1996 Cannes Film Festival. I highly recommend you see FARGO. 
Ratings are based on the four-star system.

Title
Review for Girl 6 (1996)
I'm not sure how I feel about GIRL 6. I mean, if it had been done by anyone
else I would probably have thought more of it. But, because it is a Spike
Lee joint, well, I just expected more. The film explores an up and coming
actress' brief experience as a phone sex operator. It's something she twice
refers to as, "just a job," but it quickly becomes obvious that
she is addicted to the new found power she holds over her callers.
As with many films, the weakness lies in its foundation--the screenplay.
Here the problems arise not with dialogue, but with the depths the writer
was willing to go. I didn't feel we were given many chances to really understand
the motivations of Theresa Randle's character. That was a major flaw in
my opinion. The screenplay could be described as an exercise in symbolism.
With this I mean, "the little girl who fell down the elevator shaft"
sequences she watches on the news. Also, the caller, Bob Regular, who promises
to meet her at Coney Island but ultimately stands her up. From this scene
I take it that she is looking for what she needs where she won't find it.
These are the aspects of GIRL 6 that worked very well for me, but that's
only half a screenplay. I just felt that those aspects were grounded in
a lazy script.
Spike Lee continues to change and explore new filmmaking techniques. In
CROOKLYN, he shot a sequence, with an anamorphic lens, during which Troy,
the little girl, is out of her normal environment. The film was primarily
shot flat, so the anamorphic scenes looked squeezed or skinny. This effect
lasted until the little girl returned home. In GIRL 6, Spike uses that same
technique to instill an awkward and unsettling feeling toward the subject
whenever he feels necessary. He also shot all of the callers in HDTV--which
compared to film has less resolution. Spike has said that he did this to
example by visual means their lack of power. Theresa Randle was shot on
film, her image was stronger, she was in control. This technique was also
applied to the two videotaped auditions that she has. She is asked, by Quentin
Tarantino, to show her breasts. After some fussing, she concedes. At that
moment, Spike cuts to the video image of her being taped as she removes
her top. The moment is effective.
The film's cast is great, although no one is given much time to developed
other than Theresa Randle, but then, she's the important one. Spike Lee's
role as Jimmy is one of his better cameos--very funny. The other phone sex
operators fill their characters well. I especially got a kick out of seeing
Naomi Campbell in a shirt that read, "Models Suck."
Like I said earlier, if the film had been done by someone without a track
record as good as Spike Lee's, I'm sure I'd be recommending that you see
this film. With that in mind, if you approach this film as an exercise in
film technique or if you're just a fan of Spike Lee (as I am), you will
appreciate it more than the average moviegoer. There's really not much depth
to this story. I liken this situation to when Martin Scorsese does projects
like AFTER HOURS or CAPE FEAR. The film is good. The film-maker is capable
of much more. 
P.S. The title of this review is in reference to the film's self-indulgent
use of technique to express something (a story) that is devoid of any real
substance.
Ratings are based on the four-star system.

Title
Review for Usual Suspects, The (1995)
Last year's winner of the Oscar for Best Original Screenplay went to THE
USUAL SUSPECTS (an award I was hoping would go to SMOKE, but that wasn't
even nominated). This film has an impressive run of dialogue and is
well-acted, but in my opinion the story suffers from a serious defect. It
seems the story exists only to set up the audience for the twist at the
film's end, which by now I'm sure many of you have seen. The sequence is
certainly exciting and it is interesting to watch it unfold, but when it
is finished, what do you have? Nothing, which can only mean that the story
was a perfunctory step on the way to the 'cool idea' that McQuarrie had
for an ending. A true use of a twist (or twists) that exist in service the
story is CHINATOWN.  "...my sister, my daughter, my sister and my
daughter!"  Each surprising turn moves you closer to opening up the heart
of the story, instead of devoiding it of worth. And that is what THE USUAL
SUSPECTS did. It essentially said, "most of what you have just seen was a
lie."  In my opinion, that is nearly as bad as the "it was all a dream"
bit used most notably in NORTH. This is something I refer to as cinematic
suicide. However, this in no way compares to my disdain over the fact that
the story existed only for the sake of the twist/ending.
This film was directed much in the same manner by which it was written. 
Bryan Singer is the type of director that would be described as
stylistic.  I put him in the same league as someone like Michael Bay who
has brought us the likes of BAD BOYS and THE ROCK. Both of these directors
are out to prove that they can do 'cool shots', plain and simple. It's the
Tony Scott brand of filmmaking. An example of Bryan Singers work in THE
USUAL SUSPECTS would be the matching dissolve he performs from the
circular cave scene at the beach to a coffee mug. What was the reasoning
for this, you ask?  What motivated the apparent relationship between that
scene and the coffee mug? Nothing. There is no relationship. Perhaps if
the scene at the cave had a strong relation to the man, Kobayashi, which
we eventually learn is actually written on the bottom of the coffee mug,
there would have been a valid reason for the dissolve.  However, the only
motivating factors were that they were both round and that Singer thought
the dissolve would look neat. Bryan Singer's stylistic approach to
filmmaking is about the most superficial I've ever scene--second only to
Michael Bay's.
Now, the actor's performances are something to behold. Kevin Spacey
(GLENGARRY GLEN ROSS) won an Academy Award for this role and he is a very
good character actor. Although, I think he's done a few other films in
which he was even more deserving of the award. Gabriel Byrne (MILLER'S
CROSSING) perfectly underplays his character as a thoughtful man who seems
uninterested by what happens around him until it directly affects him. The
rest of the cast performs together well with one exception. Kevin Pollak
(A FEW GOOD MEN) does not have a hold on his character at all. He seems to
be trying to do a tough guy, but he comes across as, in all honesty, like
he's acting like a tough guy. He's done better work before and this hit me
as a surprise.
Anyway, you'll either love or hate this film--there's no middle ground
because there is very little depth here. I'd say it has about as much
depth as PULP FICTION, which I liked because it was about its characters,
not the technique. This is also the only film that a certain friend of
mine and I disagree on. He called it 'refreshing'. I call it a gimmick. 
Ratings are based on the four-star system.

Title
Review for Dead Man Walking (1995)
"A film about looking into the heart of a killer and finding the soul of a
man." These were the words used to describe DEAD MAN WALKING in the
trailers and commercials that ran for the film. They're dead on, it's
exactly what this film is about. It is not about the death penalty or
right and wrong. It is about taking responsibility for your actions,
honestly.
Based on the book by Sister Helen Prejean, played by Susan Sarandon, DEAD
MAN WALKING is a film about her experiences with death row inmate Matthew
Poncelet. And at the same time that she is fighting to have his sentence
reviewed, she is meeting with him and trying to get him to understand what
he did. The film is about the process of working toward redemption.
The screenplay by Tim Robbins is first-rate. The dialogue between Sarandon
and Penn is smart and never dull. Their scene together just before Penn is
to be executed is one of the most moving experiences I have ever had in a
movie theater. The dialogue is fresh and quick. Ideas, thoughts and
subjects move quickly--they never drag--and much of this can be accredited
to the two actors' performances. There was only one line that I was
disappointed with. When Sean Penn is about to be executed, he expresses
tearful apologies to one of his victim's father. Just then, the father of
the other victim quips, "What about us," to his wife. This may be trite,
but it was distracting in an otherwise solid screenplay.
Tim Robbins also directed this film. He did a fantastic job capturing (and
never intruding on) Sarandon and Penn's scenes together. He also
introduced some interesting aspects with regard to his shots. For example,
there is a mesh-wire divider between the two actors much of the time.
Robbins used that to symbolize a character's emotional state by how much
the divider was obstructing the view of the actor's face. Much of the time
Sarandon's is out of focus, well beyond the camera's depth of field, her
face shown clearly. However, Sean Penn's wire-meshing is often as in focus
as his face is, blocking his face more and making him appear hidden or
closed off. Later, when the divider is changed to a clear plastic one,
Robbins makes use of the actor's reflections in each other's shots under
similar motivations.
If you have not seen this film, you are missing one of the greatest scenes
between two actors that have ever been filmed. These two deserved their
Oscar nominations and although only Susan won hers, they both deserved to.
Once Sean Penn began to cry, I was sold.
This film has been accused of being pretentious for presenting Sean Penn's
character as a Christ metaphor during the execution sequence because the
table he is on requires his arms be strapped down out to the sides in a
fashion similar to the crucified Jesus. Tim Robbins said that he was aware
that the scene could be taken that way, but he was more interested in the
fact that the table and equipment used were exact replicas of what was
being used for actual executions. The table actually is designed that way
and the only thing in that scene that they changed was how long it took to
kill him. In the film it takes two or three minutes, in reality it takes
about twenty. 
Ratings are based on the four-star system

Title
Review for Bottle Rocket (1996)
In 1993, a group of young independent filmmakers submitted a black and
white short film titled, BOTTLE ROCKET for consideration at the 1994
Sundance Film Festival. It was accepted. There, the short film caught the
eye of Texas-based screenwriter L.M. Kit Carson. Two years later, we have
the feature-length version of the same film produced by James L. Brooks.
This is every struggling filmmaker's dream.
BOTTLE ROCKET, dubbed as "Reservoir Geeks", is one of the funniest and
most originally written films I've seen in a long while. We follow Anthony
played by Luke Wilson who is just getting out of a voluntary hospital for
what he describes as 'exhaustion'. From there he re-teams with Dignan and
Bob, his two old friends. I really would hate to ruin a single scene if
you haven't watched this film yet. All I will tell you is that nothing
leads where you'd expect it, the characters are simple, charming and
wonderful to watch, and the film has a great little ending that will leave
you with a smile on your face (and maybe some sympathy in your heart).
The film was written by its director, Wes Anderson and by Owen Wilson who
plays the character, Dignan. These guys bring to the screen a film-sense
all their own. The characters were certainly written to play for laughs,
but each is portrayed honestly and we almost begin to respect them for how
simply they approach their lives. There is also a great last line that
gives us a sense of closure--that things have come full circle. I'd like
to see this film up for Best Original Screenplay. It won't be.
The film was directed in the same manner by which it was written, which is
to say, it presents the visual imagery under the same mindset that
produced the dialogue. Half of what you laugh at in this film comes from
visual cues expressed by the director, Wes Anderson. He knows what his
actors are capable of and how to send an idea about a scene through use of
the camera, shot selection and editing. His film is kinetic, it feels
alive. Also, he has composed an ending sequence for this film that will be
in my memory forever. I was actually a little moved by it.
Every single person in this film was casted perfectly, perhaps because the
characters were written for them. If you think about the fact that three
brothers and a few friends (excluding James Caan) comprise the cast, it is
even more impressive. They really have to be seen to be believed. But
then, the writing lends itself to the character quirks that make them seem
more human. My favorite line happens when Future Man has been making fun
of Dignan's jumpsuit. Anthony tries to cheer him up by saying, "Don't
worry about it, Dignan. Did you see what he was wearing?"  And Dignan
replies sheepishly, "Yeah. It was pretty cool."
In closing, if you enjoy films such as THE HUDSUCKER PROXY or RAISING
ARIZONA, you will love BOTTLE ROCKET. And the choice of title is pretty
interesting, too. The idea of a bottle rocket--it's something vivacious
and alive, and prone to violence, but the thing is really relatively
harmless. This describes Dignan perfectly. You've got to see it. 
Ratings are based on the four-star system.

Title
Review for Jack (1996)
Directed by FRANCIS FORD COPPOLA
Written by JAMES DEMONACO and GARY NADEAU
During the 1970's, Francis Ford Coppola had brought us THE GODFATHER, THE
CONVERSATION, THE GODFATHER PART II and APOCALYPSE NOW. All were nominated
for Best Picture and the two GODFATHER films each won their Oscars.
Coppola made these back to back to back to back. They are arguably some of
the best films that ever came out of American cinema. Then in 1980, with
the release of ONE FROM THE HEART (the straw that broke the camel's back)
Coppola began a decade long run of mediocrity. He stopped writing his own
work and the scope of his pictures narrowed. Not that a film's scope is a
determinant of quality, he co-wrote the screenplay for RUMBLE FISH which
is probably his best film during the 1980's, but Coppola was proving
himself a master of the epic film. Only in 1990 with the release of THE
GODFATHER PART III did he prove that he hadn't lost his screenwriting
touch--he just wasn't using it. PART III was rightfully nominated for Best
Picture but lost out to the unfortunate Year of Kevin Costner. After that
he made BRAM STOKER'S DRACULA which is only recently gathering a cult
following. Now in 1996, he brings us JACK.
Jack Powell, played by Robin Williams, is ten years old. However, because
of a mysterious Hollywood disease, he grows at four times the natural
rate.  Because of this he was born, fully developed, after a two month
pregnancy and now looks like a forty year old man. His parents overprotect
him. They hire him a tutor, Bill Cosby, so that he doesn't have to go to
school. Eventually, it is the tutor that insists Jack be allowed to attend
public school and meet kids his own age. They decide to give it a shot and
the story continues from there.
Too often the written word, something the audience experiences indirectly,
is a film's weakest link. The scribes for JACK, James DeMonaco and Gary
Nadeau, have written scenes that are both effectively comical and
touching, but the film is best when words are put aside and Coppola begins
telling a bit of story through his mastery of visuals. The dialogue is at
times uninspired and predictable, and that's unfortunate. However, there
are plenty of great moments created by Coppola and Robin Williams that
keep the film afloat. And with the closing of the film, we are brought to
tears--at least I was.
For example, Francis Ford Coppola directed a scene in JACK where Robin
Williams watches a butterfly spring from a cocoon. The scene is full of
wonder and the inherent symbolism is more than apparent. Later, presumably
the same butterfly lands on Robin's windowsill. He picks it up and tries
to set it free, but it dies in his hands. Neither of these scenes contain
any dialogue and more is said about JACK at these times than any other.
This is the work of a great director. Coppola also makes great use of
time-lapse photography and another similar effect that involves a sunbeam
moving across the room during a regular motion shot. These are my favorite
moments in the film.
Robin Williams does an equal--if not better--job of playing a child in a
man's body than Tom Hanks did in BIG. The difference is Williams'
character suffers from intense psychological difficulties once he begins
to realize how quickly his life will end. It's a thoughtful performance by
Williams.  It's also an inspiring one. The rest of the cast is fine. All
the kids are great and even Fran Drescher is good. Bill Cosby is sweet,
but again, the keys to the film's success are Williams and Coppola.
While Coppola was shooting GARDENS OF STONE, his eldest son was killed in
a boating accident. Just a few months later, Coppola's granddaughter was
born. She will never know her father first-hand. The film is dedicated to
her. I can see why Coppola chose to do this film. And although the writing
wasn't up to snuff, I can't deny that I watched the credits through teary
eyes. 
Ratings are based on the four-star system.

Title
Review for Welcome to the Dollhouse (1995)
I must say that I wanted very much to enjoy WELCOME TO THE DOLLHOUSE. I'd
watched the trailer and laughed hysterically at each line. However, in its full
theatrical version, this film is a complete failure. DOLLHOUSE definitely
has its moments, but mostly this film spent its time flip-flopping between
attempts to be satirical and poignant--often failing. Writer/director,
Todd Solondz, unfortunately has no ability to pleasantly mix the two sides
it seemed he wanted to express. 
The impression I had of the writing was that the draft used wasn't very
far from the first one. Everything was presented as is, there was not one
ounce of subtlety. Dawn Weiner, the young girl who's life is pure torment,
at one point calls a bully a retard. Later, the bully, Brandon, takes Dawn
to a junk yard where he plans to rape her. Instead, he tells her that his
brother is retarded, implies his feeling were hurt and they start a
relationship. As written, this scene was pulled off in the worst way
possible because it suffered severely from clichi-itis. Brandon's
character steps up to the fence, into close-up and makes his declaration,
"...he's not in any grade, he's retarded." Todd Solondz assumes we'll
start to feel Brandon's pain, however the scene is too contrived toward
that expectation and it proves that Solondz thinks an audience will react
to 'sad scenes' like damned, pre-programmed machines.
As a director, Mr. Solondz is rarely competent. Too often do we watch
actors move for the camera. As in the scene I described earlier when
Brandon walks to a
close-up by the fence. This technique kills any possible sense of reality
within the performances because we are too aware of their staging. I have
long been of the opinion that actors are not a tool to serve the camera,
but the camera is the tool to capture the actors' performances and even to
add to it. All to often, I think, directors stage their actors in service
to 'the shot' when they should be doing the opposite. A great example of
this is GLENGARRY GLEN ROSS. If you watch, you'll notice that director
James Foley is moving his camera, not his actors, for effect.
The performances in the film are usually pretty good with a few exceptions and
there's really not much to say here other than a few of the actors deserve the
attention this film will bring--specifically Dawn Weiner, her mother, her
brother, her sister and even Steve Rogers.
Lastly, there was a moment in the film where Dawn goes to New York to find her
little sister. She goes to sleep and suddenly wakes up to see a man running down
the street with her sister screaming under his arm. I remember thinking at
that point that because this film had already lost all integrity, this
dream sequence actually did tricked you only because something this
ridiculously inept was possible within WELCOME TO THE DOLLHOUSE. And it is
for reasons like this that I think Todd Solondz did a horrible job as both
writer and director. He seemed desperate to shake our views of teenage
life--to be an iconoclast--but fell into clichi, which I despise.
This film won best picture at the Sundance Film Festival and like THE BROTHERS
MCMULLEN last year, they both proved that independent filmmakers can make
films as cliched as Hollywood can.

Title
Review for Eraser (1996)
Ugggh!!!
         I just came from Eraser and I'm crying.  This is the most
horrible, horrible film I've had to see all year.  Worse than Twister,
worse than Mission Implausible.  Thank God I didn't have to pay for it.  I
co-write a review column here in Pittsburgh, PA and I cannot find it in my
heart to recommend this movie to anyone--at all.  For starters, I am sick
and tired of lines like: "Clean up this mess." after the head bad guy
kills someone.  Or when a 'good' character turns 'bad' and says it's
because,"I'm a businessman."  What garbage, man.  Total trash.  Why, why,
why are women in films always weak-minded and innocent.  I mean Vanessa
Williams was introduced as a "bonified honest person."  Is this what the
screenwriters think of honest people?  Anyway, what troubles me is that
when characters like her's show an act of strength, we're supposed to
automatically cheer.  What the hell is that?  I'll tell you, it's a lack
of respect and confidence in the movegoer.  They play it safe with what's
familiar to us and, unfortunately, we often do what they expect.  Also,
with regard to her character--must the woman always be the victim of
beatings by antagonists out to prove just how bad they can be?  Or what's
even more common, to be used as a hostage/body sheild?  Okay, minus that
aspect I will concede that the rest of the film. . . . . . . was just as
bad.  How does Arnold survive smashing down the roof of a car?  No broken
anythings?  Oh, he must really be the Terminator, I get it now.  And
another thing--was there truly anyone out there that watched the
introduction of James Caan's character that didn't think he was either
going to be the 'mentor that gets killed' or the 'good guy that has sold
out'?  And those damn aligators were too big and too pissed off don't you
think?  I mean they were growling!!!  Come on!  I guess living in an
aquarium will do that to you.  So then, what the hell were they feeding
those things anyway?  The same thing they fed the hippo from Congo? 
Probably.  Lastly, the guy from the opening scene that helps Arnold out
during the end.  Tell me we haven't seen this character of the funny
buffoon sidekick in countless versions.  Just tell me.  Oh, and thank God
for small-time mafia hoods, too.  As I watched the movie I kept a list of
redeeming qualities.  I have two.  Most of the bit-part characters,
despite they were walking cliches, were funny and about a handful of the
one-liners were just hysterical.  Buuuut, unless you enjoy seeing the same
Hollywood fare you've been spoon-fed since Arnold's Commando in 1986, do
yourself a favor and avoid this one.  It was horrible.
GENERAL SCORE:   16.7% (F)   --   (each catagory is grade in 25%
increments and divided by three to find the average)
(This gives me the opportunity to give a much more free and honest review
than I will submit for publication.  Thanks for reading and any comment,
criticizm, ->insults


Title
Review for Fargo (1996)
The Coen Brothers' latest film, FARGO is a combination of their earlier
works--specifically BLOOD SIMPLE and RAISING ARIZONA. I think what I'm
trying to say is that FARGO is at one moment hilarious and then sharply
horrifying. I've always had mixed feelings over violence on the movie
screen. When watching TAXI DRIVER I'd be thinking that it just wouldn't be
the same film without reaching that 'catharsis-through-urban-violence'
finale. On the other hand, I went to see ERASER and felt that the violence
there was indeed gratuitous. I had always felt that I was holding a double
standard until I realized that what makes violence gratuitous is the
integrity, or lack thereof, of the film exhibiting it. And in the case of
FARGO, I found myself disgusted and horrified at what I was seeing as
opposed to ERASER where aligators ripped arms from their sockets and the
effect on me was minimal.
FARGO, which claims to be based on actual events, is the story of a car
salesman (William H. Macy) who manifests a scheme to get nearly
one-million dollars in ransom money for the kidnapping of his own wife.
Her extremely wealthy, grumbling and growling father will be forced to
pay. The film unfolds as nearly everything goes terribly wrong--sometimes
funny, often frightening. We follow a pregnant police detective (Frances
McDormond) as she uncovers the case. I won't go any further in case you
haven't seen FARGO other than to tell you that I was skeptical as to how
involved her character could be considering her physical condition. Let me
tell you her character is well-engaged by the story and her involvment in
the climax/resolution is truly memorable.
The film's screenplay was written with extreme care for detail and
narrative verve, all too often absent from contemporary works. There are
times, and this is a good example, when it is obvious that this screenplay
had reached a final draft before principle photography was started. The
dialogue alone is so new and devoid of cliche that the audience is (and
this is rare) anticipating the characters' interaction instead of
predicting it. Even in so called 'talking heads' scenes, we are mentally
engaged by the film and certainly involved. Joel and Ethan Coen have
consistantly shown a talent for dialogue, storytelling and the ability to
integrate both into the film's visual elements. They are also one of the
few filmmakers with a signature--when you see a Coen Brothers film, you
know it.
Not one actor in the film would be considered by a studio executive to
headline a movie on their own. This is a cast of all those people you saw
in supporting roles in other films. William Macy (Oleanna, Homicide, ER)
performs flawlessly. He shapes his character so anxiously weak that we
both condemn his for his acts of cowardace and pity him for his lack of
social courage. Frances McDormond (Blood Simple, Raising Arizona) as the
pregnant police woman on the case has herself one of the most original
characters ever written. She is indeed quirky, and although quirkiness
does not neccessarily equal originality, McDormond grounds the character
in truly human qualities. Then there is Steve Buscemi (Reservoir Dogs,
Living in Oblivion) who's been doing similiar characters since his
supporting role in Martin Scorsese's short film, LIFE LESSONS, from the
film NEW YORK STORIES. Although his character in FARGO is not much
different, this time he does not come off as though he's playing for the
camera with the exception of a very funny, "total silence" monologue.
Buscemi seems to be making a career out of playing himself and this is
another of several films in which it works. Also, by the end of FARGO, his
character is so viciously frustrated that it mirrors the
hilarious/horrifying tone of the entire film.
The director, Joel Coen (Raising Arizona, Barton Fink) seems to have
matured a little--using his trademark wide angle lens with more reverance.
He saves his more visual shots for sequences in which they won't smother
the actors' performances and the story. If he sticks with it, I think he's
found a perfect balance. His best scene, I would say, is the triple
homicide sequence at night--part of which he borrowed from his own BLOOD
SIMPLE. I guess practice makes perfect.
Many people have been turned off by their own uncertainty as to whether to
laugh or cringe during this film. I know this was quite intentional and
would expect that the Coens take it as a compliment to their work to have
affected those people in such a manner. Anyway, FARGO is the best film
that's come out all year and I don't see anything coming in the future to
change that. It will certainly be nominated for Best Original Screenplay
if not Best Picture. I highly recommend you see FARGO. 
-- 
Zak Forsman, filmmaker       
Swan Pictures Independent
Send comments, praise, and insults to swan@nauticom.net
Or visit the The Zak Forsman Page http://www.nauticom.net/www/swan/

Title
Review for Taxi Driver (1976)
"Loneliness has followed me my whole life. Everywhere. In bars and cars,
sidewalks, stores--everywhere. There's no escape. I'm God's lonely man." We
listen to Travis Bickle, played by Robert DeNiro, as he watches the night
people on 42nd avenue from inside his taxi. "All the animals come out at
night," he says. It is at this particular moment when we realize that
Martin Scorsese's TAXI DRIVER is not a film about a psychotic, it is not a
film about a pervert, but a film about a lonely man in a city full of
people.
Over twenty years ago screenwriter, Paul Schrader, was in a terrible state. He'd
divorced his wife, left the American Film Institute and his career as a
film critic was waning. Schrader found himself living out of his car and
going to pornography theaters daily. Suffering from extreme pain in his
abdomen he went to an emergency room. It was there that Schrader realized
that he hadn't spoken to another person in three weeks. He began to see
his car as a kind of steel coffin and recognized that a taxi driver shares
a similar situation. Schrader quickly settled on his main character and
wrote the first and second drafts of the screenplay in ten days as a
personal catharsis, borrowing heavily from his own experiences.
What fascinates me about TAXI DRIVER is the complexity of character that arises
from a fairly simple story. Travis is obsessed with two women. Betsy (Cybil
Shepherd) is the woman he desires but cannot have. And twelve-year-old
Iris (Jodie Foster) is the prostitute he can have, but does not desire. In
his frustration over the men who seemingly control and can have these
women, Travis attempts to kill the Senator/father-figure of one, fails and
kills the pimp/father-figure of the other. And because he is lucky, Travis
is regarded a hero. Along the way we see the plan growing in his head
within scenes that keep that fact in the background--almost like an
undercurrent. One of the more memorable scenes has director Martin
Scorsese as one of Travis' passengers who lays out his plan to murder his
adulterous wife with a .44 Magnum. It is here that the idea of violent
action is planted in Travis' head and until the film's climax we watch it
grow. "I've got a lot of bad ideas in my head," he admits with a nervous
smile. Again, what has truly happened in this scene is not spoon-fed to us
which in result engages our minds. This is the difference
between great cinema and the standard Hollywood fare. This film respects its
audience.
As does Robert DeNiro of his character. DeNiro is so far into Travis
Bickle we stop seeing him as DeNiro. We forget he's acting. He's one of
few actors that can convincingly disappear inside their character. Travis
is obsessed and DeNiro knows this. Travis has trouble relating to women
and DeNiro knows this. Travis can sometimes be unaware that he's in his
own world. DeNiro knows this. In one scene some other cabbies are talking
and one asks Travis how he's doing. Travis slowly replies, "What's that?"
Then he goes on to tell a story about another taxi driver that was cut up
by a knife-wielding madman. What's important here is the look on DeNiro's
face when he first replies. Travis wasn't daydreaming and he isn't slow.
He's been floating around the city in his "steel coffin" all the while
living in his own moral universe. That's where Travis is coming from and
as I said, Robert DeNiro knows this. A great performance like this comes
down to trust in character. And honesty.
The best way to describe director Martin Scorsese's ability is with a
scene in TAXI DRIVER when Travis is standing in a hallway and talking to
Betsy on a pay-phone. He is apologizing to her for bringing her to an
X-rated movie on their date the night before. When he asks if she received
the flowers he sent, she tells him she didn't. The director's camera
tracks to the right and stops on a shot of an empty hallway. Scorsese has
said that he did this because it is as though Travis' rejection is too
painful to watch. It moves away. Apparently even harder to watch than the
violence at the film's climax. I must admit I find this motivation for
camera movement fascinating and it is for reasons like this that I feel
Martin Scorsese is our greatest director. He has an obvious and important
signature, most Hollywood directors don't.
TAXI DRIVER is a film about character. Schrader's dialogue for, DeNiro's
understanding of and Scorsese's attention to this character come together
brilliantly. Twenty years ago this film was up for Best Picture at the
Academy Awards and it won the International Grand Prize at the Cannes film
festival. And I'm sure you've realized by now that I highly recommend you
see TAXI DRIVER.

Title
Review for Get on the Bus (1996)
First, I'd like to say it's nice to have Spike Lee vindicate himself after
doing something like GIRL 6. GET ON THE BUS is easily the best film he has
made since DO THE RIGHT THING with the exception of maybe MALCOLM X. Spike
does in this film what he does best--he presents issues that face society
in an unbiased manner and lets the audience sort their feelings on their
own. I love a film that engages my mind.
The story is about a busload of black men that board in South Central Los
Angeles and drive across the country to The Million Man March in
Washington D.C. The film was funded by fifteen African-American men and
shot in just 18 days. This is another example of expert filmmaking
(writing, directing, acting) that I hope the Oscars do not overlook.  The
screenwriter, Reggie Rock Bythewood is very talented.  However, I would
say that the screenplay is a little weak in a few spots.  This may be due
to the film's hurried production. But I tell you that nothing in the
script is so bad as to detract from the better scenes. The greatest aspect
of the screenplay is that the ideas behind The Million Man March and the
reasons for going are expressed without directly involving the march
itself. This makes those ideas much more powerful because it eliminates
the inclusion of Minister Farrakhan, to which many would disregard the
march's message in favor of claiming it racist and sexist. This idea is
also expressed in another way. There is a member of The Nation of Islam on
the bus who never says a word and never gets involved in any of the
scenes. His presence is a symbol of the march, in that, even though The
Nation of Islam was there and organized the march, the march was not about
The Nation of Islam.
Spike Lee is one of the best filmmakers working today. In GET ON THE BUS,
he's trying something different--the sure sign of a filmmaker that
understands that the learning process never stops. Here, he meshes his
ever-evolving style with that of a documentarian's eye. The bus ride feels
"captured" by the filmmaker. Although there is plenty of hand-held
camerawork, it is as though Spike Lee was able to film a documentary and
still maintain effective use of dollies, cranes and tripods. It is an
astonishing feat from a filmmaker's perspective and an effective technique
for anyone watching.
As I watched the film, I noticed two things about the audience. The first
was that anytime a character made a slant toward one of the homosexual
characters, the audience laughed hysterically. The scenes were obviously
written to be funny, but I think that the predictability of our own
stereotypes was what the screenwriter was knowingly commenting on. I back
this up with another scene where the bus stops at a roadside diner in
Tennessee. The instant we see all the white faces inside, the audience
expects a confrontation.  In fact, everyone gets along pretty well. Even
when Ossie Davis explains that steer wrestling was invented by a black
cowboy, his listener responds with, "How about that."  It's fairly obvious
that these two scenes say more about the audience than the characters. But
then, that's what I expect from a Spike Lee joint.
Ratings are based on the four-star system.
