Authors
Duncan Stevens
Number of Reviews
11

Title
Review for Devil's Advocate, The (1997)
Taylor Hackford's latest effort, "The Devil's Advocate," isn't a dreadful
effort, but it could have been much better than it is. The premise is
played for thrills--if there had been thought involved, we might have
gotten perhaps a glimpse or two of consideration about whether a lawyer
should go against his conscience in defending someone he believes to be
guilty. Or, for that matter, whether anyone should uphold the standards of
the profession regardless of moral compunctions. These are real questions,
but it would take an entirely different film to address them--and Hackford
did not, ironically, have many Bigger Issues in mind in making this.
The plot: Kevin Lomax, a young Florida lawyer (Keanu Reeves), is recruited
by a prestigious New York firm, and he heads to the Big Apple with wife
Mary Ann (Charlize Theron) in tow, over the objections of a Bible-thumping
mother (Judith Ivey). His success in winning cases continues, but only to
serve as contrast to his wife's descent into madness and his own moral
disintegration, as it turns out that the firm is involved in rather more
than defending rich clients. And so it turns out that...
Stop a moment. Pretend that you don't know what the real twist is; pretend
that the trailers didn't give it away. How much more interesting a movie
might this have been if it had turned out that the firm was simply an
ordinary one, representing rich clients who wanted to buy their way out of
a conviction? It would be "The Firm" in New York, you say, but it
wouldn't--at least, it wouldn't have to be. There's plenty of room for
development along these lines: the cases that the lawyer gets handed get
more and more questionable, until finally his conscience steps in and he
says no. Firm: where's your conscience been up to now? Lawyer: well, maybe
it should have been there all along. There are a variety of places it
could go from there, some more interesting than others, but at a time when
lawyer jokes are standard, perhaps that would have been a more noteworthy
movie than this.
What we do get, as you no doubt know: the firm turns out to be operated by
none other than ol' Scratch himself (Al Pacino), and the various partners
and employees are a variety of demonic minions and henchmen. Mary Ann's
deterioration is spurred along by her recognition of what's really going
on--as illustrated by various characters' faces morphing between human and
monster, well placed and very effective. Things spin way out of control,
naturally, leading to a climactic bit of over-the-top monologue by
Pacino--but by then, the horror element has taken over and all
restrictions on realism are off, plotwise. Various twists ensue, none of
them successful at bringing things back to this planet.  
Where did this go wrong? One of the problems is that Reeves is supposed to
be playing a character; it's one thing to let a plot take surreal twists,
but it's quite another to have supposedly ordinary folks whose actions
just aren't believable. True, there is exactly one role that Reeves can
convey effectively--clueless surfer dude--and it isn't his fault if
misguided directors keep calling him and shoving him into parts that don't
involve saying "excellent" repeatedly. But he's so painfully ineffective
that it's rarely clear what he wants to convey, or what his character is
supposed to be thinking. Does he neglect his wife completely because he's
self-centered? Obtuse? Stupid? It's hard to tell. This is, in other words,
a remarkable bad performance by Reeves; ordinary bad performances present
certain ideas to the audience ineptly, in ways that make the audience
think, hey, may as well hold up a sign saying THIS IS WHAT I'M THINKING,
but what Reeves manages here is a character with no discernible
motivations at all. He's just there, and the plot goes on around him. The
part might have been better written, perhaps, but with only one mode of
delivery, Reeves isn't likely to take advantage of what's there. (Response
to Pacino's question on whether he goes to church: "I guess I'm on parole
for time served," in monotone. What is he? Joking? Bitter? Bemused?
Rueful? The world may never know.)
Pacino is quite good, as usual--and, at one particularly memorable moment,
he even makes fun of Reeves' clunky intonation. The guess here is that the
screenplay called for him to make fun of the southern accent that Lomax is
supposed to have, but the way that accent comes and goes--and the comic
qualities of Reeves' voice even without a silly affectation--makes it even
funnier. As John Milton, Beelzebub's disguise (my, my, literacy in 
Hollywood, will wonders never cease?), Pacino is appropriately smarmy and
insinuating; as the real thing, veil down, he is mesmerizing, despite some
gratuitous bits. (Lip-syncing to Frank Sinatra?) The contrast between the
nuance of the lawyer persona-- only a leer here or a chuckle there suggest
anything more sinister--and the sheer over-the-top force of the Devil with
the chance to say everything that's on his mind is the best part of
Pacino's performance.
Theron steals virtually every scene from Reeves--I would call it taking
candy from a baby, but we've had enough Keanu- bashing already--and
genuinely captivates even with not much to do besides go to pieces. (Her
role is that of the ordinary person trapped in a horror movie, and she
captures the audience's sympathy. Reeves, though his role is not so
dissimilar, is not recognizable as an ordinary person.) Most of the visual
shocks in the movie are hers--we see most of the shocking images at the
same time she does--and her reactions are convincing enough that we care
about what happens to her. If there is a downside to Theron's performance,
it's that her baby-face beauty makes Keanu looking at other women rather
improbable. (Plus, though it isn't her fault, Reeves hardly shows her any
convincing affection, so it isn't clear why she'd be upset when he starts
to neglect her.)
As noted, there is something of an identity crisis here, in that
Hackford has the beginning of a moral drama going on and then lets it get
all supernatural--in short, become a horror film. That's his right, of
course, and it's not unprecedented for horror films to be less than fully
logically realized--but there's a certain silliness in casting the Devil
with no real acknowledgment of a supernatural counterpart. Ivey has little
to do as the Bible-carrying mother who warns dolorously of the temptations
of the city; it's such a caricature that the audience doesn't take her
seriously. Her character is weak--and, even, shallow--to the point that we
don't necessarily think she's sincere. And the only other character to
acknowledge the existence of God is, naturally, Pacino, whose rant against
God ("he's a SADist!") seem just a bit bizarre given that Reeves has never
expressed any belief. Like, who you tryin' to convince, Al? The point is
that the Devil is classically imagined as actually trying to steal souls;
with no one to steal them from, the exercise feels a little dumb. All that
was required was some implication that anyone in the movie was trying to
do the right thing (ideally, out of some sense of relationship to God, but
let's not get picky), and Pacino was twisting their motives or playing up
their frailties to ensnare them. But Reeves has no apparent interest in
the right thing. Again, the idea isn't necessarily that Hackford should
have given God a fair shake, a chance to yell back at Pacino, merely that,
since God's existence is presupposed, there should have been at least a
scene or two that didn't paint that belief is silly and antiquated. A
conflict between good and evil might have been compelling; when good
wasn't allowed to show up, what was left became a tad uninvolving.
Despite the drawbacks, there are many memorable moments here,
chief among them Theron's death; the blood on Reeves' shirt in the
following scenes, underscoring what happens, is perhaps the best thing
about his performance. The visuals are skillful--a sex scene where Theron
is exchanged, in Reeves' mind, with another woman, a chilling dream
sequence involving Theron and a baby--and genuinely jarring. If you can
suspend disbelief sufficiently to enjoy the ride, give it a shot; if
poorly realized characters bug you, skip it.
The room is as you left it; your last touch--
A thoughtless pressure, knowing not itself
As saintly--hallows now each simple thing,
Hallows and glorifies, and glows between
The dust's gray fingers, like a shielded light.
--from "Interim," by Edna St. Vincent Millay

Title
Review for Titanic (1997)
"The most expensive movie in history" isn't really that exciting a crown
to wear these days, since the mark is surpassed every other year or so,
seemingly, but the distinction does mean that your film is going to get
some attention. And James Cameron's Titanic is different from some past
blockbusters in a few ways; the money appears to have been spent somewhat
wisely, and the results are evident on screen. More than that, though,
Cameron's screenplay attempts to include an actual story along with all
the impressive effects.
"Attempts" is operative here, though, because the love story in Titanic,
though a noble effort, doesn't quite work. The fault is due more to the
screenplay than to the actors; though your reviewer is not a Leonardo
DiCaprio fan, he didn't do anything particularly wrong, as
struggling-but-ever-so-charismatic artist Jack, besides take the part. And
Kate Winslet is convincing as ever as society girl Rose locked into an
unwelcome engagement with a guy she (drum roll) doesn't love. The script
is not at all kind to them, though; again and again, they're stuck with
guy-from-the-wrong-side-of-the-tracks or girl-who-has-never-really-lived
platitudes, and your reviewer was often distracted by a sudden urge to
smack his forehead. (No, no, his own, not Leo's, though that was tempting
too sometimes.) Cliched scenes include snooty upper-class types trading
snide remarks about Jack's background, a
you're-not-to-see-that-unsuitable-young-man lecture, an exchange where
Rose is really intrigued by Jack but feels like she has to be offended at
the things he says...the screenwriter had clearly been perusing his 101
Fave Scenes From Romances when he wrote this stuff. And some of the things
that do feel original aren't particularly welcome--a spitting contest?
Showing that they're both art lovers at heart by trading notes about an
"unknown" (uh, no, not in 1912) named Picasso?
The romance merits this much attention because Cameron devotes much of the
first two hours to it; after the iceberg enters the scene, development of
the romantic angle is mostly set aside. And there are things to enjoy in
those first two hours, certainly; a party on the third-class deck
contrasts effectively with an icy cocktail-lounge scene upstairs, and
Winslet's exuberance feels real. A nude drawing scene (Winslet nude, of
course; this is Hollywood) is convincingly done, with shyness on both
sides and a sense that the scene does try to dramatize a trust between
them (rather than serving as a device for gratuitous nudity, usually a
safe assumption). The scene afterwards is not a highlight--your reviewer
simply cannot see the appeal of losing one's virginity in a car--but there
are certainly effective moments. It's just that there aren't enough to
make the romance really work.
When the iceberg hits, though, the second plot--the sinking of the
ship--kicks in, and it can fairly be said that this was remarkable. The
appeal doesn't actually derive from already knowing the lovers' story and
from following them around, because their part feels rather predictable;
even when DiCaprio is chained to a pipe in a room filling up with water,
it's hard to actually doubt that he'll be rescued. Similarly, the lovers
go through several more perilous escapes, but they're less interesting
than the fate of the ship in general. Rather, Cameron focuses on several
minor characters in turn and follows them as the ship sinks, in order to
avoid the faceless-people-dying element common in disaster movies.
Prominent are the ship's designer, one of the crew guarding the lifeboats,
and, particularly, the ship's captain; their stories are compelling
because they feel like something that actually might have happened on the
ship, not a Hollywood romance. And when we do go back to Leo and Kate, we
can easily forget the earlier bad moments, since daring escapes lessen the
need for acting, and the couple becomes more plausible than it had been
earlier. A computer-generated reproduction of how the ship actually sank
appeared early on in the film; watching it played out in full color is
mesmerizing. It is a credit to Cameron's direction that the sinking,
though spectacular, is not chaotic; the breakup of the ship and the
general panic progresses gradually enough to build the suspense. And
though there are anonymous people dying left and right, Cameron keeps
enough focus on the stories we know and care about--and limits the time
and space spent on horrible deaths--that the effects are not in danger of
taking over.
The class element would feel overdone if it weren't true; the image of
third-class passengers locked below decks while the first class boarded
lifeboats would feel gratuitous in a fictional account, but it's simple
fact here--and Cameron, to his credit, doesn't beat the audience over the
head with it. Nor, for that matter, are the moments of pathos--a father
telling his daughter that he'll have a seat in the "lifeboat for daddies,"
in full knowledge that there will be no such thing, for example--sprinkled
in too heavily; the action moves too quickly for the various tragic
partings to feel maudlin. When Cameron does stop the show, as it were, to
let us watch things fall apart, it's strikingly effective; a string
quartet that quixotically stayed on deck to the bitter end plays "Nearer,
my God, to thee," and that sound drowns out everything else. There may not
be a more poignant moment in film this year.
There is a third plot, not particularly interesting or effective;
latter-day fortune-hunters are looking for a diamond that went down with
the ship, they discover the drawing, and 101-year-old Rose tells the
story. The themes-- greed and callousness--parallel those of the film
nicely, but it doesn't work very well as a story in itself. It does,
however, provide a rationale for including perhaps the most impressive
part of all: actual footage from the actual ship, shot on the ocean floor,
that give dramatic contrast and illustrate just how precisely the scale
model that the movie built mirrors the original. Gloria Stuart is adequate
as the older Rose, but it is to the film's credit that it doesn't bother
with flashing forward too often once the real plot is underway.
If there is one thing that can be said of Titanic, then, it's that it
could have been far worse than it is; Cameron does very well to tie all
the stories together into a reasonably coherent 3.5-hour whole, without
any feeling that the plots give way to look-at-these-neat-effects.
Winslet's acting does carry much of the film--she plays the most
interesting part, and gives DiCaprio credibility, no small feat--and it is
her role that ties together many of the disparate plot elements. After
all, it's she who breaks the class barriers by turning her back on the
first-class lifeboat, and it's she who confronts the shallowness of the
assumption that a diamond is a substitute for love. And hokey though it
is, it's her character's maturation, more than the romance, that the movie
depicts, and Winslet makes it reasonably plausible; we don't quite believe
her more capable at the end than at the beginning, since she played her
society girl with just a bit too much spirit to be an ornament, but her
belief in herself at the end does convince. DiCaprio tries, to be sure,
and when he's supposed to be a free-spirited kid he does fine; when he's
supposed to be strong or comforting or otherwise inspire confidence, no.
But he's just good enough to keep from distracting from Winslet, and once
the ship starts to sink, that's all he needs to do.
Titanic, in short, is not a good movie that could have been great so much
as a good movie that could have been dreadful with a less compelling
performance from Winslet and less restraint from Cameron. A better script
might have improved things, true, but the first half does what it needs to
do despite bad dialogue, and the sinking is spectacular enough to make
glitches forgivable. Though far from flawless, Titanic is a thoroughly
enjoyable spectacle.
The room is as you left it; your last touch--
A thoughtless pressure, knowing not itself
As saintly--hallows now each simple thing,
Hallows and glorifies, and glows between
The dust's gray fingers, like a shielded light.
--from "Interim," by Edna St. Vincent Millay

Title
Review for Remains of the Day, The (1993)
The fortunes of the Merchant-Ivory producer-director team have suffered
somewhat in recent years; efforts like Jefferson in Paris and Surviving
Picasso have garnered mixed reviews and little box-office interest. There
was a time, though, when the duo's trademark period pieces were virtually
guaranteed critical approval; among their best efforts were 1986's Room
With a View and 1992's Howards End, both of which gave the team something
of a reputation for sumptuous costume dramas with melodramatic plotlines.
Perhaps their finest effort, however, came in 1993 with Remains of the
Day--which, though it fits the customary period-piece mold in some
respects, succeeds on a wholly different level.
The setting is southern England, and the time flashes back and forth
between the late 1950s and the 1930s. Darlington Hall, once a bustling
mansion and estate, has fallen on hard times, owned now by an American and
run by a skeleton staff. Mr. Stevens, the butler, perceives the need for a
"revised staff plan" and sets off across England in hopes of rehiring a
woman who had once served as housekeeper. The trip serves as an occasion
for Stevens to reflect on his life of service and on the decisions he has
made in his service to Lord Darlington, a well-meaning fellow who
developed both sympathies and close contacts with Nazi Germany as the
Second World War approached. Stevens, for his part, professed loyalty to
his employer, but the course of the film brings out doubts about both the
wisdom of that loyalty and its consequences.
Remains is an adaptation of Kazuo Ishiguro's book, a novel acclaimed in
its own right but hardly, at first glance, suitable for film treatment.
The novel is set down in the form of Stevens's thoughts and writings: the
reader often detects his doubts under a veneer of excuses and
justifications for his own and for others' conduct. As such, it plays with
tensions between the subjective and objective: to determine what happened,
it is now and again necessary to discount the narrator's words as
self-serving deception, or look askance at thoughts or feelings that the
narrator imputes to himself in memory. Filtering the audience's viewpoint
through a subjective account in this way would be a difficult task for a
film, and this one doesn't really try: instead, it relies on the story
itself, and its themes of loyalty and self-denial. There is accordingly
not quite so much to chew on here as in the novel, and certain scenes
documenting Stevens's struggling conscience don't work quite as well--but
the acting more than makes up for it.
It is sometimes said that Anthony Hopkins plays a limited range of roles,
that many of his parts are reprises of the same repressed or inexpressive
type. If nothing else, his performance as Stevens in Remains is evidence
to the contrary: though he inhabits a role and a persona that require
permanent composure, he nonetheless manages to convey a wide range of
feelings. Hopkins is a master of nuance: a blink, a set of the jaw, a
voice inflection often must suffice to express his character's conflicts
or longings. Particularly compelling in that respect are those moments
when he is off his guard or unsure: there is a hilarious moment early in
the film when he is called on to explain the "birds and the bees" to Lord
Darlington's godson. (The scene is all the funnier now, since the godson
is played by none other than Hugh Grant, who turned out to have some
knowledge of the subject.) Hopkins plays a man struggling to fill a role,
and it is in the moments where he cannot quite fill it--the moments that
strain his powers of composure--that his talents really shine. Few actors
could do as much with this role as Hopkins does here; he was nominated for
Best Actor for this role, and it is arguable that he should have won.
Equally compelling is Emma Thompson as Miss Kenton, the housekeeper who
shakes up Stevens's carefully ordered world: much of her part is given
over to testing his limits and trying to draw him out. Though the role is
thereby limited, she has her moments, notably in a scene where she mocks
his mannerisms ("the way you pinch your nose when you put pepper on your
food"). A particularly memorable scene shows her backing him into a corner
to wrest a book from his grasp; the book plays it mostly for laughs ("I
judged it best to look away, but...this could only be achieved by my
twisted my head away at a somewhat unnatural angle"), but the film brings
out the sudden intimacy of the moment. James Fox is convincingly
well-intentioned as the naive Lord Darlington, and Peter Vaughan is
suitably gruff as Stevens's father, but the film's power derives from the
performa of the leads--and the emotional impact of its last third is
considerable.
There is a tremendous amount going on in Remains, enough that it bears
repeated viewing (seven times over for me); there are two fully developed
plotlines that intertwine to some extent, and several subplots deriving
from them. The Nazi-appeasement angle, even if its main function is to
cast in harsh light Stevens's devotion to duty (and, through his
employer's flirting with fascism, to put a disturbing spin on that
devotion), takes up a considerable part of the story: the flashbacks chart
the increasing depth of Darlington's involvement with Germany. In the
book, the tension between Stevens's claim to be proud of his association
with Darlington and his evasiveness (and outright lying) when asked about
his connection to the Nazi appeaser is a major insight into the truths
that he would rather not confront, and serves as a catalyst for some
unwilling reflection. In the film, though some of the same scenes appear,
they are not as obviously significant (or their significance is couched
differently). The second plotline, that of Stevens himself (and, most
obviously, his relationship with Miss Kenton), is the more compelling of
the two--Darlington, the tragic figure of the first plot, doesn't really
get enough attention to command the audience's sympathy in the way that
Stevens does. Accordingly, the first storyline gets pushed to the
background toward the end, to the point that an important development in
the Nazi- connection angle that occurs near the end feels rather
unexpected. One of the subplots highlighting Stevens' character involves
Stevens's father's illness and death, which Stevens manages to turn into a
test on his "dignity" rather than a time of personal loss; again, the book
brings out these tensions somewhat better, in that his final word on the
memory is to proclaim it a personal "triumph," but the film does show the
constricted exchanges between father and son in a way that feels, again,
compelling. The impressive part is that the script makes develops
Stevens's character--and, again, his relationship with Miss Kenton--mostly
through indirection; never does he give a soul-baring speech, never do the
two actually voice their feelings. So nuanced is the acting that
apparently ordinary moments feel emotionally charged simply because they
violate the confines of the central relationship, and the audience does
not need to be told explicitly what is on a given character's mind.
As might be expected from Merchant-Ivory, the film looks remarkable: the
interiors of Darlington Hall are elaborate, both in their prewar splendor
and their latter-day emptiness. Visually, there are many effective
moments, both on the large scale--a fox hunt, an opening tracking shot
that moves up a twisting driveway--and small: both Hopkins and Thompson
are plausible as twenty-years-older versions. Especially effective are the
early scenes, where ghosts of bygone years seem to appear to Stevens
around every corner, and Miss Kenton appears, walking in a back corridor,
before fading and dissolving into mist. There is some disagreement on the
last shot--some critics consider its imagery too obvious--but for simple
emotional impact, it works to perfection. Richard Robbins's score, for its
part, captures the repetitiveness of a servant's life, and the contrasting
emotional drama, fairly well, though at times it seems oddly placed.
As a film, Remains stands or falls on the effectiveness of Hopkins, both
in conveying the essentials of the character and in making him
sympathetic. And by and large, he succeeds on both counts: he makes those
moments where Stevens must deny himself and take up his cross feel genuine
and painful, rather than simply depictions of a repressed butler who has
become accustomed to repression. Rather than simply playing an inhibited
character, Hopkins plays a character who feels that his vocation demands
that he mask his feelings (a "dignity in keeping with his position"), and
when the mask slips slightly at key moments--the one small scene in
private where he loses his composure entirely works all the better for his
icy calm when back in public again--the effect is riveting. With a lead
less skilled than Hopkins, this could have been dreary and dull; as it is,
it packs quite a punch. Though not exactly uplifting, Remains deserves
consideration among the decade's best films. 
The room is as you left it; your last touch--
A thoughtless pressure, knowing not itself
As saintly--hallows now each simple thing,
Hallows and glorifies, and glows between
The dust's gray fingers, like a shielded light.
--from "Interim," by Edna St. Vincent Millay

Title
Review for In the Company of Men (1997)
They could have subtitled this one "As Nasty As They Wanna Be," this is a
film about evil, unrepentant and unchecked. Director Neil Labute's first
feature, shot for less than $50,000, effectively depicts misogyny and
cruelty without making the characters seem overdrawn-no small feat in an
era where Hollywood villains tend to be vaguely absurd caricature. But the
result, while effective, is far from pleasant to watch; the ending is as
troubling as that of any movie in recent memory.
The plot is simple enough, and Labute's minimalist style keeps the
proceedings mercifully free from distracting subplots. Chad and Howard
(Aaron Eckhart and Matt Malloy) have been assigned to a Midwestern branch
of their company for six weeks, and Chad, establishing that each has
lately been dumped by a girlfriend, proposes the following on the flight
there: that the two romance the same woman during their stay and then
abruptly dump her at the end of the six weeks. Why? "To restore some
dignity to our race." Because, as Chad envisions it, "she'll be reaching
for the sleeping pills within a week, and we'll laugh about this until we
are very old men." In short for the thrill of it. ("Let's hurt somebody.")
Moreover, Chad stipulates that it should be a lonely woman, "maybe
disfigured," the better to prey on her insecurities and make her fall all
the harder. Howard goes along, and Chad chooses a deaf typist named
Christine (Stacy Edwards) as the victim.
The three central characters are well realized. Eckhart's Chad combines
rage at the world for a variety of imagined slights with an oily
charm-which works so well because it doesn't seem oily. Myself, I
pigeonholed Chad as a fratboy gone bad, devoid of respect for anyone or
anything; never does the character convey that he particularly cares about
being liked, but the force of his self-assurance silences any potential
criticism. Howard is as weak as Chad is strong-whether cowed by his mother
over the phone or bullied by Chad (and the force of conformity that Chad
seems to represent) into his plans, Howard's capacity to stand up for
anything is minimal, and Malloy's stammer and nervous body language paint
the picture well. And though Christine has little to do besides be a
victim, Edwards gives her dignity; her insecurities, and increased
confidence over the course of film, come alive despite the limited part.
LaBute's style is best described as restrained: in many scenes, the camera
simply stays where it is and lets the dialogue run, all in one shot. There
are a few odd camera angles and sudden closeups, but the unremarkability
of most of the camerawork keeps the director out of the way-and, perhaps
more importantly, lends a documentary-style feel to the story, making the
events that much more real. Adding to that is the frigid cinematography:
the backdrops are airport lounges, executive conference rooms, hotel
rooms, places so familiar that no one could consider them distinctive or
foreign. The milieu feels depersonalized; the blank walls and bland
surroundings draw attention to the coldness of the main characters'
scheming.
Labute has called his film a "cinematic inkblot test," and it succeeds in
that respect on several levels: the viewer is forced to ponder to what
degree he or she shares traits with the two predators, or recognizes
friends and associates in them. More than that, though, Labute strives to
give the proceedings a comic element, and viewers who laugh may wonder
afterwards how they could have found humor in such a grim tale. (I
certainly heard plenty of laughter in the theater, much of it at moments
that made me cringe more than anything else--and I refuse to believe that
I was in a theater of sociopaths.) As in any good Rorschach test, the
viewer is left unsure at the end about what went on-how close to real life
do the interactions here come? Was Howard as guilty as Chad, or merely too
weak to resist?
It could be argued that "Men" is really about the corporate lifestyle and
the people it produces, and there is certainly that element. Chad uses his
power to humiliate a black office worker; one discussion of Chad's various
dislikes in the company instantly turns on the one who leaves the room ("I
hate that prick"); the antagonism among the main characters springs in
part from Howard's position of power in the firm. But the attitudes at
issue are hardly specific to the corporate scene; they are common about
all sorts, and the competitve sphere of the workplace brings them out
especially vividly. And Chad, for all his charm, is not truly the type to
climb the corporate ladder; such an ascent requires more fundamental
people skills than superficial bonhomie, and no one who spends time around
Chad could trust him or think his good will genuine. At bottom, the office
environment in "Men" is relevant because it creates a situation where
personalities clash, where different types are thrown together-and the
story tracks what happens when a strong persaonality takes hold of a weak
one. And it doesm't feel accurate to say that the men here are evil
incarnate, far from real life; the intent, I think, is more to show what
people are capacble of if suitably manipulated, and what locker-room
misogyny could become if allowed free rein.
There is much to appreciate about "Men": the dialogue is fresh and snappy,
and Chad's lines have enough bite to show that his is a character to be
feared as well as despised. His humor, in particular, leads me to suspect
that LaBute has been hanging around locker rooms taking notes-and the way
he pressures a reluctant Howard into going through with the plan is
classic high school bully. There are moments when the director appears to
be deliberately savaging Hollywood conventions, particularly those
involving romance, for instance when Chad goes saccharine: "I want our
relationship to blossom." Likewise, the sheer force of the ending catches
the viewer off guard-and makes the final few shots very nearly
stomach-turning. If there is such a thing as a horror film without
violence, this is it.
"Men," in sum, holds the grim fascination of a car accident: we know the
sight will be unpleasant, but we look anyway. Though far from enjoyable,
LaBute's first film is immensely thought-provoking. 
The room is as you left it; your last touch--
A thoughtless pressure, knowing not itself
As saintly--hallows now each simple thing,
Hallows and glorifies, and glows between
The dust's gray fingers, like a shielded light.
--from "Interim," by Edna St. Vincent Millay

Title
Review for In & Out (1997)
Those looking for a sensitive and honest look at the problems of
homophobia and repression are not advised to look to Hollywood, as the
film industry there is less than renowned these days for its profound
insights into real societal truths. The above is doubly true for comedies,
which, for better or worse, more often than not bypass thought about
issues they raise in favor of cheap sight gags; it is a fact of a life, at
least of life in Hollywood, and denouncing it amounts to words in the
multibillion-dollar-a-year wind.
The problems with the recent comedy "In and Out" are legion, but the
failure to treat the issues as real issues is primary about them. Kevin
Kline depicts a teacher inadvertently outed by a former student in the
course of the student's accepting an Academy Award; suddenly, all eyes are
on Kline and his mannerisms and tasts, as people speculate on whether he
is or isn't gay. The ever-so-subtle point is to mock the way stereotypes
of gay people--gay men, here--are elevated to truth, and how Kline's
character can "prove" that he isn't gay by conforming. The movie derives
much of its "humor" from making fun of the dumb-as- doorknobs small-town
Midwesterners and their silly beliefs, their prejudices, their shallowness
in thinking that a walk or an appreciation for Barbra Streisand is a
reliable indication of homosexuality--in short, it resorts to stereotypes,
silly and outdated ones at that. Screenwriter Paul Rudnick and director
Frank Oz were apparently unappreciative of this irony, but your reviewer
found it a tad irritating. More to the point, where homophobia is
prevalent, there's a lot more to it than disdain for Barbra Streisand, and
what passes for it here-- misunderstanding that magically melts away by
the end of the film--sugarcoats the conflicts that go on in real life.
The characters in "In and Out" would need a lot of development to qualify
as cardboard. We learn nothing of Kline's real thoughts or feelings; even
after the pivotal scene, at his wedding, we learn nothing about what has
been going on in his mind. Kline's role is to play straight man for a host
of caricatured characters, from his mother ("I want a wedding, Howard") to
Tom Selleck as an unethical journalist to Bob Newhart as a squeamish
school principal to Matt Dillon as the self-centered Gen-X
student-turned-actor. Joan Cusack as the fiancee has little to do until
the aborted wedding, at which point she plays abandoned bridge in such an
over-the-top fashion that the character becomes, like the rest, a running
gag. (And not, if you ask this reviewer, an especially funny one. Ha
ha--you've been left at the altar and are willing to sleep with anyone. Ha
ha.) And Kline-- well, he does his physical humor well, as he always does,
but a few moments of Kline trying to act manly are far from enough to save
this film.
The astute reader objects that the real problem here is that your reviewer
just didn't find the thing funny and hence didn't appreciate what are, in
truth, standard devices for comedies. True (but wow, are these jokes
unoriginal--that ol' chuckler about a model vomiting before a photo
session, for instance)...true, your reviewer did not laugh once and has
since been considering ways he could have better spent that $8.25. But
most comedies don't set up the bulk of their humor around a real issue
that actually affects people, and most movies that do that feel compelled
to at least treat the subject with a measure of honesty. "In and Out"
plays everything for laughs, down the confrontation between parents and a
supposedly gay son--not, in the real world, a funny topic. Many of the
funny moments are given away in the trailer, for those those that remain,
well, perhaps your reviewer was nonplussed enough by the rest of the film
that he wasn't up for a laugh.
In short, "In and Out" is a movie where the gags come cheap, very cheap,
and the knowledge that closeted homosexuality actually matters in the
world is best left at the door. Though the ending testifies to the good
intentions at owkr, the treatment of the issues makes it all feel
condescending at best.
The room is as you left it; your last touch--
A thoughtless pressure, knowing not itself
As saintly--hallows now each simple thing,
Hallows and glorifies, and glows between
The dust's gray fingers, like a shielded light.
--from "Interim," by Edna St. Vincent Millay

Title
Review for Leaving Las Vegas (1995)
     This being 1995, misery and self-destruction are hardly unexplored
topics in the cinematic world; admittedly, the advent of what has come
to be considered Generation X cinema has lent angst a distinctly
shallow feel, but there is still room for legitimate exploration of the
themes it implies.  But it is not often that the despair depicted on
screen is quite as palpable, or as strangely compelling, as in Mike
Figgis' LEAVING LAS VEGAS, currently on limited release in theaters,
starring Nicolas Cage and Elisabeth Shue.  It isn't that the events
portrayed are particularly novel movie fare, or even that the
characters are especially real: it's that the dreariness, for this is a
profoundly dreary movie, comes within the context of more dreariness,
surrounded by, well, you get the idea.  That the events and characters,
by turns tragic and pathetic, seem absolutely normal and unremarkable,
lends LEAVING LAS VEGAS, as a cinematic and cultural statement,
considerable power.
     The plot tells only half the story.  Cage (perfectly cast,
extraordinally comvincing) depicts Ben, an alcoholic Hollywood
screenwriter who, upon being fired, heads to Las Vegas to drink himself
to death; on his first night there, he picks up a prostitute named Sera
(Shue, also entirely believable) who finds him interesting and
eventually convinces him to move in with her.  Figgis (who also wrote
the screenplay) is not particularly interested in a
redemptive-love-story theme, though: Ben's self-destruction goes on
unabated and largely unremarked upon, and the relationship at the
center of the film is among its victims.  We see extensive segments
from a perspective that mirrors his: disjointed, marked by flashbacks,
blackouts, delusions, and a heightening sense of diminishing control.
Sera, for her part, struggles with an abusive pimp and more abusive
customers, and steadily wearies of saving Ben from himself; they
eventually separate, accelerating his breakdown, and their
reconciliation comes too late to rescue him.
     But LEAVING LAS VEGAS is not a love story, in any real sense,
nor is it about alcoholism.  The sex scenes--of which there is no short
supply--are largely mechanical, joyless, whether they involve Ben and
Sera or Sera and one (or more) of her clients.  Sex, here, is simply
sex for its own sake; emotional attachment is not a related concept.
The alcohol abuse is ongoing and marks every scene, including those
where Ben is seemingly stable and self-aware: while the viewer
recognizes alcohol's effects, there are no scenes of relative happiness
or coherence due to Ben's putting down the bottle for a bit, as might
be expected if the aim were solely to dramatize alcoholism.  Drinking
simply exists--again, for its own sake.  The mood of the soundtrack
alternates between bluesy and peculiarly jaunty, making it hard to take
the story entirely as tragedy; finding pathos in self-destruction is
hard when the story is set to bouncy, even raucous, music.  The opening
shot shows Ben walking down a grocery aisle tossing bourbon and whiskey
into a shopping cart--but the hard-edged jazz beat behind the scene
undercuts any sense of that sequence as ominous or disturbing.  He
lives to drink, and he drinks to die: sadness at the concept comes only
from a removed perspective.
     The failure of the relationship of the two characters further
undermines any sense of a renewing force, a redeeming feature.  When
Ben moves in, Sera buys him gifts, prominent among them, astoundingly,
a gold hip flask.  The camera lingers on the object for a while, as if
to say, yes, she really did it: clearly, this is not a scenario where
love struggles against the effects of drink.  Rather, love (or whatever
approximates it) serves to aid and abet the process of disintegration.
No sense of future intrudes on their life--and the grimness is
reinforced by a lighting scheme where shadows are heavy, pervasive.
Discussions of their relationship are invariably tied to sex: should
they have it, what does it mean, etc., and it is over sex--his bringing
home a prostitute, in a scene redolent with irony--that they go their
separate ways.  In all the time he lives with her, she makes no
apparent effort to halt his slide: she sympathizes, when drinking leads
to uncontrollable rage or shaking helplessness, but she does nothing.
To extrapolate this attitude into a larger cultural statement about
life choices, and our willingness to see and condemn self-destructive
behavior, may seem like something of a stretch, but the tone of this
film supports that notion.
     Essentially, the movie concerns itself with certain actions,
actions that come to mark and define two lives: sex and alcohol abuse.
We are immersed in--no, barraged by images of these behaviors, to the
point where they seem distinctly unremarkable: by the end of the movie,
the viewer is hard-pressed to be shocked by the meaninglessness of the
sex scenes or the deliberateness of the alcoholic self-immolation,
because, well, the viewer has already seen two hours of similar fare.
So, it seems, goes life in this particular culture (Las Vegas, high and
low society): nothing is wrong, as such, since everything has been and
will continue to be done.  The one truly vivid scene in the movie
comes, fittingly, outside the city: Ben and Sera have gone to a motel
for a few days, and after they make a scene (in a weird fusion of
drinking and sex) and manage to break a glass table, the hotel manager,
a steel-eyed woman in her 50's, advises Sera to leave and not to "cut
her little hands" on the glass, and tells them, in a tone balancing
irritation and contempt, to clear out in the morning.  That hotel
manager's line, "We get a lot of screw-ups here," gives the viewer a
sense--a fleeting sense--of external standards, of real people without
sympathy or understanding for what Las Vegas represents.  That moment
of perspective is brief, naturally: we promptly return to the city and
all it represents.  But that one moment--when the music stops and
sunlight replaces neon, faces are out of shadow--made me think that
Figgis has something to say with this movie, something not strictly
related either to sex or to alcohol.
     To make a movie about pain and anguish, a movie with
essentially two characters, grim without turning it into tragedy or
camp is not easy, and Figgis does well to avoid that end.  But it also
says something about his perspective that the love relationship seems
so shallow: her final tearful protestation that she "loved him" seems
meaningless, artificial, given what has come before.  The effectiveness
of the message underscores the strength of the performances by both
Cage and Shue; each depiction is intensely persuasive. (Cage's best
moments are in extremis: this is real drunkenness, alternating between
the obnoxious and the self-pitying.  And Shue's weary resignation as
she goes about her work gives us a sort of pained understanding of what
she goes through.) The brilliance of the acting saves the movie, which
might easily have become unwatchable (as it is, you may often need to
look away); while I cannot recommend LEAVING LAS VEGAS to anyone
looking to enjoy an evening, it is, in its own way, compelling.

Title
Review for Washington Square (1997)
The Jane-Austen-goes-to-Hollywood craze has subsided, but Austen has a
replacement, it seems, in Henry James; with last fall's "Portrait of a
Lady, and this fall's "Wings of the Dove," "Washington Square" represents
one of three James novels to hit the silver screen lately. But though the
treatment of them by Hollywood may be superficially similar--sumptuous
costumes, elaborate sets, a liberal dose of British acting--James and
Austen could hardly be more different: whereas Austen's novels are largely
comedies with some character development but little social critique
(Austen's villains are products of the same milieu as her heroes, and
their failings tend to be conventional human faults rather than anything
emblematic of their societies), James generally has different priorities.
Put another way, one can rely on the plot to keep the audience entertained
in an adaptation of an Austen film, but taking James' stories as a basis
for a film is less than a sure thing. 
Director Agnieszka Holland accordingly takes some liberties with
"Washington Square," though far fewer than Jane Campion's "Portrait"--and,
as it happens, far more successfully. The story is fairly simple:
Catherine Sloper (Jennifer Jason Leigh), plain and shy, falls for
penniless socialite Morris Townsend (Ben Chaplin), but her father Austin
(Albert Finney), suspecting that Morris is out for Catherine's
considerable wealth, threatens to disinherit her should the two marry.
This is the stuff of countless uninteresting films and novels, on the one
hand, but James has more in mind than the average writer, and the plot
reflects it; the focus is as much on the illusions associated with
romantic love as on its virtues, and the father is as compelling--and, in
a way, as sympathetic--as the suitor. And Holland, in her turn, puts her
stamp on the story; what was a fairly pessimistic ending becomes more
hopeful, with a distinctly feminist element. The initial scene, set up by
a skillful and elaborate tracking shot, depicts Catherine's birth and her
mother's resulting death, and Holland illustrates in it the relationship
that is central to the film.
Leigh has, to say the least, played a motley crew of neurotics and damaged
souls--but it is here, where her scars are displayed by facial tics and
barely visible body language, that her acting genuinely shines. Whereas in
films like "Mrs. Parker and the Vicious Circle" and "Georgia" she was
given room to express pain loudly and angrily, there are few such moments
here--but those few moments (at the reading of her father's will,
following Morris' carriage along a muddy street) are all the more
effective. When she declines Morris' invitation to dance, her
movements--looking down, twisting away--say as much as any lines could.
Leigh's delivery has been described as "lockjaw"--a promising career in
ventriloquism awaits her should she give up acting--but the murmuring
serves to reinforce her character's shyness here. Her awkwardness is
equally well realized; in dropping a pile of papers and clumsily
scrambling around picking them up, she conveys the humiliation of the
moment. Leigh's face is immensely expressive; watching her closely yields
real insight into her character's conflicts. And she does manage to
develop the character over the course of the film; her final confrontation
with her father is both dramatic and thoroughly believable.
The other performances are, mostly, strong. Finney goes well beyond 
conventional father-villain in portraying Austin: though we see his
limitations, we also see where they come from. His grief for his wife
keeps him from relating to his daughter fully: the gulf between them is
established in the first scene and reinforced in a variety of ways
thereafter. But the audience never doubts the genuineness of his grief,
nor that his distance from his daughter saddens him. This is a flawed
character, not a monster, and there is much more to his resistance to
Catherine's marriage than malice. Chaplin, for his part, does well with
the ambiguities of his character--though the final revelation is not as
believable as it might be, and the concluding scene between Morris and
Catherine feels a bit incongruous, it is possible throughout to understand
how Catherine can see him as a good-hearted boy while her father considers
him a parasite. Maggie Smith is as effective as usual as Catherine's
fluttery, sentimental Aunt Lavinia, though her character has little to do
with the central plot and sometimes feels more like a device for comic
relief.
The appeal of "Washington Square," particularly for those who want 
something more than authentic costumes and backdrops in a period piece,
lies in the way it subverts expectations. Catherine begins the film as an
awkward wallflower, but, for once, that is not a signal that she will soon
become a society belle; though her confidence grows as the film
progresses, she is recognizably the somewhat clumsy, homely girl. Points
for realism, at any rate. Moreover, this is not a story of tragically
denied lovers, though it may seem so at first; rather, it focuses firmly
on Catherine and the various treacheries and cruelties that she deals
with. The result, though slow in coming, is intriguing. Finney's character
is central to many of the surprises; his real feelings regarding his
daughter are not obvious until well along in the proceedings, but when
they become apparent, the real focus of the story shifts somewhat. 
Holland's visuals are particularly effective; she uses stark, even brutal,
images to reinforce her point, for instance when Austin discovers
Catherine secretly modeling a wedding gown, or in the young Catherine's
humiliation at a birthday recital. Though one is miscalculated--a showdown
between Catherine and Austin atop a rocky peak in the Alps--most are
effective, and the cinematography, mostly, fits the screenplay well.
It has been observed that, as is often the case with James, the conflict
between love and money predominates--but it's not clear that that's the
real point here. Certainly, that conflict is the source of much of the
plot, but arguably it masks the real tension, between a daughter too old
to be kept at home and a father whose opinion of her is so low that he
refuses to believe that she can make a viable life for herself. As it
stands, love and money are not genuinely in conflict--there is sufficient
money for Catherine to leave and marry Morris, were that the entirety of
the problem. Moreover, Morris does, eventually, land a job, satisfying
Austin's request that he make something of himself. But the problem
persists, and as we see no evidence that Austin is by nature a miser, it
seems logical to look deeper, at what truly motivates him. As usual with
James, there are hidden motivations at stake; the "money" angle is
relevant, though not in entirely expected ways, but more vital is Austin's
inability to see Catherine as anything other than an awkward, insecure
girl.
Though the ending of "Washington Square" is satisfying, it also provides
one of the film's major flaws, in that the script seems to rush to its
conclusion. After a climactic scene between Catherine and Morris, there is
little further resolution of either character--at least, not on 
screen--and we are forced to infer most of what happens after that. It 
could be argued that subsequent events are obvious, but it would have been
nice to see them--if for no other reason than to see how Leigh handles
them--and it's a bit jarring when a rather deliberately paced film
suddenly speeds up.
On the whole, though, this is a strong adaptation that captures many
of the most important elements of the novel but also gives the plot a
contemporary twist. Memorable chiefly for Leigh's portrayal of Catherine,
"Washington Square" deserves recognition for being something other than a
conventional period piece, in style and in plot.
The room is as you left it; your last touch--
A thoughtless pressure, knowing not itself
As saintly--hallows now each simple thing,
Hallows and glorifies, and glows between
The dust's gray fingers, like a shielded light.
--from "Interim," by Edna St. Vincent Millay

Title
Review for Talented Mr. Ripley, The (1999)
Anthony Minghella's Talented Mr. Ripley recalls his last directorial
effort, The English Patient, in one respect: both screenplays are adapted
from novels, and both take significant liberties in their adaptation. And
just as Minghella made an effective film out of English Patient that was
almost entirely unrelated to Michael Ondaatje's book, Ripley is an
fascinating film that owes very little to Patricia Highsmith's novel.
Matt Damon plays the Tom Ripley of the title, a working-class lad with a
flair for mimicry and forgery who goes on an errand to Italy: the father
of a Princeton-educated wastrel named Dickie Greenleaf (Jude Law)
commissions Tom to track down Dickie and bring him back to New York, one
way or another. Plans change when Tom encounters Dickie and his girlfriend
Marge (Gwyneth Paltrow): the wealth and bonhomie of Dickie's social circle
affects Tom more than he had expected--and rather than Tom influencing
Dickie to leave behind his opulent lifestyle, the story chronicles the way
that lifestyle seduces Tom. One of the main themes here is the casual
cruelty of the privileged, as Dickie initially welcomes Tom into his
social sphere and later rebuffs him, calling him a "leech" and taking away
his newfound status. The film then shifts into thriller mode as Tom
assumes Dickie's name and persona, and carries on a tense balancing act in
simultaneously maintaining his "Tom" identity for those who know him that
way, and becoming "Dickie" for others.
The Ripley of Highsmith's novel was a calculating, amoral sociopath--the
fun lay in seeing what he could pull off--but Minghella's Ripley is
arguably more interesting. Damon gives Ripley's character, initially at
least, wide-eyed wonder at the luxurious expatriate life, and an innocent
though insecure spirit--there's a sense that he genuinely longs to be
accepted by Dickie, and ultimately acts out of frustration and jealousy.
He assumes the double identity in desperation, in order to extricate
himself from another problem, rather than for the pleasure of exploiting
Dickie's wealth and status, and tries to eliminate one of his personae so
that he can get out of his unwanted double life. (There is no sense, for
Highsmith's Ripley, that the trickery is anything but amusing and
profitable.) The irony, of course, is every lie seems to necessitate three
more, and that neither persona will obligingly fade away. The effect is
very Hitchcock--the suspense is considerable, and the trajectory of the
story sets up, as in the best Hitchcock (e.g., Vertigo), a strange play of
sympathies: the audience recognizes that the protagonist is deeply flawed,
yet hopes that he'll evade detection in the end. Law's portrayal of Dickie
as a self-assured womanizer who expects the world to revolve around him
encourages us to initially identify with Tom, and to continue to
sympathize with him even as he builds his network of deceit. (On the other
hand, Paltrow is oddly ineffective as Marge, largely because her character
is so entirely hung up on Dickie, for whom the audience has no sympathy;
it's hard to understand what she sees in him, and the audience waits in
vain for her to take on a personality of her own.)
As with English Patient, the film looks gorgeous--many of Italy's most
attractive settings, both interior and exterior, are on display--and as
with English Patient, Minghella uses the location to great effect. Tanned
and expensively dressed, Dickie seems to inhabit the sun-splashed beaches
of Italy, and Tom, scrawny and pale, could hardly seem more out of place
initially. Over the course of the film, Tom assumes the necessary
trappings--clothes and music tastes in particular--so that he can take
over Dickie's life convincingly, and yet the audience still identifies him
as the insecure working-class boy that appeared at the beginning. The
transformation from tourist into expatriate accordingly never seems quite
complete, of course, but Damon brings all his acting skills to bear on
having Tom gradually learn to fit into his high-toned surroundings, and
the result is impressive. Just as the desert divided two of the main
characters in English Patient, with Ralph Fiennes's character adapting to
it and Kristin Scott Thomas's character resisting, the Italian Riviera
both brings together and separates Tom and Dickie. But the overall feel of
this film has none of the lush romance of English Patient-- indeed, where
the earlier film was all about sweeping vistas and unlimited space,
Minghella achieves an increasingly claustrophobic feel in the second half
of Ripley, again in a rather Hitchcockian way: smaller interiors, shorter
cuts and snappier conversations.
The power of Talented Mr. Ripley lies in Damon's portrayal of Tom, though.
Minghella plays up the homoerotic aspects of the relationship between Tom
and Dickie, not so much to drive the plot as to drive home a point about
Tom: his whole life is built on hiding things, on playing a part, which
certainly describes the life of a closeted homosexual in the '50s.
Ironically, his double life begins when he lets this particular mask slip
a bit; his troubles ensue because he seems to assume that he no longer
needs to play that particular role. A grimmer irony is that Tom can never
stop playing a part, much as he wants to--and Damon makes it very clear
that he does want to, that whatever thrill he once got from assuming the
identity of others has dissipated. The ultimate result feels more like
tragedy than Hitchcockian thriller (few Hitchcock characters are drawn in
such a way that we regret their demise), tragedy in the Shakespearean
sense: Tom's insecurity and longing for acceptance set off a chain of
events that he is powerless to halt. Damon's performance is subtly
expressive--it seems that he's fated never to be allowed to unburden
himself completely, and it's that clamped-down aspect that draws the
audience's sympathy.
Equal parts character study and thriller, Minghella's Talented Mr. Ripley
is easily the equal of English Patient in depth, yet entirely different in
mood. Catch it before it leaves the theaters.

Title
Review for Wings of the Dove, The (1997)
Helena Bonham Carter either has a pact with the devil or some very good
friends in the makeup business, as she's been playing the same
role--passionate impetuous girl defies societal mores-- for more than a
decade now. "Room with a View" was, if I remember correctly, 1985, and the
intervening years have featured her in "Howards End", "Enchanted April,"
and the Zeffirelli "Hamlet" as a rather assertive Ophelia, among others.
Though her character is inevitably in her late teens or early twenties,
she didn't seem young for the part when she started, and certainly doesn't
seem too old to play the central character in Iain Softley's "Wings of the
Dove," recently released. Perhaps more importantly, she gives each role
life in ways that typecast actors or actresses sometimes don't--each part
has its own peculiar motivations and quirks--and her performance is
perhaps the best thing about "Dove."
That, however, is somewhat faint praise, because this film is something of
a mess. The third recent adaptation of a Henry James novel, "Wings of the
Dove" tackles a work whose drama is arguably more psychological than that
of "Washington Square" or "Portrait of a Lady" (not that those were
action-packed, but you get the idea), and ends up with a pace so languid
that the whole thing feels in danger of grinding to a halt. The plot is
not particularly complex--Carter, an orphan unable to marry her
impoverished journalist lover because of her patroness aunt's disapproval,
schemes to have him inherit the fortune of an ailing, naive American
heiress--and the film relies on the talents of the leads to hold the
audience's interest. But though Carter is up to the task, with flashing
eyes, pouty lips, and intimations of a hot temper, the other two underplay
their parts. Linus Roache of "Priest" is the lover imprisoned by his
conscience and torn by two different attachments, but very little of it is
actually apparent; the best word to describe his expression is "blank." We
can, of course, infer what he's supposed to be thinking, but it might be
nice to get more of a hint of it now and again. And Allison Elliott's
dying heiress seems either too forgiving to be a real character or simply
rather dim, and Elliott never really gives her understandable motivations.
Of course, many a film has ben carried on the strength of one performance,
and Carter's is good enough--but she spends little of the last third of
the film on screen, and the pace consequently drags considerably.
Softley does best when he lets the camera stay on Carter, and he does that
often enough at the beginning, when the film's clear focus is on
developing her character. But when the story turns to the triangle and
Softley wants to point out tensions or problems, he resorts to intrusive
devices--voice-overs, strange camera angles, inexplicably poor
lighting--that distract from the story. After all, a psychological drama
is interesting because of the characters, and holds our attention only if
the characters are compelling; direction that takes the audience's
attention away fromt he performers doesn't help. Particularly emblematic
in that repsect is s scene toward the end, after the heiress' death; yes,
a gondola hearse in Venice is a striking picture, but it also might have
been nice to get a look at Roache during that scene, even if all we're
going to get is more blankness. There are some skillful moments, notably
one where Carter and Raoche pass each other in a stairwell and the camera
trades angles repeatedly, but Softley calls attention to himself too
often. Perhaps the worst example is the transition from the clinic where
Elliott goes for treatment--Softley makes the transition out of the scene
by zooming in on an object and turning it into another object in a new
scene, but the new scene has nothing to do with anything and serves only
as a flimsy transition into an entirely different scene. Clever camerawork
is all very well, but it should aid, not impede, the story.
"Wings of the Dove" certainly looks good. The pitch for a costume design
Oscar is fairly obvious (how often does costume design make it into the
opening credits?) and it even seems that Carter's elaborate dresses and
hats become shabbier as her spirits sink. One particularly well-mounted
sequence follows the three in a pair of gondolas through a long series of
tunnels: there, and elsewhere, the languid quality of the life the people
lead translates well into the feel of the film itself.
As with "Washington Square," the story here centers on ambiguous
motivations, and the ambiguity gives the drama whatever force it has. But
the problem here is that the chemistry between Carter and Roache is less
than strong, and thus it wouldn't feel particularly significant if their
relationship took an unexpected turn. Put another way, his commitment to
her seems lukewarm from the beginning--perhaps there's supposed to be
something there that Roache's underacting doesn't convey--and a change in
his affections doesn't feel like all that dramatic a development. The
erotic element of their relationship, though it gets a lot of camera
time--starting with a scene in an elevator in Carter's dream in the
beginning, a scene which she (in her own dream) halts--is not particularly
well developed, and if the intent was to portray unbridled passion, it
doesn't quite work (and it's hardly what James had in mind). One scene
where Carter is bewailing her separation from Roache gets a gratuitous
little touch when the camera moves from her to the empty pillow next to
her and stays there, as it to say "Ha! That's what this is REALLY about!"
But the story is more interesting as a tale of three characters struggling
to understand each other than as a collection of frustrated desires, and
the quasi-erotic bits that Softley throws in are not highlights.
Paradoxically, though, the one sex scene in the film is done with some
intelligence--it isn't interchangeable with any other such scene, for one
thing-- and captures something of the rift between the characters
involved. Even if the idea of depicting such a scene would have been
anathema to James, it does provide a measure of resolution.
"Wings of the Dove" is certainly not a dreadful film; there are some
memorable scenes and some snappy dialogue, and Carter's performance is
consistently strong. But even at 105 minutes, relatively short these days,
it feels long and drawn-out; it often takes three scenes to convey what
could have been done in one. Whatever its merits, the appeal of "Dove"
will likely be lost on all but the most die-hard of period piece fans.
The room is as you left it; your last touch--
A thoughtless pressure, knowing not itself
As saintly--hallows now each simple thing,
Hallows and glorifies, and glows between
The dust's gray fingers, like a shielded light.
--from "Interim," by Edna St. Vincent Millay

Title
Review for Chinese Box (1997)
Wayne Wang's most recent feature, "Chinese Box," is best described as an
intriguing mess: several strong performances amid some interesting themes
don't quite manage to form a coherent whole. It's somewhat frustrating to
watching because the film feels like it could have been much better.
Still, there's plenty to enjoy as it is.
With the handover of Hong Kong to China in mid-1997 impending, Jeremy
Irons, as a British writer/journalist named John, learns he is dying of
leukemia--in fact, dying at a rate that means he'll disappear from the
scene at about the same time the British will. The obvious allegory is,
unfortunately, not as well developed as it might be; at least, much of the
plot doesn't seem to support the allegory in any intelligible way. The
film follows his relationships with two Chinese women--Gong Li's
prostitute-turned-nightclub-owner Vivian, and Maggie Cheung's feisty
street hustler Jean. Oddly, though, the stories of the three individuals
are arguably more compelling than the relationships between them: Vivian,
though she has made her way out of prostitution, is nonetheless barred by
her past from marrying her businessman lover, and must resort to sending
home fake wedding pictures. Jean hawks pirated videos and pines for her
British boyfriend--yet, when he surfaces and acknowledges that he has
forgotten her completely, she shrugs it off after a moment and goes back
to work. And John, onetime writer of a tome called "How to Make Money in
Asia," is forced by his illness to see the reality of Hong Kong, even as
he fades away from it. His unrequited love for Vivian never seems fully
realized, since the two characters don't get to interact much until the
end of the film--and, oddly, John's scenes with Jean have more life.
Irons, as usual, fills out his part nicely; he makes the audience believe
in his illness, seemingly becoming paler and more gaunt over the course of
the story, and, like the British presence, increasingly muted and
insubstantial. (Hmmm. Maybe that allegory worked after all.) Cheung,
erstwhile action-movie star, is a burst of energy in a sometimes languid
film; more self-possessed and more savvy than the other two leads, she is
the only one who seems to have a clear direction. Li's icy aloofness will
be familiar to those who know her from past efforts, mostly under the
direction of Zhang Yimou: "Raise the Red Lantern," "Ju Dou," "To Live,"
and "Shanghai Triad," as well as "Farewell My Concubine" and "Temptress
Moon", saw her refining her imperious air. But this is the first role
speaking mostly in English, and at times she struggles to make herself
understood (though at other times she comes through with what sounds
almost like an American twang). (One scene where she tries to imitate
Marlene Dietrich's voice has something of a self-referential quality.) And
it's difficult for the audience to connect with her character, since the
film is played mostly through Irons's eyes and Irons doesn't really
understand her himself. Still, Li has a subtly expressive face that makes
her enjoyable to watch, even though enigmatic.
Wang's quasi-documentary style does not serve him well here. Much of the
dialogue was drowned out by background noise; Li's lines in particular,
which would have been difficult to understand in the best of
circumstances, take some repeat listening to decipher. The shaky-camera
technique, though it imparts an air of realism, becomes tired and
distracting after a while. Though there are moments when the handheld
camera works well--following Cheung down an alley, for example--it more
often calls attention away from the lead actors and onto the director.
Aside from a few moments at the beginning and the end, moreover, the
political element hardly makes it into the film, which is unfortunate
because the documentaryish angle might have served Wang well there.
Instead, the love story becomes the bulk of the plot--and considering how
little development that story receives, the film sometimes slows almost to
a halt. With lesser actors than these three, it could have been rather
wearying.
There are things to enjoy about "Chinese Box," but the movie as a whole
needs some work. If you're a Gong Li or Jeremy Irons fan, give it a shot.

Title
Review for Cider House Rules, The (1999)
Imagine Dickens with a lush soundtrack and with the surroundings bathed in
a rosy glow, and you have the feel of Lasse Hallstrom's film "The Cider
House Rules," a rather disconcerting adaptation of John Irving's novel.
While the effect is pleasant to watch, it doesn't really say anything of
consequence--odd, because the novel had plenty to say, and Irving himself
adapted the novel for the screen. The result is a competent but not
particularly memorable film.
The setting is Maine between the world wars. Tobey Maguire stars as one
Homer Wells, an orphan born and raised at St. Cloud's, which doubles as
orphanage and abortion clinic, the latter covertly, of course. Michael
Caine is Dr. Larch, the compassionate doctor who runs St. Cloud's,
performing abortions and delivering babies as necessary, and supervising
the various waifs under his care. Dr. Larch takes Homer on as his
assistant, and Homer gets a thorough medical education without ever going
to high school--but, don't you know, he longs to Get Out And See The
World, and when Candy (Charlize Theron) comes to St. Cloud's for an
abortion, with boyfriend Wally (Paul Rudd) in tow, Homer, rejecting Dr.
Larch's entreaties to stay at St. Cloud's, hitches a ride to the coast
with them and takes up apple-picking in Candy's family orchard alongside a
set of poor black migrant workers. Homer discovers along the way that Dr.
Larch's ethics had more of an effect on him than he realizes, though, and
complications ensue. If it sounds confusing, trust me, it's not. You can
doze off for long stretches and still follow the story perfectly well.
Among the prevailing themes in the book was abortion, since that's the
heart of the conflict between Homer and Dr. Larch--Homer won't perform
abortions, Dr. Larch will. It's implicit that abortion is at the heart of
Homer leaving the orphanage, since succeeding Dr. Larch as head physician
implies taking over his abortion duties as well. But while the abortion
issue in the book was polemical--Irving was very clearly taking a side,
namely pro- abortion--it just seems pat here; the conflict is resolved, if
that's the way to put it, in a way that seems firmly within the stock
arguments of the abortion debate, and it's unlikely that this film's
treatment of the problem will add anything to that debate. Granted, it's
hard to imagine a film that could change anyone's mind on this particular
issue, but this doesn't feel like a particularly thoughtful consideration.
The book uses the larger theme of rules and the necessity of rule-breaking
to set up its abortion argument--the "rules" of the title are a set of
directives posted in the orchard's bunkhouse, universally ignored--but the
book also had the luxury of several additional minor characters and quite
a few more events to make that argument. The film's treatment of the
subject, by contrast, intermittently appears and then leaves again for
long stretches, and thematically the whole thing wanders.
Part of the problem is Maguire. He has a winning smile, but not much more,
and he's not particularly good at conveying anything other than
indecision. That's not necessarily a handicap for some parts, but Irving's
protagonists are all written blandly, straight men for the various zany
and peculiar events and characters around them, and hence they need actors
with vibrant personalities to play them. Maguire, alas, has very little
personality, and what he has doesn't exactly seem principle-driven and
resolute. Because of that, then, Homer's moral odyssey is fairly
unconvincing--we don't really buy it; the convictions never seemed all
that deeply held anyway. (His face, which is almost entirely
expressionless, doesn't help his cause.) The problem is exacerbated by
Caine's vivid performance as Dr. Larch, since Caine seems genuinely
animated by his convictions--and with the character on one side of the
debate ablaze with moral certitute and the other simply saying his lines,
the eventual result feels like a bit of a foregone conclusion. Maguire
isn't bad, by any means, but he underplays all his most important moments,
including one crucial scene where he's supposed to be burning with
indignation but in fact sounds no more than mildly annoyed. Raise that
voice, Tobey! Chew some scenery! Wake *up*! Theron, for her part, has very
little to do besides be attractive, and Delroy Lindo, as one of the
orchard workers, is nicely expressive--but the story revolves around
Maguire.
A movie that spends as much time as this one does in and around an
orphanage has inherent sentimentality risks, and Hallstrom doesn't do
enough to stave off that element. A subplot involving a boy (named Fuzzy,
of all things) who's permanently confined in a breathing tube and watches
people wistfully through the plastic--no points for picking up on the
Poignant Metaphor here--gets far too much attention in light of its
minimal role in the story. Even the orchard scenes, which are presumably
meant to represent a grittier side of life, look too much like a New
England postcard to feel all that real. There's an irony here, since
anyone who's read Irving's novels knows that there's nothing even vaguely
sentimental about them--the characters are drawn with an unsparing eye,
and their faults and foibles are always on display. Without Irving's prose
to keep the comic tone going, though, the movie alternates between sweet
and ponderous, neither of which is a particularly Irvingish quality. The
problem might have been avoided had the script not eliminated a certain
character, a girl at the orphanage who left it to find Homer; Melony, as
she was called, was far too earthy to sentimentalize, and she served as a
foil of sorts. As it is, there's very little dramatic tension in the film,
except at a few key points. (There's another irony here, of course, namely
that the sentimentality doesn't seem to affect Maguire--he may be
surrounded by heart- tugging orphans, but his heart doesn't seem to be
tugged.) The soundtrack, sometimes appropriate but often intrusive,
heightens the melodramatic feel.
All that said, though, there are things to like about Cider House Rules.
Prominent among them is a marvelous performance by Caine, justly nominated
for an Oscar; he conveys the fatherly instincts that he has for Homer
without ever seeming mawkish. There's a back-and-forth letter-writing
scene between him and Homer done by voice-over that's particularly
resonant, arguably more so than any of the scenes where the two are
actually together--perhaps it's because Maguire is more effective as
voice-over (his voice has more expression than his face) than actually on
screen, but the dialogue crackles in that scene more than at any other
point in the film. Caine, who's British, adopts a New England accent
almost perfectly, and combines waspishness (toward those who don't
understand his mission) with affection (for the orphans) in a rather
nuanced way. Moreover, there's a subtheme about maturity as measured in
the ability to make decisions that's actually rather well done: Candy's
immaturity is indicated by her inability to make decisions, and Homer
eventually learns that growing up means having to make hard choices.
Still, the heart of this film, for better or worse, is Maguire's
character, and Maguire doesn't really carry off the part. It's not a bad
effort, but it works better as an attractive spectacle than as an actual
story.
