Authors
V. B. Daniel
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Con Air (1997)
     Okay, here's the deal. 'Member back in kidhood when you saw an ad
during Saturday cartoons for some fab-o new toy? This
fill-in-the-blank, whatever it was, had the right-on dig-o-rama. It
was flashy, shiny, cool. It did backflips, shot sparks, spun like a
top, made rattatat noises, had kung fu grip. The  fresh-scrubbed kids
in the commercial -- all freckly-faced and chipper -- looked like they
were having  the time of their lives playing with it. The announcer
was all frothy and screamin', "Be sure to get the
fill-in-the-blank today!" 
          Well, you'd go absolutely batcrap to get that dang
fill-in-the-blank. You'd whine and carry on, pitch a
peemortal fit or three. You'd drop oh-so-subtle hints to your parents,
like, "Momma, I just GOTTA have a fill-in-the-blank!" You'd drag her
through the store like a wrecker pullin' a Taurus, 'til you could plop
her in front of the shelf, so she could see exactly what the box
looked like and its exact location on the shelf. And, she'd try to put
you off with, A) "Save your allowance..." B) "Maybe for your
birthday," or , C) "We'll see...." (I always detested, "We'll see....)
Then finally, some interminable eon later, you got it! The
fill-in-the-blank! After all the hullabaloo, the  fill-in-the-blank
was finally in your hands! And you played with it. And, without fail,
the fill-in-the-blank  turned out to be a big gyp. It broke, it didn't
fly, it didn't make the same sounds it made on TV. You didn't have
freckles and you weren't all that chipper. And, now, you were stuck
with it. 
          My dear patients, that's exactly how I felt last night when
I left the theater after seeing Con Air, Paramount's float in the
summer blockbuster parade. I'd seen trailer after trailer for the
thing, not realizing I was being duped with the same marketing finesse
that made the fill-in-the-blank so appealing years ago. And, by
criminy, all I was left with was a box of 180 dB explosions and an
empty shell of a movie. No spinnin' tops, no shootin' sparks, no kung
fu grip. Batteries not included. 
          Nicolas Cage stars as Cameron Poe, a prison parolee being
transported with a batch of the most heinous criminals on Planet
Reebok. The nare-do-wells (surprise!) hijack the plane to escape. And
 the only way Poe can prove he's not a heinous criminal himself is to
 stop this merry band of goons. Simple, huh? 
          We get the standard creepy turn from John Malkovich, this
time as criminal mastermind Cyrus "The Virus" Grissom. If you saw In
The  Line Of Fire, you've caught Cyrus the Virus. His name was
different in that film, but it's the same person.
          Super-cool Ving Rhames (Pulp Fiction, Mission:Impossible) is
second-in-command Nathan "Diamond Dog" Jones. And, oh, yes, Steve
"Where's the Orthodontist" Buscemi plays Garland "The Marietta
Mangler" Greene, a Lecter-wannabe (whose character never kills anyone
in this movie, by the way....). I love how movie prisoners always have
a nickname that ends up in quotations; even when it's spoken, you
 just want to do that arms-up-two-fingers-of-each-
hand-scratchin'-in-mid-air-universal-symbol-for-
quotations-sort-of-dealie. 
          Add to this mishmash one John Cusack, as U.S. Marshall Vince
Larkin, and you've got a very promising action thriller, bigger and
better than The Fugitive or The Rock. Right? 
          Wrong. In fact, this drivel should not even be within
spittin' distance of the moviehouse. The Nickster, doing some funky
Elvis-Rosco P. Coltrain-Dukes-of-Hazzard voice, is buffed up and oily,
he sports a nice long hair weave, and has the most consistent T-shirt
sweat-stains since Bruce Willis in Die Hard. But, despite his
Nickness, which is always so fun to watch, he does not make this movie
great. In fact, he's merely the man that keeps this cinematic upchuck
from getting my dreaded DEAD ON ARRIVAL rating. 
          You pull Cage out of the pot, and you've got a relentless
storm of car wrecks, plane wrecks, and other gas-induced explosions,
peppered with silly murders and absolutely the lamest dialogue this
side of Godzilla 1985. This is producer Jerry Bruckheimer's first film
without his late partner and friend of the  working girl Don Simpson,
and it really makes one wonder exactly who the brains of that twosome
really was. Bruck-man can go over the top with the best of them (and
here, WAY over the top), but it's simply mindless violence for the
sake of the legendary "Summer Slam Action Flick." Unlike his last year
winner, The Rock, there's no attempt to balance the gunpowder with a
little wit, thought, and common sense story structure. 
          And, while we're raking over Bruck-man, let's point out
something else here. Con Air marks his pattern of pulling directors
from the ranks of TV commercials. (The Rock's Michael Bay, Top Gun's
Tony Scott, Flashdance's Adrian Lyne all got their start puking out
small-screen harpies for Madison Avenue.) I have no doubt that this
man Simon West could direct a feature movie, but, somehow, I get the
feeling that  West was only doing what he was told to do instead of
putting his own stamp on the movie. I find it hard  to believe that a
first-time director chose to not tell any sort of story. No, gentle
readers, this thing smells of Bruck-man telling West, "I said
EXPLOSION, not EXPOSITION." 
          Sorry, West and Bruck. You let your testosterone get the
better of you this time. You'll probably make a small mint from the
Bang Junkies who get off seeing Las Vegas blow up, but, as for making
a good movie, you missed the trick completely. C'mon guys, don't
forget: some assembly required. 
