Authors
Gordon Bass
Number of Reviews
2

Title
Review for Xizao (1999)
filmcritic.com presents a review from staff member Gordon Bass.
You can find the review with full credits at
http://www.filmcritic.com/misc/emporium.nsf/2a460f93626cd4678625624c007f2b46/2ff1155b5ca0201988256916001bf2b4?OpenDocument
China's a funny place today. Old men in Mao suits perform morning
stretches in the shadow of dot-com billboards. Cell-phone toting kids
cruise on beat-up bikes. And the crowd at McDonald's is notably more
enthusiastic than the one protesting at the American embassy around the
corner. 
But what's the price of progress? In Shower, Zhang Yang looks at the
widening chasm between old-school China and its Gen-Y offspring, while
playing a warm eastern riff on the return home of the prodigal son.
Businessman Da Ming represents the new generation; he's a wealthy, weary
frequent flier in a rumpled coat and tie. His father, Master Liu, is old
China; he happily runs a bathhouse in a fading Beijing neighborhood
where he lives with Da Ming's mentally handicapped younger brother Er
Ming.
Da Ming, who lives in a prosperous area of southern China, makes a
reluctant trip to Beijing under the mistaken impression that his father
is dead, only to find him alive and well. He'd love to turn right around
and head home, but agrees to spend a few days in his old family
home--which is nothing more than a room behind the deteriorating
bathhouse.
>From the start Da Ming fidgets with his cell phone, cringes at the
antiquated lifestyle of his father and brother, and itches to leave. Why
waste time in a bathhouse when you can take a five-minute shower, after
all? But after a few days in Beijing he begins to see the bathhouse for
what it is: A gathering place for the neighborhood men, a refuge from
work and wives and home life. The idiosyncratic bathhouse customers are
an extended family, and provide comic relief to the story. Retired
cronies pit fighting crickets against one another in battles that test
friendships. A young schemer hides when his get-rich-quick scheme fails
and the loan sharks are threatening. A meek husband escapes from his
domineering wife.
Sadly, the bathhouse is slated for demolition along with the rest of the
neighborhood since space is needed for anonymous hi-rise apartment
complexes. Da Ming sees Master Liu's health start to fail as the
neighborhood's days tick away; Liu's life is inextricably intertwined
with the fate of the neighborhood. It's the end of an era, and
modernity, as we've seen over and over, doesn't always equal progress
(imagine what a billion new cars and refrigerators and showers are going
to do to China's already rotten environment).
So this is Cinema 101. So the symbolism is as old as storytelling. The
bathhouse is an oasis in the midst of change, with water that renews
life and purifies. The wayward son returns home to redeem himself. And
the retarded brother is the only one who can see clearly what the
bathhouse means to the family and community. But Yang keeps the story
real, the actors (veterans of mainstream and experimental Chinese
theater) turn in restrained and moving performances, and in a summer of
tired action retreads, this heart-bendingly beautiful film is a cool
drink of grown-up pleasure.
Director: Zhang Yang
Producer: Peter Loehr
Writer: Liu Fen Dou, Zhang Yang, Diao Yi Nan, Cai Xiang Jun
Starring: Zhu Lu, Pu Cun Xin, Jiang Wu, He Zheng, Hu Bei Bei, Lin Ding,
Feng Shun
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!

Title
Review for Du rififi chez les hommes (1955)
filmcritic.com presents a review from staff member Gordon Bass.
You can find the review with full credits at
http://a.filmcritic.com/misc/emporium.nsf/2a460f93626cd4678625624c007f2b46/285a5ac036f67fec8825694100152765?OpenDocument
When a movie begins with a con being freed from jail, you know one of
two things will happen: Either he'll be called in to help the hapless
police solve an impossible crime that's had them baffled for months, or
he'll be tempted by one final heist, a perfect job that will let him
retire a wealthy man.
Rififi, a French film originally released in 1955 as Du rififi chez les
hommes, is a film noir. Which means, of course, we're going to get the
heist.
Sad-eyed Jean Servais plays Tony le Stephanois, fresh from a stint in
the slammer. Free for the first time in five years, Tony wants to stay
on the straight and narrow, but can't maintain his cool when he
discovers that his girl has taken up with another man during his
imprisonment. A man of few words, Tony orders her to strip, whips her
and kicks her out of his apartment before meeting up with his old
associates Jo (Carl Möhner) and Mario (Robert Manuel, from whom Billy
Zane was apparently cloned). Jo and Mario have a high-risk crime in
mind, breaking into a ritzy but well-protected jewelry store and its
basement safe, and Tony agrees to mastermind the job. Cesar le Milanais,
an Italian safecracker played to dapper, womanizing perfection by
director Jules Dassin, is recruited to round out the gang.
The heart of the film is the subsequent robbery sequence, which
stretches for 30 minutes without dialogue. Cool, tense, and suspenseful,
the scenes of the heist play out like a primer for would-be jewel
thieves, which led to the film being banned in several countries after
its original release in 1955. (That it was allowed in the United States
was an indication that the Production Code Administration had lost much
of its authority by the mid 1950s; the Code stated that "theft, robbery,
safe-cracking... etc., should not be detailed in method.") 
The heist goes off perfectly, giving us valuable lessons in how to break
through a concrete ceiling without a sound and how to silence an alarm.
The film anticipates every audience question -- How do you hammer
through concrete without waking the neighbors? How do you crack a safe
without explosives? -- and answers them with surprising technical
accuracy. That the break-in is accomplished with nothing more than rope,
a suitcase of simple tools, and an umbrella makes it vastly more
impressive than anything in current films, where burglars rely on latex
face masks, magic voice-changing throat stickers and plastic surgery to
get their business done. No, back in the smoky, jazz-filled Paris of the
1950s, men were men, and they used hard steel implements to do the job.
The crime nets the gang jewels worth a staggering 240 million francs.
But despite an agreement to lay low for a while, suave safecracker Cesar
can't help giving an enormous diamond ring to a nightclub chanteuse,
setting a final chain of violence in motion. The singer promptly shows
it to her boss, club owner Pierre Grutter, who makes an immediate
connection between the ring, Cesar, and the recent heist. And decides he
should have the stash himself.
>From here events spiral rapidly southward. Grutter beats a confession
out of Cesar, Tony pops Cesar for talking, and Grutter kidnaps Jo's
young son and demands the jewels as ransom. There's an accelerating rush
to a violent and hallucinatory ending.
Yet despite the inevitable bloodshed, the underworld romance of Rififi's
Paris has an undeniable and timeless appeal. As captured in moody
black-and-white, it makes you want to lounge in a jazz-joint, chain
smoke and knock back whiskey, and bitch-slap any two-bit punk who dares
look at your girl. Sure, there's a price to pay in the end, but that's
the life of the professional criminal. And the code of film noir, even
in France.
Director: Jules Dassin
Producers: Henri Bérard, Pierre Cabaud, René Bézard
Writers: Jules Dassin, René Wheeler, Auguste Le Breton
Starring: Jean Servais, Carl Möhner, Robert Manuel, Jules Dassin, Marie
Sabouret
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
