Authors
Scott Hunt
Number of Reviews
20

Title
Review for Smoke Signals (1998)
Review by Scott Hunt
Movie Hunt:   http://netdirect.net/~hunt/index.html
Cast: Adam Beach, Gary Farmer, Irene Bedard, Evan Adams, Tantoo
Cardinal, Cody Lightning and Tom Skerritt
Director: Chris Eyre
Writer: Sherman Alexie
A lyrical, at times magical, look at the familial bond, "Smoke Signals"
is the first film written, directed,co-produced, and acted by American
Indians. Director Chris Eyre and screenwriter Sherman Alexie have
adapted Alexie's critically acclaimed collection of short stories, The
Lone Ranger and Tonto Fistfight in Heaven, into a funny, bittersweet
road picture that avoids melodrama and the often romanticized images
presented of American Indians in modern cinema.
Thomas Builds-the-Fire (Evan Adams) and Victor Joseph (Adam Beach) are
Coeur D'Alene Indians who share a common bond. As an infant, Thomas was
thrown from the upper story window of his house as it burned, his
parents trapped inside. Moments before hitting the ground, he was saved
by Victor's alcoholic,physically abusive father, Arnold (Gary Farmer).
As the boys grew, Thomas came to view Victor as a brother and Arnold as
a surrogate father. Twenty years later, word comes to the reservation
that Arnold, who had left Victor and his mother Arlene (Tantoo Cardinal
in a subtle, knowing performance) years earlier, has died and Victor
must go retrieve his ashes. Short of funds, Victor is forced to accept
money from Thomas, despite his annoyance and apparent dislike of him,
on the condition that Thomas can go along.
Evan Adams is a delight as Thomas, Victor's cousin. Thomas has a
fondness for sports coats with matching vests, black framed glasses and
pigtails, along with an ever present goofy grin, something which
irritates the brooding Victor. At one point Victor tells
Thomas, "Indians ain't supposed to smile. Get stoic. If you don't look
mean, white people won't respect you." Victor holds a special
resentment for Thomas, who has leaned what it's like to be an Indian
from watching television. As Victor puts it, "The only thing worse than
Indians on TV is an Indian watching Indians on TV."
Victor is a walking knot of anguish, conflicted about his feelings and
memories of his father, a man he can neither hate nor love. Throughout
the film, more is revealed about Arnold in expertly done, non-intrusive
flashbacks. This is one of the movie's strengths as Thomas narrates
many of the flashbacks in an annoying, yet mesmerizing, sing-song voice.
The movie settles into the familiar trappings of a road picture as the
two young men gain fresh insight into themselves and Arnold. What makes
the film special is the self-deprecating dialogue, often centering on
stereotypes of American Indians. Ayres and Alexie don't preach at the
audience, but rather give them a comedic nudge as they tear down many
preconcieved notions about Indians.
As both Thomas and Victor struggle to interpret the smoke signals of
Arnold's death, they ultimately begin to learn the power of fathers,
sons, and forgiveness.

Title
Review for Anna and the King (1999)
Review by Scott Hunt.   Visit me at Movie Hunt
http://netdirect.net/~hunt/index.html
Cast:  Chow Yun-Fat, Jodie Foster, Bai Ling
Director: Andy Tennant
Writer: Anna Leonowens, Steve Meerson, Peter Krikes
Anna and the King strides onto the screen in full regalia, wearing a
brilliant suit of sumptuous landscapes, deep, vibrant colors and an
epic storyline. It's true beauty comes from it's subtle ruminations on
the politics of power, whether it's between governments, or the
interplay between a man and a woman.
Anna (Jodie Foster) is a widowed British schoolteacher with a touch of
wanderlust trying to grasp her quicksilver feelings concerning the
recent death of her husband. With son in tow, she takes the employ of
King Mongkut (Chow Yun-Fat) to tutor his son in the English language.
Mongkut sees the strength of the British and correctly surmises that
his country's future lies in opening itself up to the ways of the
western world. Anna function is to help provide that link.
The core of the film, of course, deals with the blossoming love between
Anna and Mongkut as it attempts to germinate in the unfriendly soil of
a shifting political climate. Foster plays Anna with equal parts
clenched jaw and wide-eyed wonder. She is assertive, yet, respectful of
the king as she initially tries to impose her western sensibilities
upon him. It is one of Foster's strongest performances since Silence of
the Lambs in a role she could not have played earlier in her career.
She brings a mature self- awareness and determination that might not
have come across from a younger Foster. It's a joy to watch her cagily
bargain for her own measure of influence within the realm of Mongkut's
monarchy. When she makes her entrance into a politically charged
banquet mid-film, she exudes a hypnotic beauty that is deepened by her
textured performance.
Chow-Yun Fat's King Mongkut is every measure of Foster's Anna, perhaps
even more so. This is the Chow Yun-Fat that  Hong Kong cinema has been
in love with for nearly twenty years. He is imposing, yet vulnerable,
playful, but stern. It is an impressively assured and nuanced
performance.
Precious time is stolen from the movie's 155 minutes running time by an
unengaging subplot involving one the King's concubines (Bai Ling) and
her love of a commoner. It strikes with the subtlety of Siam's fabled
white elephant as it stomps through the leisurely paced story.
Some may be put off by the action filled climax of the movie. Although
a bit inconsistent in tone from the rest of the film, it fits within
the established subplot of a perceived siege by neighboring Burma, a
country backed by the British.
Anna and the King transcends being a predictable, traditional love
story by avoiding mawkishness. It shows a seduction of intelligence.
Ever mindful of each other's positions, Anna and King Mongkut negotiate
a maze of social customs, conflicting world views and lost loved ones
to connect on a level that ultimately proves deeply satisfying, if not
achingly bittersweet.

Title
Review for Ghost Dog: The Way of the Samurai (1999)
Review: Ghost Dog: The Way of the Samurai (1999)
Review by Scott Hunt   Visit me at Movie Hunt
http://netdirect.net/~hunt/index.html)
Cast: Forest Whitaker, Henry Silva, Cliff Gorman, John Tormey, Gene
Riffini, Victor Argo, Tricia Vessey, Isaach de Bankole', Camille Winbush
Director: Jim Jarmusch
Writer: Jim Jarmusch
Languid, yet pointed and focused, Ghost Dog: The Way of the Samurai
sublimely savages our cultural fascination with the mafia and the sleek,
ultra-cool, cinematic image of the hitman. Juxtaposing the samurai's
honor code of feudal Japan against the tradition bound modus operandi of
the american/italian mafia, it ceaselessly chips away with a sculptor's
precision at the archaic foundations of both as they lumber,
dinosaur-like, to function in the modern era. Director Jarmusch
gleefully plays the iconoclast, ripping into Mafioso precepts with
splashes of acidic wit. Using a palate of bleached colors, Jarmusch
lugubriously maintains a tone of desolation that belies the many sparks
of laugh out loud humor punctuating the film. He doesn't cater to
audience expectations of hyper-colorized, stylized violence and gunplay
where no one dies. The action is presented in flat, brutal codas.
Bullets have permanence. Death has consequences. The movie rises beyond
standard conventions to become a meditation on the concepts of honor and
loyalty. It is an anti-movie, of sorts. There are few photogenic,
empathetic characters for the audience to fall in love with. This isn't
a film that lovingly holds your hand. There are dark, contemplative
moments and the film firmly holds you by the shoulder, just so,
asserting itself for all to see.
The fulcrum for the movie's thematic balancing act is Ghost Dog, a mafia
hitman. A twist on the stereotypical image of the mob enforcer, Ghost
Dog is a hilarious contradiction in terms. Unlike the sleek, muscular
killing machines one is accustomed to, we are given an inner city black
man who is overweight and slovenly, replete with chapped, dirty hands
and rumpled clothing. He wears a hooded sweatshirt, which he often pulls
over his head, giving him a monk-like appearance. There are no acrobatic
back flips and shiny super guns in his arsenal. He uses old, worn
weapons and simply goes about his tasks in economical, efficient and
pleasureless fashion. Ghost Dog is a disciple of the old ways of the
samurai, distilling the essence of his life through the filter of a
book, which he reads daily, Hagakure: The Way of the Samurai. Life
consists of simple pleasures for him: ice cream, warm rooftop naps and
good books. Ghost Dog lives, as it were, by the basic tenet expressed by
his book; one should start each day considering oneself as dead. Living
atop an abandoned building, surrounded by his flock of pet carrier
pigeons, Ghost Dog exists in a netherworld lacking creature comforts and
friends. He craves nothing more. As he puts it late in the film, "I've
seen all I want to see." He exists in a spiritual world of the mind,
gaining moral sustenance from his readings.
Ghost Dog wasn't always as he is presented. In several Roshomon-like
flashbacks, it's shown how Ghost Dog was assaulted by racist white males
and beaten nearly to death until the timely intervention of a Good
Samaritan, that "Samaritan" being a foot soldier in an aging crime
family. Ghost Dog pledges his life to the service of the man, Louie
(Tormey), as repayment. After years of loyal service, Ghost Dog is sent,
by Louie, to kill "Handsome Frank", a made man within Louie's
organization who has run away with the crime boss's daughter, Louise
(Vessey). Ghost Dog wordlessly executes his task, witnessed by Louise,
whom he spares, as she sits watching a Betty Boop cartoon, clutching a
copy of the book, Roshomon. In a bit of synchronicity, Louise loans the
book to Ghost Dog.
Upset that Frank was taken out by someone not from the family, the mob
bosses, in turn, put out a hit on Ghost Dog in a perverse twist of
loyalty to their assassinated comrade. The rest of movie holds the dated
value systems of both the mafia and Ghost Dog up to the light of a new
millennium with many acerbic asides as the two come factions come into
conflict.
The theme of old cartoons flares up time and again, each time showing
cartoon violence that is in sharp counterpoint to the reality of Ghost
Dog's world. Each time a character is shown watching a cartoon, it's
from the same era, Betty Boop, Felix the Cat, etc., a reflection of days
gone by. Near the end, Louise is watching a cartoon that's a departure
from the previously shown ones. It's a bit of audacity on Jarmusch's
part that is nicely effective, despite it's surrealistic nature.
As Ghost Dog floats through his world, his life is touched by two
people. One is a sage little girl (Winbush) who connects with Ghost Dog
through their love of reading. She comes to symbolize a melding of the
old ways and  new sensibilities, just as Louise ultimately does. By
film's end, the fact that Jamusch is so effective at illustrating the
tenuous bond between the two is a testament to his skill as a writer.
The other person in Ghost Dog's world is an ice cream (de Bankole')
vendor who only speaks french, yet intuitively shares a rapport with
Ghost Dog. The vendor is the literal stranger in a strange land.
Jarmusch, through rapper/composer RZA,  underscores his film with rap
and reggae music, which at first blush seems dichotomous, but its primal
rhythms serve to strengthen the fundamental nature of the movie. Ghost
Dog seems to draw some type of strength from the rap music he listens to
as he negotiates the streets in various stolen cars. (Which, in and of
itself, presents another paradox about Ghost's Dog's sense of honor.)
The head Mafioso is played by Henry Silva with a stone faced
resignation. Of all the cartoonish mobsters, he is the only one who
appears self aware of his state in the world. Gorman plays Sonny, a
lieutenant who respects the old ways, yet has a quirky affinity for rap
music, a love comically shown in several impromptu displays. Ruffini
seems the truest reflection of the mafia. He is a husk of a man,
assisted by two hearing aids, who barks out advice without truly hearing
what he, or others are saying.
Whitaker carries the film by using what truly great actor's use, his
face. Ghost Dog is reticent to speak, often going for long periods
without doing so. The fact that Whitaker can convey such a wide range of
emotion through a gesture or look is a remarkable talent. Although the
film has a deliberate pace, some of the  late night drives and walks
taken by Ghost Dog dragged the momentum down.
Truly tragic is how Ghost Dog misinterprets Japanese honor in his final
confrontation with the mob. He reveals himself to be so desperate for
spiritual guidance through the Hagakure that he fails to truly adapt it
to what is real and true in his world. Carried on the shoulders of a
remarkable performance by Whitaker, Ghost Dog rises beyond being a
characterization or icon, into a figure that garners sympathy, if not a
bit of pity.

Title
Review for Space Cowboys (2000)
Cast:  Clint Eastwood, Tommy Lee Jones, Donald Sutherland, James
Garner, James Cromwell, Marcia Gay Harden, William Devane, Loren Dean.
Writers:  Ken Kaufman and Howard Klausner.
Director:  Clint Eastwood.
Review by Scott Hunt         Movie Hunt:
http://netdirect.net/~hunt/index.html
Make no mistake about it, Space Cowboys succeeds due to the varying
iconic levels of three of its main leads; Eastwood, Jones and
Sutherland. Over the years, each man has arguably put a distinctive
stamp on American cinema. Dropped into the unsurprising, yet satisfying
Space Cowboys, their strength of personality lends the film it's best
moments. The script has no real unexpected moments and doesn't seek to
blast you with over the top special effects. It's quite simply a fun
movie that's as enjoyable as a home cooked meal.
The script pleasingly plays off the respective star's real life and film
images with varying degrees of success. Eastwood's first moments on the
screen, he's seen working in his garage, listening to jazz music, a nod
to his real life devotion to the music form. Sutherland spends much of
the film flashing his trademark loopy grin. It's that crafty smile we've
seen time and again in films such as M.A.S.H and Backdraft. Jones plays
off his acerbic, gruff screen persona to great effect, eliciting a
pathos from his role that is truly bittersweet. Garner, by comparison,
has a certain fuzziness to his character. His inclusion and role feels
more like an afterthought than an integral part of the film.
Frank Corvin (Eastwood), "Hawk" Hawkins (Jones), Jerry O'Neil
(Sutherland) and "Tank" Sullivan (Garner) are first shown as young men
in 1958. They are Team Daedalus, the country's top Air Force pilots. In
a gorgeously filmed black and white flashback, rebellious Hawk and rigid
leader Frank are seen test piloting a jet plane, soaring high enough to
see the moon, despite the blazing daytime sun. In a nice reference to
Greek mythology, like Daedalus' son Icarus, they fly too high and come
crashing to the earth. They have seen their prize, the moon, and both
men dream of someday visiting it.
Flash forward to modern day NASA. There is a crisis involving a
satellite of Corvin's design. It's in decaying orbit and falling towards
earth. The only solution is an in-flight repair and Corvin is the only
man who can do it. Realizing his strong negotiating chip, Corvin
leverage's his way into Team Daedelus making the space trip.
Most of the film's heart beats in the pre-flight training the geriatrics
must endure. There is an easy camaraderie between the stars and the tone
of the film slides into an almost TV sitcom-like quality. Due to
Eastwood's deliberate directing hand, the scenes play more sweetly
amusing than cloying. Frank and Hawk, despite their age, get into a bar
fight that plays like siblings venting life long grievances. The "Aw,
Mom, we weren't doing nuthin'" looks they give a team supervisor upon
explaining their shiners shows the actor's strength through subtlety.
Hawk, sans computer assistance, shows two young, hotshot astronauts, how
pilots flew in the old days. Jerry, with the practiced subtlety of a
snake charmer, hits on any women within range of his droopy shouldered,
coke bottle thick, be speckled sight. Eastwood sends the message that
old means nothing more than wiser, maybe a bit smarter and still
sexually potent.
There's almost an audible grate of metal on metal as the second half of
the film grinds gears from a character driven focus to adventure.
Although beautifully realized visually, the space rescue is truly
unremarkable. Nothing occurs that we haven't seen in other recent films
involving space travel. By shifting from the film's strong suit, its
leads, to straightforward action, a certain momentum is lost.
If you're not looking for any big revelations or insight into the human
condition, this is a movie for you. Space Cowboys doesn't try to present
itself as anything other than what it is: Fun, eminently watchable,
summer fare.

Title
Review for Mission to Mars (2000)
Review by Scott Hunt   Visit me at Movie Hunt
http://netdirect.net/~hunt/index.html)
After a marketing windup of striking visuals and the promise of star
caliber actors, Mission To Mars ends up throwing a whiffleball.
Fiercely unoriginal, Director DePalma cobbles together a film by
borrowing heavily from what has gone before him. There are aliens
similar to those in Close Encounters of the Third Kind. The stranded
astronaut theme is reminiscent of Robinson Crusoe on Mars. The
astronauts encounter space flight difficulties that smack of Apollo 13.
Interior spacecraft visuals are redolent of 2001: A Space Odyssey.
Instead of using these components as a launching pad to create his own
movie, De Palma stops right there, refusing to infuse the film with
anything even remotely resembling cleverness or heart.
Mission to Mars takes it's first wobbly steps at a pre-launch barbeque
in which the perfunctory character introductions are done. During these
surface scans of the characters, we learn that Jim McConnell (Sinise)
has lost his wife. It's a plot point revisted throughout the film with
jackhammer subtlety. The rest of the crew exhibit a bland affability.
There is no contentiousness, no friction to add the the dramatic
tension of these men and women being confined to close quarters for an
extended length of time. Maybe DePalma was going for the comraderie of
The Right Stuff, but in that movie, the astronauts had embers of
personality to warm us through the technical aspects.
It's the year 2020 and this is NASA's first manned excursion to the red
planet. A crew, led by Luke Graham (Cheadle), arrives on Mars and
quickly discovers an anomaly, which they investigate with tragic
results. Graham is able to transmit a garbled distress call back to
Earth. In response, Earth sends a rescue team comprised of McConnell,
Woody Blake (Robbins), wife Terri Fisher (Nielsen) and Phil Ohlmyer
(O'Connell). Obstacles are put in the crew's way and and they matter-of-
factly go about solving them. I should say, McConnell goes about
solving them. Time and again, McConnell is presented as some kind of
wunderkind, which wouldn't be so bad if the rest of the crew didn't
come across as so aggressivelly unremarkable. (Mention should be made
of the misogynistic handling of Fisher in a situation where the entire
crew's mission and life is in mortal danger. On a team of
professionals, she is portrayed as an emotion directed weak link. Women
serve no purpose in the movie other than to serve as a reflection of a
male character's personality trait.)
By the time they land on Mars and try to solve the mystery of what
occurred, Mission to Mars starts laying on the cliches and stilted
dialogue with a heavy brush. There is an adage in film to "show, don't
tell." Mission to Mars does both. Repeatedly. Characters obsessively
explain the obvious, explain their actions as they are doing them,
explain to fellow astronauts facts which should be fundamental
knowledge to them. The film's conclusion is momumentally derivative,
anti-climatic and unsatisying. As I walked out I wondered who the
target audience might be for this film. The best I could come up with
is pre-teen age boys, but in this media saturated era, this film's
components would have been old hat even for them. I have to think what
attracted such talent to this film was the lure of making a  good,
modern day B-movie. The key to such a venture is a certain depth and
sincerity towards the material. I felt no such earnestness.

Title
Review for X-Men (2000)

Cast: Patrick Stewart, Hugh Jackman, Ian McKellen, Halle Berry, Famke
Janssen, James Marsden, Bruce Davison, Tyler Mane, Rebecca
Romijn-Stamos, Ray Park, Anna Paquin
Writer: David Hayter
Director: Bryan Singer
Review by Scott Hunt
Movie Hunt: http://netdirect.net/~hunt/index.html
(Romijn-Stamos). It changes skins from social commentary to action film
to character study, never quite showing its face long enough to get a
good look. What's seen in those glimpses are the promise of a thrilling,
potentially thought provoking franchise of movies.
an allegory to man's oppression of man, whether it's racial or
ideologically based. The X-Men are a group of people whose genetic
makeup differentiate them from the rest of mankind. Their mutant DNA
gives them enhanced abilities. Some are powerful telepaths able to read
minds, such as the X-Men's leader, Professor X (Stewart). Others can
control magnetic fields, giving them mastery over anything with metal in
it, such as Magneto (McKellen). Still others have enhanced healing
abilities, or can create ice, or fire. Rather than consider their
abilities a gift, they are often viewing by those possessing them,
mutants, as a curse, serving to ostracize them from society.
The comic book series has been wildly successful for decades, mixing
kinetic, savage action with an often-blistering acuity for capturing the
despair of the downtrodden and disenfranchised. X-Men, the movie, gleans
the essence of the comic and effectively puts it on the screen.
The film opens as a flashback study of its villain, Magneto. Seen as a
young boy, his family is ensnared in the machinations of the Nazi war
engine as soldiers tear young Erik's parents from him as the family is
sheparded into detention camps. The experience unalterably shapes his
worldview. He thinks the only way for mutants to survive is to dominate
those who would subjugate his kind.
His opposite, Professor X, has a background that's only hinted at. He is
obviously rich and influential. He believes that humans and mutants can
co-exist, despite a senator's (Davidson) efforts to whip the country
into an anti-mutant frenzy. It's a thinly veiled allusion to McCarthyism
and the nazi regime. Professor Xavier is an ersatz King to Magneto's
Malcolm X.
With two decades worth of character development to mine and a squadron
of characters to manage, Singer succeeds with mixed results. Hayter and
Singer shrewdly balance the action scenes with character development,
but due to time constraints, some actors come off better than others. Of
the X-Men, worst of the lot is Storm (Berry), who not only is given
nothing to do, but has an accent that noticeably fades in and out.
Wolverine is an intriguing mix of toughness and emotional vulnerability.
Blessed/cursed with a skeleton made of indestructible metal, blade-like
claws that can project from his hands and the ability to heal from
almost any wound, he forges a surrogate father relationship with Rogue
(Paquin). Much of the film's empathetic and emotional strength draws
from the wellspring of their budding relationship.
Jackman plays Wolverine with the sharpness of ..... While the classical
theater trained Stewart and McKellen serves as solid bookends for the
acting ensemble, it's Jackman who provides the entrancing, substantive
middle. His Wolverine is perhaps the most confused and lonely of all the
deadly. Jackman could have done a lot of self-conscious posturing and
overly pensive emoting, thereby crushing any hopes the film might have.
Instead, he plays it remarkably straight. Wolverine is  a confused,
grown man yearning to find a place in the world, rather than a
wisecracking, super thug with the right answer to every situation.
Cyclops (Marsden), the X-Men's field leader and love of Dr. Jean Grey
(Janssen), projects a borderline arrogant smarminess.  An unbalanced
attempt is made at a potential love triangle between Wolverine, Cyclops
and Grey, but it's a sparkless connection.
Of the evil Brotherhood of Mutants, Toad (Park) and Sabretooth (Mane)
revel in the physicality of their roles. Sabretooth is an animalistic
sledgehammer of force, showing a reckless brutality unhampered by any
sign of true intelligence or cunning. Toad has all the grace of a grade
school bully, enjoying any opportunity to inflict pain with the warped
glee of a child burning ants with a magnifying glass. Romin-Stamos is a
bit of a cipher as Mystique. She has few words of dialogue and is
covered in blue scales and body paint, rendering her unrecognizable. Of
all the evil mutants, her presence is compelling. Is this due to some
heretofore-unseen acting ability, or the strength of the script playing
to her acting weaknesses?
The gist of the story involves Magneto's attempt to influence world
powers in embracing mutant kind, in the opposition to senator Kelly's
dogmatism on the subject. To that effect, he plans to use a special
device to genetically alter many of the world's leaders into mutants.
Xavier means to stop him. It's an admittedly simplistic story, but it
serves mainly to introduce the characters and set up conflicts for
future films. Hopefully future X-Men films will present themselves with
the same straight-faced earnestness of this one. By playing up the
humanistic angle, rather than heroic preening, Singer has made a film
that's accessible to both fans of the comic series and newcomers to the
storyline. There are obvious rends and tears in the fabric of X-Men's
script, but on the whole it plays as smart, fun entertainment with
promise. What more can you ask of summer fare?

Title
Review for Drowning Mona (2000)
Review by Scott Hunt   Visit me at Movie Hunt
http://netdirect.net/~hunt/index.html)
Cast: Danny DeVito, Bette Midler, Casey Affleck, Jamie Lee Curtis, Neve
Campbell, William Fichtner
Director: Nick Gomez
Writer: Peter Steinfeld
Ever watch a very young child try and tell a joke that is beyond his,
or her, sophistication? It's full of stops and starts and usually, the
punch line is ruined. I felt the same way watching Drowning Mona. Skip
a stone across water and you approximate the depth of this attempt at
an ensemble comedy.
There are some slightly successful attempts at humor, but they only
serve as window dressing. There is a running gag about the town,
Verplanck, N.Y., being a test town for the then new Yugo. Everyone
drives a Yugo, differentiating their cars with personalized license
plates. Even the Police chief drives one. There is a certain
sublimeness to the image of a lights and siren decked out Yugo
skittering its way through the town streets. There also is a running
gag about one of the characters, Jeff,  missing a hand and how it
occurred. It pokes gentle fun at the notion of urban legends. It turns
out the truth is more horrifying than any legend. There are some sight
gags that pop up as well, such as Mona's tombstone, which
reads "demoted", instead of devoted. Still, The core of the story
maintains the flatness of a still pond.
The lynchpin of the film falls on the redundant and sporadic scenes
involving Mona (Midler). Each scene with her is the same: scream at
someone, hit someone, then scream some more. There's no uniqueness or
modulation to her or explanation for her meanness. Anyone off the
street could have played the role, such as it is. The other characters
are walking cardboard cutouts. Each one is defined by one trait and no
further attempt is made at deeper characterization. There is a burly,
female car mechanic, so of course, there is a forced lesbianism gag.
Mona's son, Jeff (Marcus Thomas) is a simpleton, hence you can predict
his dialogue before it even plods its way from his mouth. Chief of
Police Rash (Devito) likes Broadway musicals and loves his daughter.
There's nothing more to him.  Elle, the chief's daughter (Campbell), is
bland personified, a dutiful girl with no higher aspiration than to
have a child and be married. Mona's husband Phil (Fichtner) Jeckle and
Hydes from shirking coward to reptilian letch. Bob (Affleck), Elle's
betrothed, and business partner to Jeff, is a mumbling, obvious
dullard. There is no contrast to any of the characters. By having at
least one character with some wit, or wits, to serve as counterpoint to
the others, perhaps Steinfeld's attempt at satirizing a small town
infested with ambitionless people might have come off better.
Ostensibly a murder mystery, Drowning Mona gives you almost all the
clues immediately, then lets you sit back and feel superior as you
watch the cast of paper people fumble their way to finding the killer,
who could be anyone due to Mona's loving manner with everyone on town.
Even that aspect of the film fails, throwing in a convenient,
ridiculous and unsatisfying wrap to things.
It's been a while since I walked away from a movie theater in an angry
mood. What makes it all the more remarkable is that I rarely remember a
comedy making me so angry for wasting my time at it's ineptitude.

Title
Review for Pitch Black (2000)
Review by Scott Hunt         Movie Hunt:
http://netdirect.net/~hunt/index.html
Cast: Vin Diesel, Radha Mitchell, Keith David, Cole Hauser, Rhiana
Griffith, Claudia Black, Lewis Fitz-Gerald
Writers: David Twohy, Ken and Jim Wheat
Director: David Twohy
Pitch Black is a sheep in wolf's clothing. It is full of darkness,
danger and violence and if you buy into the marketing hype, an
unsettling and scary film going experience.
Don't be fooled.  Pitch Black is a morality play masquerading as a
scare-fest. 
It starts off with blistering intensity. A cargo spaceship crash lands
on a planet apparently leeched of life by the scorching heat of three
suns.  Among the survivors is Fry (Mitchell), the ship's pilot, who
spends the film wrestling with the fact that she tried to jettison the
other passengers in her effort to land the craft safely. There is Imam
(David), an Islamic leader whose faith in his god is tested repeatedly
throughout the film. There is a law enforcement officer in the form of
Johns (Hauser), who attacks every situation with square jawed
authoritarian zeal. And there is Riddick (Diesel), a menacing,
muscle-bound convicted murderer who's being brought back to justice by
Johns. 
The group quickly sizes up the situation and each other. Confident in
their assessment of matters, a plan is set in motion to escape their
hellish environment. Those plans are shredded by the appearance of one
of the planet's wildlife, a predatory,  sometimes winged, species that
enjoys the taste of blood and flesh. Fortunately, the creatures are
light sensitive and are forced to live in networks of catacombs under
the planet's surface. Unfortunately, the group has managed to land on
the planet moments before an eclipse is about to occur, taking away
their one protection from the monsters. The group's savior comes in the
form of Johns, whose decisive leadership looks to deliver them from
purgatory. Or does it?
Pitch Black deviates from the standard sci-fi fare by avoiding some of
the stock "escape the boogieman" conflicts  the genre typically serves
up. Just as the planet gave a false facade of lifelessness, first
appearances given by the survivors proves to be just as false. The
excitement of the film comes not from the danger posed by the creatures,
but rather from watching the shifting allegiances and emotional growth
of the characters as the planet serves as a deus ex machina of sorts to
catalyze emotional growth. 
A recurrent theme runs throughout the movie of faith, whether it be
religious or in a person, and how that powers their  motivations. I
found it telling that an accidental death occurs early on due to the
misperception of a self professed atheist. Conversely, Imam constantly
contributes any good fortune to Allah. One by one, his perceived heaven
sent blessings are taken away and crushed. Imam is forced to reassess
his faith. Another character expresses belief in god, along with a life
long hate. Yet another character makes a decision that echoes the
sentiments of Christ about selflessness and has lasting repercussions
for several of group. It is a fascinating character study hiding under
the guise of a scare flick.
Special mention should be made of Vin Diesel, who intriguingly conveys
feral menace combined with a truly mesmerizing presence. His character
could have easily slipped into a parody of the baddass killing machine,
but Twohy and Diesel add surprising depth to Riddick. They can be
excused for the two or three Shwarzenegger-like catch phrases that growl
their way out of Diesel's mouth.
The movie has its flaws that can be nitpicked. The creatures do look
derivative of the ones in Alien. The dialogue isn't the freshest at
times, reminiscent of a bad comic book. Yes, the appearance of Riddick's
vision skills are more than a little timely considering the situation.
These trappings are on the periphery of the story Twohy is really trying
to tell. Twohy may have lured you in under the pretense of scaring you
with film fabricated boogieman, but he shows the real boogieman to be
the prejudices and beliefs we use to direct decisions in our lives.

Title
Review for Magnolia (1999)
review by Scott Hunt. Visit me at Movie Hunt  
http://netdirect.net/~hunt/index.html
Director: Paul Thomas Anderson
Cast: Tom Cruise, Julianne Moore, Philip Seymour Hoffman, Jason Robards,
Willim H. Macy, Melora Walters, John C. Reilly, Phillip Baker Hall,
Jeremy Blackman 
Magnolia left me relling from the theatre, staggering from the
relentless assault of an adventurous director reveling in his craft. At
nearly three and a half hours, Magnolia will strike some as a brute of a
film. It not only demands your attention, but challenges you to grasp
the significance of seemingly unrelated storylines and hidden
intentions. It is delirious, depressing, heady, pretentious, surreal
filmmaking. It's also a movie that will polarize its viewers.
Director Paul Thomas Anderson takes a talented cast, wraps them in a net
of interrelated stories and sets them spinning in a symphony of despair
whose song doesn't let up until an oddly exhilerating, biblically
influenced pseudo-climax. The character's make up a modern day Gomorrah
in the soulless way in which they live their lives. There is Frank
Mackey (Tom Cruise), a slithery snake charmer of men whose "Search and
Destroy" seminars teach how to mentally rape a woman to get into her
pants. There is Earl Partridge (Jason Robards), a dying media tycoon
yearning to make amends for a lfe of callousness by finding his
estranged son. There is game show host Jimmy Gator (Phillip Baker Hall),
a self absorbed TV icon who is hiding more than a few secrets from his
public. And there is police officer Jim Kurring (John C. Reilly), who
cloaks himself in the codification of organized religion and the legal
system, perhaps masking a man who needs rules to fuel his decision
making process.
Given equal weight are stories involving a coke-addled emotional cripple
(Melora Walters), a former TV quiz show champion (William H. Macy). a
materialistic, adulterous wife (Julianne Moore), a child (Jeremy
Blackman) victimized by a mentally abusive parent, and a caring,
empathetic nurse (Philip Seymour Hoffman). Hovering over all these
characters is a cloud of death, lies and despair. It is not a pleasant
movie.
There is not one bad note in the acting. It is affecting and layered and
wonderful. There is a moment where Tom Cruise wordlessly implodes that
rivals work he has done in whole films. Then he tops himself with a
mesmerizing deathbed scene. Walters plays her character with red-eyed
rawness and a fierce self-destructiveness that is anxiety inducing.
Robards convincingly portrays a fading whisper of a man, who still hears
a lion's roar when he speaks. Director Anderson has apparently given the
actors lattitude to emote. The problem is that he stays on them too
long. Julianne Moore's character, Linda, quickly escalates to a frenzied
pitch of guilt, tears, screaming and remorse and never backs  off from
it. After a few hours, it turns from interesting to chinese water
torture. Quite a few scenes, such as the game show, go on just a bit too
long and will be off-putting for those used to a pat 90 minute film
where the main theme is reiterated several times just in case you missed
it the first go around.
And just what is the theme? Alienation? Hopelessness? Anderson
challenges you to draw your own conclusions and he doesn't make it easy.
The film starts by showing three, strange and seemingly unrelated
events. It's a harbinger of the synchronicity to come. At times,
different stories reach reach key moments at the same time. Other times,
stories seem to veer off into uncharted territory, regardless of what
else is happening. Anderson is audacious enough to even have a group
sing in the middle of the film! What's surprising is that it mostly
works. If you have doubts about Anderson's intentions, I'll ask you to
pay attention to the final frame. Despite all the Sturm und Drang,
Magnolia ultimately speaks to man's capacity for hope and attempts at
redemption.
Despite Magnolia's needlessly long running time and its propensity for
uneven editing as Anderson plays the auteur, showing off fro the masses,
I have to admire his guts. This is truly adventurous filmmaking that
spits in the face of conventional storytelling.
My rating: A Bulleye. (4 out of 4 stars)
A side note: Helping anchor the film is a perfectly matched soundtrack
featuring Aimee Mann. Her lyrics often add depth to a scene thematically
while the actual music is both morose and beautiful. When she sings
"Save Me" at the end, it enhances the yearning felt by the characters,
just as "Wise Up" mirrors the anguish felt by all as they contemplate
their lives.

Title
Review for Mission: Impossible II (2000)
Cast: Tom Cruise, Dougray Scott, Thandie Newton, Ving Rhames, Richard
Roxburgh, John Polson,
Brendan Gleeson, Rade Sherbedgia.
Writers: Robert Towne, from a story by Ronald D. Moore and Brannon
Braga.
Director: John Woo.
Review by Scott Hunt.   Visit me at Movie Hunt
http://netdirect.net/~hunt/index.html
Rating: Rating: Near Miss  (2 out of 4 stars)
Towne and Woo take some chances with the burgeoning Mission Impossible
franchise and I'd like to say they pay off
handsomely. Fact is, they might owe you some change back. The pair,
under the supervision of producer Tom Cruise, have
tried to make the movie more intimate, cutting down the multi-character
team concept of the series and previous film, into an
american version of the Bond franchise. It's a star turn for Cruise and
he projects a sinewy sexiness with the material at hand.
It's just a shame he didn't have more to work with.
In paring down unessential elements, Towne neglected to strengthen what
was left. Relationships are left one sided and
motivations are murky. They've tried to make a humanistic spy film, but
stopped short of fleshing out the characters. Even the
main story  is simplistic, which isn't necessarily a bad thing.
Mission Impossible agent Ethan Hunt (Cruise) is called upon to recover a
package stolen by  renegade IMF agent Sean
Ambrose (Scott). IMF knows nothing about the package, save it is of
value and a potential threat to the world. In a prickly
meeting with his supervisor (an unbilled and Machiavellian flavored
Anthony Hopkins), Hunt is told he can assemble any IMF
members he deems necessary to his mission, but first and foremost, he
must enlist the aid of  master thief, Nyah Hall (Newton).
Eventually, we're shown that the package is the antidote to a lethal
super virus code named Chimera, which was developed
under the supervision of an evil pharmaceutical supervisor. Ambose aims
to loose the virus upon the world, holding the only
cure in is possession. It's not the most muscular of premises, but it's
solid and has potential.
Rather than have the audience simply "oh" and "ah" at the special
effects, Towne has admirably tried to set up some intriguing
character motivations. Hunt and Ambrose have a history from their IMF
days. It's one filled with mutual dislike and perhaps a
touch of jealousy on Ambrose's part. Nothing more is said about it.
Ambrose has a homicidal hatred of Hunt and properly
explored, could have given their confrontations far more impact that
good guy fights the bad guy. It's a tango performed with
shoelaces tied. It's a dance of death in which both sides stumble. Why
does Ambrose hate Hunt so? What made him leave
IMF? Was Cruise recruited to go after him because of the unspoken past
history? These are questions left unanswered.
Ambrose is unremarkable in his villainy. He is simply a petulant, greedy
and clever man. He isn't given any idiosyncrasies that
make him particularly fearsome or memorable. Seeing Hopkins brief
visage, I couldn't help but think of the menace of his
Hannibal Lechter character and how this film could have benefited from
such a chill inducing villain. Instead we're treated to
meglomaniac-lite.
Cruise and Newton not only are requisite gorgeous to look at, they  draw
you in with their "you are my soul mate" looks they
give each other. They share a primal attraction that is tastefully
shown. There are no shots of bare breasts, or lingeringly filmed,
titillating sex scenes. They don't seek to learn much from each other,
content to bask in each other's presence. If not for the
strength of Cruise's personality and the waif-like vulnerability of
Newton, the scenes, wispy as they are, could have fallen flat.
As it stands, there is a certain charm to watching their interaction.
Heaving a huge stone into pond of their relationship is the
revelation that Nyah once was Ambrose's lover. Instead of this fact
causing a ripple effect with later events, it makes nary a
splash.
Another misstep by Towne and Woo is that we aren't shown why Nyah would
have been attracted to Ambrose. Because of
this, their encounters are drained of dramatic tension. Just as with
Hunt and Ambrose, the dramatic impact is dulled by not
having more back story on the pair. For Ambrose's part, his attraction
seems based upon a pure animal lust, evidenced in an
almost comical scene where Nyah disrobes in front of him and his jaw
drops in glassy eyed lust. I felt as if I was watching the
Big Bad Wolf sizing up Goldilocks.
At times, the scenes of exposition with the characters becomes clock
watchingly slow. Fortunately the action scenes, which are
back loaded at the end of the movie are gripping, beautiful and just
plain fun to watch. Hunt breaks into the pharmacy company
in a sequence that whispers of the memorable Pentagon break-in scene in
the first Mission Impossible movie. Hunt, time and
again, dispatches foes with Woo's trademark, slow motion, ballet style
martial arts. Here's where the film really flexes it's
muscles.
Woo throws it all at us, explosions, car chases, motorcycle chases, two
fisted gun battles underscored by classical music, each
done in his distinctive style. Older time Woo fans will smile knowingly
at his usage of religious backdrops and birds on the wing.
There's an engrossing fight between Hunt and Ambrose that is thrilling
not just due to the camera work, which shows you the
impact of each blow, but the lack of music. It's a mano a mano fight
where all that is heard for periods are the sounds of kicks
landing and grunts of pain. Hunt doesn't dispatch Ambrose easily. It's
fight in which there is a sense of failure on Hunt's part, no
mean feat.
In stripping away the team feel of the movie, Ving Rhames, in particular
gets the proverbial short end of the stick. A resourceful and powerful
screen presence, he is reduced to being a one dimensional sidekick. It's
painful to see the big man shoehorned
into such a miniscule role. His character seems to be around only as a
link to the first film. Despite it's flaws, his portrayal of a
good agent finding redemption was a nice side story to the first film.
MI:2 is a fun, thrilling to watch film when it's not dragging itself
through the mire of exposition. With the talents behind such films as
Chinatown (Towne), the Killer and Face/Off (Woo), I expected a bit more.
It's entertaining fare, but hardly the stuff of
memorable movie going.

Title
Review for Wonder Boys (2000)
Review by Scott Hunt.   Visit me at Movie Hunt
http://netdirect.net/~hunt/index.html
Wonder Boys shambles along with the somnambulistic intensity of someone
who's taken far too much cold/flu medication. Suddenly nudged by the
thought that a point needs to be made, it concludes with a far too pat,
Hollywood ending. There are many satisfying moments of whimsical farce
and it avoids many a cliché, but the film rushes its resolution,
dulling its potential impact. Shining through the haze is an impressive
performance by Michael Douglas.
Douglas plays Grady Tripp, a university English professor caught in the
paralyzing grip of career inertia. Tripp is a "wonder boy", a prize
winning published author, who must now produce a second, equally
dazzling work. In a nice twist, rather than suffering from writer's
block, Grady is afflicted by something even worse. He can't seem to
finish his latest novel, which has bloated to 2000 plus pages and
continues to grow with the ludicrousness of a 50's B-movie monster.
There are other nice spins on traditional movie formulas and
characters. Grady is confronted by his girlfriend, Sarah (McDormand),
that she is pregnant. She also happens to be the university's
chancellor. She's also married to the head of the English department.
Ouch. Sexy, bright student Hannah (Holmes) rents a room in Tripp's
house. She would be just as happy sharing not only Tripp's room, but
also his bed. The cliché thing would be to have a passionate, graphic
sex scene between them. It doesn't happen. Morose, pensive student,
James Leer (Maguire), is a cipher. Grady finds a kindred talent in the
boy but rather than seeing a bit of himself in James, he sees a bizarre
flip side. James is a compulsive liar, obsessed with celebrity deaths,
and fiercely observant. Did I also mention he kills Sarah's husband's
dog and commits theft while at a university function? These events are
set against the backdrop of a literary weekend being held at Tripp's'
Pittsburgh based college.
Tripp is a chrysalis, wrapped within the insular cocoon of academic
life. He floats through a marijuana-shrouded fog, making half decisions
about his life. The film is about his journey into light. Or deeper
into darkness. Leer helps goose Grady into action.
Much time is spent on the relationship between Tripp and Leer. Grady
has an uneasy attraction to the boy's talent, soured slightly by a
touch of envy. Leer is indeed talented, quickly writing his first novel
as Tripp still trudges through his. As the two go through adventures
together, there is no ultimate feeling of satisfaction with Leer. By
making Leer such a compulsive liar, we aren't allowed to empathize with
his downfalls and triumphs. We never learn what makes him who he is. He
ends up being a walking collection of idiosyncrasies made flesh.
Along with the pressure exerted by Sarah , Hannah and James, two other
characters help push Grady along. A reflection of Grady's impotence
comes in the form of Rip Torn as  Q, a fellow writer. Q is able to
crank out a new novel every year and a half. Q has long ago bought into
his own hype. At one point, he addresses an assembly by starting with
the sentence, "I am.....a  writer". He bellows such a simple sentence
with an  aggrandizing self-satisfaction that border parody, but
maintains reality, by no small means through the dry, comedic skill of
Torn.
Terry Crabtree (Downey, Jr.), Tripp's agent, has also descended upon
the campus. Crabtree wants a look at Tripp's long promised novel. Drag
queen date in tow, Crabtree finds himself sucked into Leer and Tripp's
misadventures. Despite the external trimmings of Downey's flamboyant
character, Downey manages to tamp down the outrageousness of Crabtree
and give him a real earthiness.
In contrast to the zaniness involved in a many of the movie's other
situations, the film is a character study of Grady. His fuzzy wall of
indecision is pummeled by one ludicrous, yet believable, event after
another. Douglas comes across as sweet, confused, prideful...and
scared. For all his standing and bluster, he is still an 18 year-old
college kid trying to cope with events seemingly beyond is
comprehension.
There is a slow pacing to the first half of the movie. For me, a bit
too slow. Amusing insights are given into academic life and situations
are promisingly set up to be resolved, but suddenly everything is tied
up in a neat little bow. There is a key moment where Tripp is involved
in a situation where his life hangs in the balance. I kept thinking the
brave choice would be to take the hard route and not warp what had been
a intelligently written movie and shoehorn the ending so as to please
the masses. Alas, it didn't occur. Heaven forbid a character not be
allowed to walk off into the metaphoric sunset. Wonder Boys is a tasty
meal marred by sickeningly sweet dessert.

Title
Review for Next Stop Wonderland (1998)
see more reviews at MovieHunt   http://netdirect.net/~hunt/index.html
Are we victims of fate in life or can we create our own destiny?
Director/writer Brad Anderson seems to be saying yes to both questions
in his witty film "Next Stop Wonderland". The two main characters, Alan
and Erin, spend the entire movie in each other's orbit, catching
glimpses of one another, yet not quite connecting until the inevitable
conclusion. Is it fate that keeps them near each other and ultimately
puts them together? Does this predestination carry over to all aspects
of life?
As the film starts, Erin Castleton (Hope Davis), a melancholy 29- year
old late shift nurse, is ending her live-in relationship with her
boyfriend (Hoffman). Rather, he is ending it with her. Arriving home
from work, Erin finds her boyfriend parked in front of their apartment,
car packed with his belongings. In a fumbling, amusing and self
deluding ramble, he instructs Erin to watch a videotape he's made
detailing why their relationship is doomed to fail and why he's
leaving. It's obvious he lacks the courage to confront her directly as
he rails on about accomplishing something with his life and taking a
stand, all the while backpedaling his way out of their relationship. He
then flees the scene with the grace of an inept thief.
Erin's mother (Holland Taylor, in a surprisingly effective, small
role), fearing that her daughter will be without a man in her
life,takes out a personal ad for Erin. To Erin's embarrassed horror,
the ad describes her as a "frisky, cultured, carefree professional with
a zest for life". Eventually, Erin responds to the tidal wave of
responses, which makes for some of the most humorous, telling moments
of the movie as she meets prospective suitors and "poseurs".
Alan, a plumber and aspiring marine biologist, first spots Erin as he's
cleaning the inside glass of a fish tank at the Boston aquarium.
Wearing a wet suit and goggles, he follows Erin from window to window,
separated by the glass as Erin, oblivious to his gaze, enjoys the fish.
Later, we see him on a train as she sits on a platform outside, mere
feet away. The movie spends it's entirety having their paths circle
each other without crossing.
There are several subplots involving Alan. One concerns his attempts to
get on the job track at the Boston Aquarium, thereby escaping his
apparent fate to carry on the family plumbing business. Another subplot
involves his father's desperate attempts to force fate's hand by
gambling away his life at the dog track. A distracting focus is put on
Alan's debt to a loan shark and the manner in which he pays it off. The
movie tries too hard to make Alan a likable guy. Thankfully, his dream-
guy persona is counterbalanced by Erin's distant, yet fundamentally
hopeful, personality.
The film moves along at an unhurried pace, albeit too much so in the
latter third, as we wait for the two to meet. Co-writers Anderson and
Lyn Vaus throw a couple of possible red herrings into the mix as the
two find other possible relationships. The films shifts into a much
slower gear as we wait for these romances to blow over.
When Alan and Erin eventually do meet, we see that perhaps they both
were destined for each other as they share a lingering, almost
subliminally knowing, gaze. It's a sweet, measured moment. The
disappointment comes in the fact that we've come to know the pair, yet
we don't get to view their impending romance.
The film's inherent belief in the subtle persistence of fate and the
wonder it can bring to one's life makes "Next Stop Wonderland" a quiet
pleasure in a cinematic landscape littered with explosions, shallow
characters and overdone special effects.

Title
Review for Gone in Sixty Seconds (2000)
Cast: Nicolas Cage, Giovanni Ribisi, Angelina Jolie, Delroy Lindo, Will 
Patton, Robert Duvall, Christopher Eccleston
Writer: Scott Rosenberg.
Director: Dominic Sena.
Review by Scott Hunt
Movie Hunt: http://netdirect.net/~hunt/index.html
The stereotypical American male has an undeniable fetishistic love of sports 
cars. Producer Jerry Bruckheimer plays upon that attraction with a movie so 
loaded with testosterone and laced titillatingly with shot after frenetic 
shot of powerful muscle cars, sleek foreign road huggers and iconic speed 
machines that many males will leave the theater in an orgasmic haze. Gone is 
60 Seconds is an orgy of maleness gone horribly awry.
Cage is legendary retired car thief, Memphis Raines (don't you love cute 
movie names), who must call upon his time worn skills to save his 
thick-headed brother (Ribisi) from being killed. Seems a murderous crime 
boss (Eccleston) with a fetish for wood (insert your own joke) hired brother 
Kip to steal a ridiculous amount of expensive, exotic autos. Fifty cars, to 
be exact. Poor Kip screws the pooch and bungles the job badly. If the cars 
aren't delivered in three days, bossman has a casket carved out just for 
Kip. Literally. If only someone could save him. Hmmmm..wonder what Memphis 
is doing?
In order to give the film some emotional heft, there are several subplots 
designed to tug at our heartstrings or give us the thrill of...yawn, excuse 
me, dramatic tension. Shadowing Memphis is an old law enforcement foe 
(Lindo) who's looking to send Memphis away. Will he catch him? There's old 
flame Sway (Jolie), who had her heart broken by Memphis years ago. Will they 
get back together? Shortsighted, thrill seeker Kip idolizes his brother, yet 
resents him for moving away from the family. Will they reconnect? Raines old 
mentor (Duvall) has long since left the life of crime. Will Memphis get him 
finally caught as he pulls him back into the life, one more time? Can you 
answer all these questions correctly in 2 seconds without seeing the film 
first? I'll bet you can.
Following the opening credits, which fill you in on the accomplishments of 
the Raines family through a montage of old photos, we was taken full 
throttle into the splendor that is Memphis. He's first shown living the good 
life teaching young children to drive go-carts. In a later scene, as misfit 
brother Kip knowingly tells Memphis he has the stolen car situation under 
control, all the while making breakfast, a metaphor is made of Shakespearean 
proportions. Just as a pan of grease flares up with Kip clueless to how to 
quell it, big brother Memphis calmly and efficiently throws some salt on it. 
Looks like everything might turn out alright after all. You know this 
because the music swells on the crest of violins.
That's about as strong as the characterization gets, which is a shame. 
Bruckheimer has a real talent for loading his movies with an obscene amount 
of talent given the task at hand.  Monumentally underused Jolie portrays an 
empty headed sexpot whose idea of sex revolves around cars and Memphis. Or 
maybe it's just the cars. Duvall trots out his ornery, but sweet old codger 
outfit. I'm sure he's still laughing at taking a paycheck for this one. 
Lindo projects a warm hearted, but tightly focused detective that almost 
transcends the material. The biggest waste of resources is Vinnie Jones, who 
plays a mute accomplice of Memphis. Without saying a word, he is easily the 
most charismatic person in the movie. Like a blast of nitrous oxide, he 
attacks each scene with a straightforward zeal. Too bad his minutes onscreen 
are so few. Somehow, Bruckheimer manages to attract top Hollywood acting 
talent to high concept, poorly written movies, gussies up the film with lots 
of gold hues and pleasingly stylized action and they sell like proverbial 
hotcakes.
Every time something clever happens it's counterbalanced by something so 
overtly wrong that it jerks you back into realizing you're watching a movie. 
There's a innovative usage of black lighting that goes from being a novelty 
to a part of the plot. It's counterbalanced by an extremely feeble attempt 
at humor by having an Asian American repeatedly failing a driver's test. 
Imagine the yuks. There's a segment where one of the thieves shows another 
his cool fake fingerprint trick. It's countered by the lame semi-subplot of 
a car being stolen with a bunch of heroin in the trunk. The ramifications 
are never explored. Then there's the ridiculousness of the many cops who 
actually shoot at fleeing cars. Not only is it stupid, but it's against the 
law.
This is a movie made of pretty, but tepid car chases strung together by just 
enough character interaction to move the plot along. Gone in 60 Seconds 
aptly describes how long it'll take for this marginally entertaining, but 
empty film to leave your memory.


Title
Review for Romeo Must Die (2000)
Cast: Jet Li, Russell Wong, Aaliyah, Delroy Lindo, Isaiah Washington,
DMX, Henry O.
Writer: Mitchell Kapner.
Director: Andrzej Bartkowiak .
Review by Scott Hunt         Movie Hunt:
http://netdirect.net/~hunt/index.html
The story of Shakespeare's Romeo and Juliet has become so iconic that
the story crosses many cultural boundaries. It's a fine framework on
which to build a story about rival gangs, eastern vs. western morality
and forbidden love. The problem with Romeo Must Die is just as the
writer and director start building their clockwork beast, they suddenly
stop to admire their work without fleshing it out. It's a creation
whose heart pulses to the beat of slick marketing: the world of music
video meets Shakespeare. It's an unsteady creation.
The film teeters along a path in which it tries to be an action film
while haltingly being an examination of societal boundaries within the
code of honor amongst thieves. The story centers on two crime families.
One is Asian American. One is African-American. The Asian family is
headed by actor Henry O., whose son, Han Sing (Li), a former police
officer,  is in a Hong Kong prison for an unspecified crime involving
his father. In archetypical Hong Kong cinema fashion, the brutal death
of Han's brother brings him to America, seeking answers and revenge.
The other family is helmed by Isaak O'Day (Lindo), whose daughter and
ersatz Juliet, Trish (Aaliyah), wants nothing to do with the family
business. Both men are attempting to acquire oceanfront property in a
bid to acquire land for a shady developer looking to build an NFL
stadium for an Oakland expansion team. Whichever family is able to land
the deal will be able to emerge from the shadows of crime into the
world of legitimate businessmen.
Kapner and Bartkowiak try too hard to force the disparate themes
together. They've culled one of the basic tenets of Hong Kong cinema: a
family member being killed and the hero's ensuing search for justice.
Rather than the death being affecting, it feels perfunctory. Added to
the mix is a distractingly loud urban soundtrack that is a too obvious
grab for teenage viewers. (Especially when a song sung by Aaliyah was
being played as she was on the screen.) Layered on top of that is the
inert "romance" between Trish and Han. Though the pair are intimated as
having romantic feelings towards each other, there is nary a kiss or
profession of love between them. Perhaps this is a concession to a
perceived unmarketability of interracial romance, especially when both
parties are minorities? The script lightly touches on the notion of
race in America, but with such a feathery touch so as to be almost
unnoticeable. Interspersed throughout the film are fight scenes
involving Li. These are done to Li's disadvantage.
There are some unique situations for Li to present his on-screen
fighting skills. The first being a Houdini-like escape in which he must
overcome six prison guards as he is dangling in the air by one foot and
handcuffed. It could have been a memorable scene, however, the camera
flashes through the action so quickly that the confrontation becomes a
blur of colors and noises, rather than a mano-a-mano between men. Other
battles are ingeniously set up with Li using props such as a fire hose,
a belt and other items. Each scene is compromised by spastic editing
that doesn't allow full appreciation of the powerful, yet precise
fighting style of Li. During the fights, one can sense the marketing
gurus at work. Punches land and bones are broken, but it's done in a
bloodless and oddly politically correct manner. One innovation involves
showing an x-ray of an opponent as his bone, spine, etc, is broken.
Given the overreach of the material, several performers manage to carry
the film  on sheer charisma. Aaliyah acquits herself nicely, even being
given a crying scene that feels forced and too obvious a showcase for
her range. There is promise in her. Li has some moments where he
effectively and silently conveys a range of emotions, yet other times
he merely occupies the screen. There are snippets of the presence that
made him a star in Hong Kong, but this vehicle doesn't allow that
persona to fully surface. The always sturdy Lindo gives much needed
heft to the proceedings. Wong and Washington both radiate a handsome,
leading man glow that dims as they are gradually reduced to mustache
twirling villains. Maybe if Romeo must Die had sets its sights a tad
lower and gained some focus in the process, it might have been a better
showcase for Li and Aaliyah. As it stands, both partially cut through
the confused fog to show two emerging Hollywood lights. It's said that
a man's reach should exceed his grasp, but in this case, the filmmakers
went a bit too far and muddied things by taking on too much.

Title
Review for Shaft (2000)
Cast: Samuel L. Jackson, Christian Bale, Jeffrey Wright, Vanessa
Williams,  Busta Rhymes, Dan Hedaya, Toni Collette,  Richard Roundtree.
Writer and Director: John Singleton
Review by Scott Hunt         Movie Hunt:
http://netdirect.net/~hunt/index.html
Timing, the old saying goes, is everything. With the recent resurgence
in popularity of 70s movies and television, what better time to try a
sequel to Shaft? Although it's an exciting movie that briskly moves
along, it misses the soul of the original. Aficionados of the first film
might find that a bit unsettling. The original's wary pragmatism has
been replaced by a certain idealism. John Shaft of the original movie
was leery of whites and the establishment. He plied his trade in an
insular world that gave him a measure of comfort. He knew he couldn't
change the world, so he did what he could to better his little corner of
it. Today's Shaft, an Armani clad Samuel Jackson, is much more naďve.
This Shaft works with the establishment and is surprised time and again
when it lets him down. It's a marked and noticeable shift in tone. I
can't help but wonder how the newer film might have played if it took
the same anti-establishment, racially confrontational tone. But then
that wouldn't make for a wide based, commercially successful film, now
would it?
Samuel Jackson is the nephew of the original John Shaft. He's a
detective on the N.Y.P.D. who gets a brusque smack in the face when a
racially motivated killer is allowed to escape the country. Bale plays
Walter Wade, the killer, with a clench jawed bemusement at the melting
pot that is New York. There's a calculated, seething hatred behind his
smug smile that perfectly catches the skewed mindset of a sociopath. His
murderous rich kid has nary a chink in his emotional armor save devotion
to his dead mother. Eventually Shaft brings the kid in to face the court
system. His arrest brings him into contact with another of Shaft's foes,
Peoples Hernandez, a Latino drug lord.
The two men meet in jail and it's  one of a couple of fascinating
exchanges between the two. Hernandez quietly introduces himself to Wade
despite sensing Wade's distain. He's lured by the twisted prospect of
networking via the penal system. Wright takes the potentially
stereotypical Peoples to a mesmerizing level, playing him with a strange
effeminacy mixed with machismo. He knows he is society's scum, but has
enough self-awareness of his limitations to make him dangerous. When he
finally coerces Wade into dealing drugs for him, he does so with a
coiled cobra's lethality. As the film ricochets from side story to
gunfight and back again, Wade's menace fades as People's potency grows.
His unpredictable rages and manipulations to better his station in life
explode from the screen with the same fervor as Shaft's cool intensity.
It reaches its peak when he mourns the loss of a loved one, emphasizing
his grief with an ice pick. It's an image that will linger with you long
after leaving the theater.
The link between Hernandez and Peoples is Toni Collette's waitress, who
saw Wade commit the murder.  Wade wants Hernandez to find her. She makes
the most of her limited function within the film. At best she serves as
backdrop to show Shaft's compassion as the two have a quiet conversation
about her being a witness and how difficult it must have been for her to
be on the run for two years in order to evade both Wade and the court
system. Amid the rattle of the pervasive gun battles, it's a scene that
lands with a loud clunk.
Busta Rhymes has a supporting role as a sidekick of sorts for Shaft. He
basically serves the movie equivalent of television's wacky neighbor.
Vanessa Williams has a whisper thin role as a sometimes partner to
Shaft. Given the careening storylines of Shaft vs. Peoples, Shaft vs.
Wade, Shaft vs. the system, etc, there isn't much wiggle room for her to
do much.
Serving as totem of the first film, Richard Roundtree has a couple of
scenes where he tries to counsel the younger Shaft on the ways of the
world and  lure him into his private detective firm. It's a nice
counterpoint seeing the elder's contentment with the life he has made as
the younger man is self confidently still finding his way.
Shaft is peppered with snappy verbal exchanges and gun battles along
with some really solid acting. It's a fun, albeit, violent movie. Maybe
if it didn't try so hard to please all it's audience members and wasn't
so diffuse in trying to take the plot in so many directions, it might
have been a much stronger effort. As it is, it's a nice start to what I
imagine will become a franchise for the studio.

Title
Review for Shanghai Noon (2000)
Cast: Jackie Chan, Owen Wilson, Lucy Lui, Roger Yuan, Xander Berkeley,
Writers: Alfred Gough and Miles Millar
Director: Tom Dey
Review by Scott Hunt
Movie Hunt: http://netdirect.net/~hunt/index.html
Shanghai Noon is a paint by numbers picture done with finger-paints. There 
are no surprises as to where the paint is going and despite the pretty 
colors, it's far too messy to be considered good. In an attempt to replicate 
the previous success of Rush Hour, the writers have taken the "hero must 
travel to a strange land to save a kidnapped female" premise from the 
previous film and tried to shoehorn it into an Old West setting. In a sloppy 
attempt to disguise rehashed goods, an unsuccessful lampoon is made of 
Westerns. There are some amusing moments created through the sheer charisma 
of Jackie Chan, but overall, it's a feeble effort at displaying the skills 
of one of the premiere physical comedians in world cinema. The audience and 
Chan both deserve far better.
Like Rush Hour, Chan plays a hero who must rescue a kidnapped damsel in 
distress. In this case, he's a member of the Imperial Guard named Chon Wang 
sent to the Western territories of America, circa the late 1800s, to help 
deliver a ransom of 100,000 pieces of gold to a mission in Carson City, 
Nevada, and safely return Princess Pei Pei (Liu) to their homeland following 
her abduction by the traitorous Lo Fong. Following the cinematic tradition 
of buddy pictures, he meets up with Roy (Wilson), a bandit whom he first 
hates, then grudgingly befriends. The thin as onionskin premise just begs to 
be peppered with reams of whimsically staged displays of Chan's ballet-like 
fight scenes. It's a good fifteen minutes before Chan even remotely attempts 
a stunt. And when he does, it singularly unremarkable, involving a 
confrontation with some train-robbing bandits led by Roy. There is a bar 
fight midway through the film where Chan squirts from foe to foe, slippery 
as wet ice and a unique standoff between Chan wielding a horseshoe tied to a 
rope against armed combatants, but other than that, I'm hard pressed to view 
any of the other fights as especially unique to Chan. Anyone who's never 
seen martial arts films might be impressed, but I found myself greatly under 
whelmed.
Wang's partner Roy lends the movie an off-kilter skew with his surfer dude 
via the Old West mentality. Roy is an amiable bandit who is quixotically 
quirky in his approach to life. Although an acquired taste, is soft-spoken 
sarcasm and basic insecurity lends an interesting counterbalance to Wang's 
befuddled chivalry.
A cardboard cutout could have played the princess. As it stands, the fiery, 
charismatic Lucy Lui is criminally underused. How can we care about her fate 
when she is so severely underdeveloped a character? At least she fares 
better than Wang's American Indian bride (Brandon Merrill), who spends the 
entirely of the movie as a silent plot device, speaking only to deliver a 
trite, groan inducing punch-line at the end. Women tend to get short shrift 
in buddy films as window dressing, but these two aren't even given that 
common courtesy. It's a wonder women can even enjoy films of this type with 
their underlying misogynistic tone.
Amid the uninspired scenes are a few amusing nods to the classic western. At 
one point the men are hunted by Marshall Van Cleef (Berkeley), who looks 
more than passingly like Lee Van Cleef in the Good, the Bad and the Ugly. 
Roy has a Sundance Kid look about him that is played upon in a scene where 
the pair plans to bust through a wooden door, guns blazing, as in Butch 
Cassidy and the Sundance Kid. A weaponless Wang fighting tomahawk wielding 
Indians puts an welcome, odd spin on the cowboys vs. Indians theme as the 
fight goes down with nary a six-shooter in sight, using foliage as weapons.
It's obvious this film exist as feel-good, striving merely to entertain, not 
educate or examinate, but that doesn't excuse some of the distracting 
cliches and plot holes. Midway throught the film, Wang is unknowingly 
married to an American Indian woman, who risks her life time and agains to 
save him, yet by film's end, she inexplicable swtiches allegiances, ignoring 
her wedding vows for another man. Wang, a man ruled by tradition, honor and 
principles, does the same. At one point Roy is left for dead, buried up to 
his neck in dirt, a vulture picking at his head. Next scene he's playing 
cards in a casino, no worse the wear. It's a Houdini escape that begs 
explaination. Why do Lo Fong and Van Cleef both think Roy and Wang have the 
gold? Was there a crucial scene cut explaining their fallacious thinking, 
seeing as how the gold never left the custody of the three other imperial 
guardsmen who were transporting the gold with Wang?
Buddy films rely on charisma to carry them through typically threadbare 
plotting. Wilson and Chan display an unusual, yet warm chemistry, but it 
simply isn't enough. They have fun with what they're given, but it's obvious 
both of their considerable talents are suffocated by Filmmaking for the 
Masses 101. It would have been nice to see both men's talent breath under 
more clever, knowing filmmaking.


Title
Review for Gladiator (2000)
review by Scott Hunt. Visit me at Movie Hunt
http://netdirect.net/~hunt/index.html
My rating: A Bulleye. (4 out of 4 stars)
Director: Ridley Scott
Cast: Russell Crowe, Richard Harris, Joaquin Phoenix, Connie Nielsen,
Oliver Reed, Djimon Hounsou
Writers: David Franzoni, John Logan and William Nicholson
`People should know when they are conquered', intones a lieutenant to
General Maximus (Crowe), early in the film. It's a statement that serves
as a reflection of the indomitable force of human desire. Gladiator is a
film about man's ability to overcome near insurmountable odds. Homeric
in scale, it is one of those rare films that deserves the title `epic'.
Nestled within a grand tale of treachery, political maneuvering and
personal loss, it none-the-less takes time to savage the modern day
notions of sports and entertainment.
Crowe is General Maximus, pointman for the juggernaut-like Roman
military of Emperor Marcus Aurelius (Harris), an expansionist pricked by
nettles of guilt over his place in history. Harris effectively conveys
the weariness of absolute power checked by self doubt as he wonders if
his yearnings to build a strong Rome have smothered his philosophical
leanings. He visits Maximus on the battlefield as his army executes it's
final sweep in a 100 A.D. version of Manifest Destiny. The battle opens
the film. It's filmed in deeply saturated tones of dark yellow and blue,
contrasting the muddy, fog covered terrain against the warm flare of
archers lofting flaming arrows towards their targets. The whole film is
suffused with gorgeous colors, making it a truly beautiful movie.
Director Scott uses a frenzy of jumpcuts as the action blinks from
combatant to combatant. His pace is so frenetic that it becomes
indecipherable who is doing what to whom. It's disconcerting and
detracts from comprehension of the fighting. As the battle is won and
Aurelius praises Maximus for his leadership, Aurelius' son, Commodus
(Phoenix) ,arrives disingenuously asking if he has missed the battle.
The contrast between the leather clad, bleeding Maximus and the
misplaced looking, bejeweled silk and fur garb of Commodus signals the
near palpable difference between the two men.
As the army tends to it's wounds, the ailing Aurelius takes the General
aside for a father-surrogate son chat in which he pleads with Maximus
that he take control of Rome upon his passing. It is the Ceasar's wish
that the power of Rome by given to the senate, and by proxy, the people,
dissolving the dictatorship it has been under. It's a request that tears
at Maximus. A simple farmer at heart, he longs to return to his wife and
son, but can't deny his intrinsic devotion to the Roman empire. Later,
as Aurelius explains his decision of succession to Commodus, events
quickly take a turn into true Greek tragedy as Commodus kills his father
in a opportunistic fit of ambitious rage. The scene plays out better
than would be expected as Commodus shows no glee in the killing and
appears helpless to fight his naked desire. Phoenix plays Commodus  as
progressively unbalanced throughout the film, yet manages to project an
aura of animal cunning. He is a man seriously flawed, yet brutally
dangerous in the wielding of his power upon his father's death.
Revealed around the same time is a former love affair between Aurelius'
daughter, Lucilla (Nielsen)and Maximus. Time and again, much is made of
the unspoken love
between the pair. I found it a bewildering relationship as Lucilla
repeatedly betrays Maximus in the name of self preservation. It seems as
if Lucilla is supposed to come across as a sympathetic character as she
tries to temper Commodus' rage. The implication is that her actions are
driven by her maternal protection of her son, but as her transgressions
against both Commodus and the General escalated, I found myself thinking
her nearly as evil a monster as her brother. When she gives a speech
late in the film praising Maximus, it speaks as much of her hypocrisy as
it does to Maximus' strength of character.
Not to reveal the entirety of the events that unfold, but in quick
succession, Maximus must endure the stripping of his position, the death
of his family and being captured into slavehood, where he is forced to
become a gladiator.
As each gladiator event unfolds, with the stakes being no less than the
lives of the combatants, it cast a none too kind light upon today's
modern day gladiators in professional sports and our national
fascination with personal tragedy. Whether it was Scott's intention or
not, an argument can be made that the gladiator fights are a blistering
indictment on our tabloid crazy, insensitivity to the pain of others as
we look for entertainment, no matter what it's form.
As Gladiator (Maximus) rises through the ranks, he eventually comes into
conflict with his nemesis, Commodus.  Commodus comes to represent the
duplicity and scheming of politicians, while Gladiator speaks to the
force of human desire. As Commodus manipulates events in an attempt to
gain a perceptual advantage over Maximus in the populace's eyes, one
can't help but see an analogy to modern day spinmeisters and today's
national media in relation to the leeming-like whims of the general
public.
Crowe's Gladiator is a model of reluctant heroism. For him, fighting is
a functionality of survival, nothing more. He eschews flashiness unless
it is necessary. This is not a superman. He is a simple man, who is very
good at what he does. By downplaying the invincible hero aspect in favor
of a protagonist who bleeds, cries and suffers loss, the film ups the
meter on Crowe's already infinite watchability. Crowe's oft displayed
intensity adds dimension to what could have been a two dimensional role.
His yearnings and sense of loss take on a certain tangibility due to his
acting skills.
Oliver Reed is an equally strong presence as a gladiator trainer who
almost sells his soul as he panders to the masses thirst for
entertainment. Djimon Hounsou soulfully essays the role of Gladiator's
best friend and confidant.
Gladiator doesn't come across as a dissection of Roman politics, nor
does it particularly pander to the blood thirsty voyeurs lurking in its
audience looking for cheap thrills. It  manages to travel a middle
ground of  viscerally captivating, solid entertainment.

Title
Review for Jesus' Son (1999)
Cast: Billy Crudup, Denis Leary, Holly Hunter, Samantha Morton, Jack Black
Director: Alison Maclean
Writers: Elizabeth Cuthrell, David Urrutia, and Oren Moverman, based on the 
novel by Denis Johnson
Review by Scott Hunt   Movie Hunt: http://netdirect.net/~hunt/index.html
Jesus' Son floats along with the hallucinatory feel of a drug addict's sense 
of recollection. It's not so much a movie as it's a well made patchwork 
quilt of memories. Its tales are woven together through FuckHead, or F.H. 
(Crudup), an intrinsically sweet young man who stumbles into the drug 
culture of the 70's. He remembers his life in a stream of consciousness, 
often interrupting himself to fumble back and forth through the gaps in his 
memory. It has a severely episodic feel with no sequence carrying more 
weight than another, save one. The film is based upon a collection of short 
stories in novel form by Denis Johnson, which based itself on a line from a 
Lou Reed song, "....When I'm rushing on the run, and I feel just like Jesus' 
son..."
F.H starts on his decent through the unknowing lure of Jezebel-like Michelle 
(Morton), who shoots up in front of him after their first night of 
lovemaking as he looks on, cluelessly munching a bowl of cereal. Soon both 
of them are suffocating in a fog of drugs. Morton infuses Michelle with  
equal parts of feistiness and emotional dependence in a shaded performance. 
F.H.  displays an incessant hunger for Michelle's attention. Their love 
affair comes across not so much as heart felt emotion, but rather a vampiric 
sucking of life force. Drugs have leeched away part of their ability to 
connect with others and they use each other, much as a drug, to continue to 
feel something in their nomadic lives. Their love affair ends badly, as does 
anything F.H. touches, hence his name.
F.H meets a possible future version of himself in Leary's character, a worn 
sparkplug of a man who long ago quit firing effectively. His hollow eyed 
husk of a man takes F.H. on an employment opportunity that consists of 
ripping the copper wiring from an apartment that may, or may not, belong to 
him. They sell the precious metal to fund a day of drinking and heroin and 
simpleton F.H. considers it one of the best days of his life. F.H. sees no 
moral implication to his actions or others. He simply exists in the moment. 
Leary's character shows the consequences of such a myopic view of life, a 
fate F.H. almost shares, if not for the twisted touch of his love for 
Michelle.
Holly Hunter as sensitive woman with a touch of death, Will Patton as a 
smarmy, albeit brief suitor for Michelle and Dennis Hopper as a recovering 
drug addict clinging to life each get a vignette sprinkled with some sharp, 
revealing lines. They give solid readings, but none truly stand out as does 
Jack Black as a fellow orderly F.H. works with in a hospital emergency room.
Georgie's (Black) Zen-like lunacy fuels some of the few laugh out loud 
moments as he performs unauthorized surgery on a man with a knife stuck in 
his eye, or performs his own seemingly hunger induced surgery on some road 
kill. Not only is it black humor at it's finest, but turns a probing eye on 
F.H.'s inability to cope with momentous events in his life as his memory is 
retold in two different lights.
Several times, subtle allusions are made to Jesus, each done in a disturbing 
fashion. At one point F.H. looks through the window of a diner, the 
lettering on the window making it seem as it he has a crown of thorns. He 
follows a snakeskin wearing man for no reason off the subway, and is 
surprised to find himself inexplicably aroused by his encounter with the 
serpent. A couple of times, people make reference to him not being "the one.
Jesus' Son  meanders along pointlessly. There's no plot to speak of, simply 
a recovering addict's ruminations on what brought him to the point he is. I 
wanted to feel emotional attachment to the angelic F.H., but as the film 
ended I realized I didn't really know him, so how could I truly care about 
him? I saw what heroin had made him, but I never got a real glimpse at the 
man he was before his adventure in wonderland. In telling his tale, he never 
manages to connect with the listener.


Title
Review for Trois (2000)
Review by Scott Hunt   Visit me at Movie Hunt
http://netdirect.net/~hunt/index.html)
Cast: Gary Dourdan, Gretchen Palmer, Kenya Moore, Chrystale Wilson,
Bryce Wilson, Soloman K. Smith, Thom Byrd
Director: Rob Hardy
Writer: Rob Hardy
For a film touted as exploring relationships and Black sexuality, Trois
is surprisingly tame. Despite it's lurid subject matter and it's
passing nod to Fatal Attraction, it moves along with flat, uninspired
dialogue as it sets up a surprising climax that tries mightily to
overthrow the considerable dead weight of the rest of the film.
Freshly moved to Atlanta, Jermaine (Dourdan) and his wife, Jasmine
(Moore), have the trappings of a perfect life. They have a beautiful
house in suburbia. Jermaine is a lawyer on the fast track at his firm.
Jasmine is his supportive wife, who is finishing up her college
degree.  In an opening montage via a home video of the pair, we see the
unremarkable story of their marriage and early marital triumphs. This
is a couple that has it all. Into this Eden slithers the lure of lust.
Despite his outward appearance, Jermaine reveals himself as selfish and
covetous of his wife more as a possession than a person. A glimmer of
his true nature peeks out during an early sex scene with his wife as he
goes about his business, oblivious to Jasmine's concerns. We also find
that he has been relentlessly asking Jasmine to participate in a menage-
a-trois, much to Jasmine's dismay. As Jermaine puts it, "Don't you want
to be sexually free?"
Jermaine shares his desire with  co-worker Terrence (Smith), who
obligingly sets Jermaine up with a woman who might be interested in
just such an encounter. The woman, Jade (Palmer) is a direct
counterpoint to Jasmine. Jade, at one point was a college student, too.
Unlike Jasmine, she found herself pregnant, dropped out of school and
now struggles to make ends meet. To further reinforce their
differences, it's revealed that Jade is involved in a custody battle
over her son.
Inevitably, through liquor and a touch of duplicity on Jermaine's part,
the forbidden act is consummated. The aftermath of the encounter
sidesteps into Fatal Attraction territory as acts of violence are
perpetrated upon Jermaine's property with the hint that the violence
may escalate. By this point, Trois shows itself to be a soap opera
without the requisite melodrama: a Fatal Attraction without the social
significance.
The exploration of relationships is strictly superficial and
stereotypical. Jermaine comes off as insincere, sexually driven and
selfish. Jasmine is bland and subservient. Jade comes off a bit
sympathetically, but that is negated by her moral bankruptcy. Yet
another tale of a sexually aggressive "dog" of a man who imposes his
will upon his accommodating, innocent mate.
The last 10 minutes will undoubtly throw you a curve, but by this
point, will you even care? If the rest of the movie was as dynamic as
the ending, perhaps there could have been some freshness to it. As it
stands, Trois is pretty standard fare.

Title
Review for Whole Nine Yards, The (2000)
Cast: Bruce Willis, Matthew Perry, Rosanna Arquette, Michael Clarke
Duncan,
Natasha Henstridge, Amanda Peet, Kevin Pollak. 
Writer: Mitchell Kapner.
Director: Jonathan Lynn. 
Review by Scott Hunt         Movie Hunt:
http://netdirect.net/~hunt/index.html
Rhythm. I kept thinking about that word as I left the theater. At it's
best moments, the Whole Nine Yards has a certain rhythm. It comes from
some of the one on one conversations between characters. There is a
certain comic timing that reminded me of 1940's screwball comedies, like
a good Tracey/Hepburn film. Those moments weren't plentiful, but they
were joyful to watch.
The Whole Nine Yards centers on dentist Nicholas "Oz" Oseransky (Perry),
who is sleepwalking through life married to a shrewish wife (Arquette),
living a bland existance in Montreal. That all changes when Oz meets his
next door neighbor, Jimmy "The Tulip" Tudeski (Willis), a former Chicago
mob hitman recently released from prison for ratting out his former mob
associates. Because of Tulip's kiss and tell, a mob boss, played by
Pollock, wants him dead. The story careens along at a brisk clip as
there are double , then triple crosses and at certain points, you don't
know who is going to kill whom. Perry and Willis both play characters
we've seen before, but they imbue them with so much of their persona
that they gain an edge to them. 
Perry is the same character he's played on TV and in previous movies: a
sweet, somewhat clever guy whose unsure of what he wants in life. Willis
is the same pucker-mouthed, wisecracking, king of cool that we've been
seeing since his Moonlighting days. The difference this time is that
Lynn has gotten the pair down to a distillation of themselves. The
acting may not be a stretch for either actor, but there is a leaness to
their performances that works in their favor. Perry runs the gamut of
slapstick physical comedy to repeated double takes to a modest spit
take, a comedic classic. He bounces through the film with whiffle ball
lightness, while showing a certain restraint. He is amusing to behold. 
Willis manages to turn his trademark smirk into a mysterious Mona Lisa
smile, and that's the key to his performance. You think you know what
Tulip is thinking, but that smirk lingers a bit long as his eyes lock
uncomfortably onto another character and you sense the menace floating
behind that smile.
There are other nice acting turns. Amanda Peet, as Jill, Oz's dental
assistant, projects a sexy goofiness that is truly engaging. Natasha
Henstridge as Tulip's wife, holds the screen with subtle emotional
depth, that belies the swirl of zaniness surrounding her. Duncan, as
another hitman, lights the screen up with his self satisfied smile and
hulking presence. That isn't to say that everyone comes across so
effectively. 
It's obvious that Pollock and Arquette, as Oz's wife, were told to play
their parts over the top. The problem is that they go so far over the
top that they fall off the other side. Arquette adopts what is suppossed
to be a french accent, but it sounded more like a blend of French,
Chinese and an other-wordly language. Pollock garbles his way through an
unfunny hungarian speech affectation that had me yearning for earplugs. 
The Whole Nine Yards has it's moments, but it never climbs to the level
of belly laughs. I found myself chuckling at certain parts and smiling
in bemusement at others and there isn't a thing wrong with that. Just
because it falls short of going the full 10 yards, doesn't mean it's not
pleasant, very amusing film fare.
