Authors
<bams@3blackchicks.com>
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Meet the Parents (2000)
MEET THE PARENTS (2000)
Rated PG-13; running time 108 minutes
Genre:Comedy
IMDB site: http://us.imdb.com/Details?0212338
Official site: http://www.universalpictures.com/meettheparents/
Written by: James Herzfeld
Directed by: Jay Roach
Cast: Ben Stiller, Robert De Niro, Teri Polo, Blythe Danner,
Owen Wilson, Nicole Debluff, Jon Abrahams, James Rebhorn (Larry Banks),
Phyllis George (Linda Banks)
Review Copyright Rose Cooper, 2000
Review URL: http://www.3blackchicks.com/bamstheparents.html
Whatever special water Robert De Niro drinks that makes him so talented,
somebody oughta bottle it up and give it to Hollywood's 20 Million
Dollar Club (you hear me, DiCaprio?).  Serious or funny, De Niro runs
big time circles around those so-called stars earning boucoup bucks.
Oh yeah: and Ben Stiller ain't so bad, either.
The Story (WARNING: **spoilers contained below**):
MEET THE PARENTS is a comedy of errors: most of which were made by Greg
Focker (Ben Stiller).
Greg, a male nurse, is in love with elementary teacher Pam Byrnes (Teri
Polo), and wants to marry her; but just before he has a chance to
propose, he finds out Pam's father Jack (Robert De Niro), a "rare flower
dealer", expects any potential suitor of his daughter to ask him for her
hand in marriage.  Since Greg has yet to meet Pam's family, they set off
to meet Jack and Pam's mother Dina (Blythe Danner) during the weekend
when Pam's sister Debbie (Nicole Debluff) is preparing to marry her
doctor boyfriend.
Greg's suitcase, which didn't fit in the plane's overhead storage, is
lost by the airline - and from there, a series of interconnected foibles
befall Greg, affecting the whole Byrnes family, much to the
consternation of Jack, who doesn't like or trust Greg - even though Jack
has a secret or two of his own.  And yes: Wackiness Ensues.
The Upshot:
There were a bunch of folks in this cast - decent supporters, all - but
make no mistake: this puppy was Robert De Niro's and Ben Stiller's to
play with.  And play with it, they did.
That Ben Stiller could crack a rib or two, comes as no surprise; the man
had me near tears as his weekend went swiftly to hell in a great big
basket.  When his character, Greg, ran back into the house after
he...well, I won't spoil it, even though it's a scene that's been shown
in numerous trailers already.  Suffice it to say that the audience
erupted with laughter when Greg jumped through the upstairs window.
Though I've not liked him all that much in the past, Stiller's comedic
timing in "Parents", as well as KEEPING THE FAITH earlier this year,
really gave me pause to reconsider.  If nothing else, like Jack said,
I'll be keeping my eye on Mr. Stiller.
But De Niro was like a treasure found for me.  I won't waste my time or
yours in recounting the dozens of serious movies in which he worked his
acting magic; and though I've seen him crack a smile or two in flicks
like MIDNIGHT RUN and WE'RE NO ANGELS (and, of course, as an
ObMobster-type in ANALYZE THIS and similar fare), in "Parents", his mere
facial twitch, or "innocent" crack, kept the audience roaring.  I can't
wait to see his next comedy showcase.
The weakness of this movie was that there were too many characters, and
situations, that were left underused.  Blythe Danner was game as Jack's
ditzy wife Dina, but De Niro could've almost as easily gone it alone
without too much muss and fuss.  The rest of the family seemed equally
mere appendages, as if writer James Herzfeld needed to include a "whole
family" for Greg and Jack to bounce their lunacy off of.  And it's a
crying shame that the dysfunctional natures of both Pam's ex-boyfriend
Kevin (Owen Wilson) and her brother Denny (Jon Abrahams) weren't further
explored; surely, those characters had much more to offer than being
simple "straight men" for Greg and Jack.
Fun though MEET THE PARENTS may have been, by concentrating almost
exclusively on two characters out of many, it wasn't as great as it
could've been.  Still, I noticed no shortage of grins, and had a good
time remembering the first few meetings I had with my now-husband's
family.  At least I never had Issues with raw sewage...
Bammer's Bottom Line:
At times Laugh Out Loud hilarious, MEET THE PARENTS re-introduces a
different, funnier side of Robert De Niro to the world (or at least, to
that part of the world that didn't bother with that "Rocky And
Bullwinkle" mess).
MEET THE PARENTS (rating: greenlight):
But who knew that they could come up with funny riffs on the name
"Focker"? [end Sarcasm]
