Authors
John Paul Powell
Number of Reviews
9

Title
Review for Four Rooms (1995)
Published In The Outreach Connection Newspaper (Jan. 18, 1996)
Starring: Tim Roth, Antonio Banderas, Jennifer Beals, Ione Skye, David Proval,
          Madonna, Valeria Golino, Paul Calderon, Bruce Willis and 
          Quentin Tarantino.  
The origin of this atrocity began four years ago. Directors Allison Anders
(Gas, Food, Lodging) Alexandre Rockwell (In The Soup) and renaissance man 
Quentin Tarantino (Reservoir Dogs, Pulp Fiction) smoked the 1992 film 
festival circuit. Fresh and hip, the trio bonded like two socks and a 
sweater on tumble dry.  
Shazam! Inspiration zapped Alexandre Rockwell. Why couldn't they merge 
their talents and shoot a picture? (Mistake Numero Uno) They rang up 
philosopher king Richard Linklater (Slacker, Dazed And Confused, Before 
Sunrise). "Thanks but no thanks," was his reply. Smart move, O' Wise One.  
Quentin conned bud Robert Rodriguez (El Mariachi, Desperado) and Rockwell 
drew up the guidelines: four stories Crazy Glued by a rookie bellhop, a 
run-down Hollywood hotel and New Year's Eve. Everyone wrote their script 
in isolation, submitting it upon completion. (Mistake Numero Two-o) 
The opening segment (The Missing Ingredient) showcases a coven of witches 
renting the Honeymoon Suite. Broom carrying-Broomhilda-Wicked Witch Of The 
West crones they ain't. We're talking Valeria Golino, Alicia Witt, Lili Taylor
, Ione Skye, Sammi Davis and Madonna. Prior to filming, Madonna had an  
apparent advantage over the other actresses. She didn't have to research 
the part.  
At their beck and call is Ted (Don't Call Me Theodore!) the bellboy. It's 
Ted's first night on the job and he's as tightly strung as Alex Lifeson's 
guitar. Unbeknownst to Ted (Tim Roth-Mistake Numero Four-o), he stocks the
"missing ingredient" for the coven's resurrection spell. All in all, it's a
sticky situation. (Mistake Numero Five-o) 
Ted cannonballs out of the frying pan and into the fire delivering a bucket of
ice. (Boy. These guests are lazy sloths.) By mistake, he walks in on a married
couple. The wife (Jennifer Beals) is tied to a chair and gagged. Oops. Wrong
room. Red-faced, Ted apologizes and retreats. The business end of a .357
Magnum stops him cold. The Wrong Man in the wrong place at the right time, Ted
humors the sickos until he can split the scene. (Mistake Numero Six-o) 
Two child actors (Lana McKissick and Danny Verduzco) outshine Antonio 
Banderas in The Misbehavers. Gangster dad (Banderas) pays Ted to babysit his
Damien-Omen children so he and his wife (Tamlyn Tomita) can paint the town 
red. The parents book. Ted's left in charge. Scratch one Towering Inferno 
hotel room.  
Witches. Sexual deviants. Snot-nosed brats. Minimum wage or no minimum wage.
Tips or no tips. Ted calls in his resignation. The hotel manager (Marisa 
Tomei) begs Ted to complete one last task.  
Staying in the penthouse is comedy star Chester Rush (Quentin Tarantino) 
and friends. As instructed, Ted fetches them a chopping block, a bucket 
of ice, a roll of twine, three nails and a hatchet. The occupants intend 
on recreating an episode of Alfred Hitchcock Presents.  
In The Man From Rio, Peter Lorre bets Steve McQueen his new car if McQueen can
ignite a cigarette lighter three times in succession. If McQueen fails, his
finger is lopped off. In their drunken stupor, Rush and pal Norman (Paul 
Calderon) make an identical wager: Rush's sports car for Norman's digit. Ted 
is paid handsomely to, if need be, drop the hatchet. 
Four Rooms is a heartbreaker. Braced by Tarantino's leverage, the four
directors had the chance to really do something special. They blew it. To
feast on the Tarantino/Rodriguez double-bill (The Man From Hollywood, The
Misbehavers), we have to sit through a pair of real snoozers. The Missing
Ingredient and The Wrong Man are contributions Allison Anders and Alexandre
Rockwell would have been better off locking in a musty chest and stashing it
in the attic.  
As a Tarantino junkie myself, I know what you are presuming. Two outta four 
ain't bad, right? Hold yer horses, pardners. Tim Roth's inept execution tips
the scales.  
I'm not even sure what the hell he was attempting. Roth walks as if he had a
phone booth shoved up his ass and behaves as if a car battery was attached to
his testicles. Every line and movement is exaggerated. A magic mushroom 
induced imitation of Jerry Lewis? A bungled try at physical comedy? Whatever
that was, it's bleeding annoying and excruciating to behold fine actor 
self-destruct.  
(Audible sigh) Quentin. Quentin. Quentin. You wanna support your friends. I 
respect that. A good friend will and should go to the wall for a chum. Chums
though can't properly judge their friend's work. They'll politely stifle their
genuine feelings so yours won't be bruised.  
Plainly put, no director was hurt during the filming of this motion picture.  
Four Rooms is rated E for Erratic. Beals rifling off synonyms for "penis" - 
Madonna wearing a designer Glad Bag - Tim Roth + one pickled corpse + a 
sister drop-kicking her brother Bret Hart style + guest star Marisa Tomei 
sucking on a bong - Allison Anders + Tim Roth smacking a cig out of a 
punk's mouth (twice) + waaay underage drinking - Alexandre Rockwell - 
semi-nude witches doin' the Twist = Big-o Mistake-o. 

Title
Review for Casino (1995)
Published In The Outreach Connection Newspaper (Nov. 22, 1995.) 
Starring: Robert De Niro, Sharon Stone, Joe Pesci, James Woods,
          Don Rickles, Alan King and Kevin Pollak.
Directed by: Martin Scorsese. 
Screenplay by: Nicholas Pileggi and Martin Scorsese.
Based On The Book by: Nicholas Pileggi.
Produced by: Barbara De Fina.
A Universal Pictures release.
     "They call it Paradise.  I don't know why.  To call some place
Paradise ... kiss it goodbye." - The Eagles (The Last Resort)
     The Mormons were bright bulbs.  They moved in, spent two years
milking cows and praying, then split.  In 1864, the army built a fort
protecting prospectors from rattlesnake/cactus swarmings and the
occasional coyote drive-by shootings.  In 1931, the Nevada legislature
took a sledgehammer to Pandora's Box.  Quickie divorces and gambling
were legalized.  Sin City rolled out the welcome wagon.
     Las Vegas.  In Spanish, it's "the meadows."  Meadows where money
DOES grow on trees.  The politicians planted the seeds.  Organized
crime picked the fruit.
     Mob hirelings Lefty Rosenthal and Tony "The Ant" Spilotro were
among a host of crooks operating casinos and skimming the till for
out-of-state bosses.  Rosenthal, the superlative gambler was the
brains.  Spilotro, the muscle.  Though Martin Scorsese and
writer/journalist Nicholas Pileggi swapped names (Sam "Ace"  Rothstein
and Nicky Santoro); CASINO shadows Lefty and Ant's paradise flushed.
     Rothstein (Robert De Niro) is the mob's cash register, the
fictional Tangiers Casino frontman.  He minds the store, oversees
employees and patrons, puts out the trash (undesirables) and regulates
the take so the bosses get their cut.  He pulls the wool over
everyone's eyes.  The city, the press, the politicians hail him as a
community leader.  Rothstein is stunned. "Back home, they put me in
jail for what I'm doing.  Here, they give me awards," he says.
     Nicky Santoro (Joe Pesci) handles the "complications."  He
safeguards the investment.  The psychopathic pitbull cracks skulls and
if need be, buries troublemakers in the desert.  Dead rats don't chat.
     The green comes pouring in.  Bosses are happy counting the
profits.  Rothstein is content running the casino.  Everyone's
delirious save Santoro.  He craves the Big Score.  It's Las Vegas,
circa 1973.  Nobody's eyeballing the bank vault.  If you've got the
balls, they'll do everything but hold the door open as you loot the
joint.
     Santoro's gluttony rocks the boat and Rothstein treads water.
Dunking Rothstein are his pill-popping, booze-swilling, blood-sucking
tipsy wife Ginger (Sharon Stone) and her bottom feeding chum Lester
(James Woods).  The internal wrangling nukes Eden.
     Martin Scorsese loves the material.  You can tell.  It's in the
detailed plotting as Scorsese steers us behind the scenes.  A gambler
bets and loses, the cash is brought to the casino vault where it's
counted and packaged.  A middleman nabs the money (the "counters" look
the other way), fills a case, drives to the airport and boards a plane
to Kansas City, motors to a nondescript bakery and presents the case to
the bosses.  Scorsese and Pileggi have done more than their homework,
they've aced the final exam.
     It's in the performances Scorsese commands.  Parroting his
Goodfellas part, Joe Pesci talks tough and goes ape-shit.  We chuckle
and we cringe.  Under Scorsese's guidance, we observe what Sharon Stone
is capable of if she spends time concentrating on acting and not
doffing her duds.  CASINO is her foremost accomplishment.  Normally,
anyone wearing a flashy pink suit would have popcorn and spitballs
lobbed at them.  But this is De Niro and we wouldn't dare.
     It's in the realistic dialogue and violence.  De Niro and Pesci
relate their inner thoughts via narration.  The gritty, colourful,
witty dialogue underscores the biographical content, as does the
violence.  There are four brutal scenes that caused Yankee censors to
stain their pants and badger Scorsese with the dreaded NC-17 rating.
Scorsese doesn't fade to black or cut away.  Why should he? These are
gangsters, not Avon reps.  Gangsters commit repellent deeds.  Like it or
not, that's life.  That's reality.
     Censor Boards, why worry? We're adults.  We're potty trained.
Look ... we can even tie our shoelaces.  By fingering the violence, you
shelve the message.  The mob angle is actually the framework for a
morality tale.  Of how greed can corrupt, how love can blind and how
mistrust can poison any relationship.
     CASINO is rated M for Masterpiece.  Two exploding cars.
Gratuitous 70s blue eyeliner.  Ventilated craniums.  One head crushed
in a vice.  Guest star John Bloom (a.k.a. movie critic Joe Bob Briggs).
Two baseball bat attacks.  Blueberry muffins.  Gratuitous Frankie
Avalon.  No Wayne Newton.  Three old fossils (Steve Allan, Jayne
Meadows and Jerry Vale).  One Black and Decker hammer attack.  Pesci
Gin-Sus a drunk.  Half the Smothers Brothers.
Outreach Rating: 10 high rollers / 10.

Title
Review for Primal Fear (1996)
Originally published in the Outreach Connection Newspaper
(April 4, 1996)
I confess. I throw myself on the mercy of the court. Yes, it's true. I was one
of the bazillion people glued to the Simpson trial. Scantily clad women
lathered in oil could parade through my living room tossing hundred dollar
bills in the air and I wouldn't have blinked.  
Ok. You got me. I would have. But only to snatch up the dough as my wife would
sock me into next Thursday if I gaped at the gals. (She has a mean right hook,
yah know!) 
Of the droning testimony, the bombastic grandstanding and the farcical 
courtroom antics, what sticks in my mind is a distraught Christopher Darden
breaking down at the prosecution's post-verdict press conference. His throat
seizing and choking off the words. Darden weeping openly, whispering an 
apology to the victim's families and stumbling away a broken man.  
Christopher Darden thought his cause was just and true. He was championing
good. He was defending the victims. Good wins out over evil...doesn't it? In
comic books, movies and novels maybe, but not in real life. Killers go free.
Children die. Dictators hold power. Innocent people suffer. Crimes go 
unpunished.  
At times, evil does triumph and when corrupted souls prevail, raising their
hands in victory isn't enough. They smirk from ear to ear. They spit in your
face. They rub your nose in it. That's the nature of the beast.
Darden swallowed the bitter pill that we carbon-based humanoids can't and 
won't accept: the undisputable fact that life isn't fair. Don't look for any
Christopher Dardens in Primal Fear. The opposing lawyers (Richard Gere and
Laura Linney) concern themselves more with humiliating their counterparts,
petting their egos and padding their bank accounts than seeking the truth.  
Ignore the Hollywood actors and you have yourself a documentary crucifying
the legal profession.  
Defence attorney Martin Vail (Gere) is a bleached Johnnie Cochrane. You can
mow down a kindergarten class in broad daylight. Not a problem. Vail has no
qualms about defending you. As long as you don't admit responsibility and the
case promises to put his mug on the evening news; he'll take you on in a
heartbeat. Don't have two dimes to rub together? Relax. If it's a high-profile
case, Vail will bill the State. 
What distinguishes Vail from the likes of Cochrane is that Vail is man enough
to acknowledge that he's in it for the fame. Which is what causes him to 
quickly lay claim to the Butcher Boy Of Saint Mike's case. 
Aaron (Edward Norton), a transplanted hayseed is charged with the murder of an
Arch Bishop. (Which chimes in at about 10 million Hail Mary's. Give or take a
few hundred.) Arch Bishop Rushman's body was found carved like a Christmas
turkey, a mysterious message carved in his chest. Aaron was seen fleeing the
scene. Johnny Appleseed insists that it wasn't he who mistook Rushman for a 
holiday bird but distinctly saw a shadowy figure (That shadowy figure again?
Does he get around or what?) standing over the body. If Aaron is convicted 
it's say goodnight Gracie.
Prosecuting Appleseed is Janet Venable (Linney), Vail's former six month one
night stand. Hell hath no fury like a woman scorned. Vail is in for the fight
of his life. 
The true test of any courtroom drama is whether or not it sedates the audience
when the trial takes centre stage. Primal Fear shrewdly side-steps this 
impasse by fast forwarding the proceedings. The pacing meets with applause.
It's the casting that begs for a raspberry.  
Martin Vail is as unscrupulous as they come. He doesn't bend the rules. He 
ties them in friggin' knots. Vail steals evidence from the crime scene. He 
defends gangland bosses. He threatens uncooperative witnesses. Richard Gere is
not suited for this role. His appeal detracts heavily from Vail's unethical
actions. The violations don't seem as grievous because they are committed by
the charming Richard Gere.  
Primal Fear is Lens Man Gregory Hoblit's feature film debut. Hoblit has won
bushels of Emmys for directing and writing duties on such hit programs as
Hill Street Blues, L.A. Law and NYPD Blue. (He also contributed to Steven
Bochco's Cop Rock but I won't hold that against him.) Hoblit's extensive
television background is as transparent as transparent can be. The means
by which Hoblit jumps from scene to scene and the film's overall look
mirrors television's uninspiring "point and shoot" rational.
Withdraw Steve Shagan and Ann Biderman's gripping screenplay and you 
could cite Hoblit for impersonating a director.  
Edward Norton - Hoblit's aerial shots x Frasier's Dad (John Mahoney) swearing
up a storm - Richard Gere as Vail x Venable breaking communist anti-smoking
laws + one naughty video tape x Gere for saying to Norton: "Now for the 
important stuff. What's your suit size?" - Hoblit's Boob Tube style x shish
kebabed fingers - perturbing Male/Female posturing + two wild foot chases x a
bold conclusion - a wasted Alfre Woodard = lawyers take it in the shorts. 

Title
Review for Balto (1995)
Once upon a time, there was a real Balto. While cosmopolitan city folk raised
their glasses to the roaring twenties, a catastrophic epidemic cloaked the top
of the world.  
Diphtheria. Highly communicable bacteria which infiltrates the human body. 
Potent toxins saturate the bloodstream. Air passages are progressively 
obstructed. If antitoxin isn't administered, the victim can suffocate and die. 
Savage blizzards assailed the North. Helpless citizens of Nome, Alaska, held
vigils at their children's bedsides. The much-needed antitoxin couldn't be
transported by boat, train or airplane. Mother Nature had scrapped that plan.  
Sled dog "musher" Gunnar Kaasen hooked up his dogs (Balto as the lead), braved
the treacherous weather, completed the final leg of the relay and delivered 
the medicine. The "Great Race Of Mercy To Nome" succeeded. The children were
saved. To this day, an annual race is held to commemorate the altruistic 
actions of man and beast.  
Balto, the animated adventure, reinvents history. Half-wolf and half-dog, 
Balto is an outcast. The residents don't trust his unpredictable nature. They
fear he will let the wolf in him assume control, gobble up their children 
and drink from their toilets when they're not home. About as popular as TV's 
Central Park West, Balto lives in a wrecked ship on the outskirts of town. He 
ain't got cable but he's got pals: two cuddly polar bear (Muk and Luk) and 
Boris the goose (who Balto asserts is the reason the other geese fly South).  
Balto falls head over tails for Jenna (Bridget Fonda's yap). Eyes meet.  
Tails wag. Noses nuzzle. Dreadful news pours cold water on their tender
courtship. Jenna's owner (Rosy) has contracted diphtheria and the sled dog
team is MIA. Rosy's chances of surviving are slimmer than an anorexic 
attending Weight Watchers. Balto won't play dead. He's determined to 
locate the missing team and lead them home.  
It is abundantly evident that the producers were mindful of their audience. 
The Northern terrain tests Balto's endurance. Avalanches, blinding snowstorms
and frigid temperatures pound our hero. Fearsome foes test his wisdom and 
relay a profound message to children. Early on, Balto is set upon by an 
irrational, gargantuan bear. Back against the wall, Balto defends himself. He
does however attempt a peaceful resolution when his arch-nemesis Steele (Jim
Cummings' pipes) won't hand over the antitoxin.  Steele slaps him down 
over and over. Balto absorbs the blows, appealing to Steele's conscience. 
Kids don't have to be Little Man Tates to connect the dots.  
The British animators commissioned to work on Balto bring something old, 
yet new to the sketch board. Most commercial animators these days are 
cranking out high-tech polished work. The idea is to fool us into 
thinking we aren't watching a series of moving drawings. The settings in 
Balto emulate this pervasive notion. They are gloriously rendered, 
airlifting us to the heart of Alaska. What differentiates Balto is the 
characters truly look like illustrations. The simple drawings are 
curiously attractive.  
For a long while, kiddie flicks have been appallingly depressing. As 
chipper as a funeral in the rain. As uplifting as a six-storey F on 
yesterday's homework assignment. Babe. Pocahontas. Toy Story. Balto.  
Hollywood has come to its senses. Better late than never, I suppose.  
Lucky us. Let's keep our fingers and toes crossed.  
Balto is rated I for Inspirational. Gorgeous scenery + one snowball fight 
a tune sung by Steve Winwood x one bad ass bear + a live-action wraparound 
sequence x no annoying, cute musical numbers + one doggy make out scene = a 
furry role model for children.  

Title
Review for Pallbearer, The (1996)
Originally published in the Outreach Connection Newspaper (May 3, 1996)
Starring:    David Schwimmer, Gwyneth Paltrow, Barbara Hershey, Michael 
             Rapaport and Toni Collette. 
Written by:  Jason Katims and Matt Reeves. 
Directed by: Matt Reeves. 
Produced by: Jeffrey Abrams and Paul Webster. 
             An Alliance Communications release.  
(Sung to the tune of "I'll Be There For You:The Theme To Friends" by The 
Rembrandts.) 
Tom Thompson can't find a job, no matter how he tries.  
Graduated the head of his class.  
He can't take flippin' fries.  
Tom lives with his mother, she's such a dear.  
Turning thirty in a bunkbed is his greatest fear.  
Lost and lonely, Mrs. A gives Tom a call.  
Ruth insists Tom's a friend of her son's.  
He doesn't remember Bill at all. 
Mrs. Abernathy cries fibre-optic tears.  
Tom doesn't have the heart to tell her and the truth disappears.  
Tom and pals write a eulogy for a man they did not know.  
They mock the funeral.  
How could anyone stoop so low? 
Overcome by guilt, Tom comforts Ruth.  
Sorrow turns to passion and she lusts in his youth.  
Julie, Tom's high school crush, arrives back in town.  
She professes her love for him. 
It's an offer he can't turn down.  
Tom leaves Ruth hanging by a thin thread.  
How can he admit to knowing Bill only after he was dead?  
Tom has really stepped into it.  
And you thought Hugh Grant was a twit. 
He didn't use a dead guy to score a hit.  
Still, what an embarrassing deed to commit.  
The world laughed at the bumbling Brit.  
He should have picked a street more dimly lit.  
David Schwimmer plays Ross on that weekly Friends TV show.  
He's one up on Matt LeBlanc.  
His first feature film doesn't blow.  
A monkey in a baseball movie, what's wrong with this?
A question Matt should have asked before sinking into the abyss.  
The friends in Pallbearer are as real as you and me.  
Not like those phoney, well-dressed dopes lurking on TV.  
Trials and tribulations solved in thirty minutes flat.  
Perfect haircuts.  
Perfect lives.  
It's enough to make you crack.  
The Pallbearer is rated S for Sensational. Schwimmer / Paltrow / Hershey 
x a pounding score by Stewart Copeland x a high school year book + one 
coffin race x Neil Young's Harvest Moon + a yummy glass of chocolate milk 
x a rib-fracturing eulogy + one mint Pacer automobile = Mrs. Robinson 
lock lips with Generation X.

Title
Review for Twelve Monkeys (1995)
Starring: Bruce Willis, Madeleine Stowe, Brad Pitt and Christopher Plummer.  
Directed by: Terry Gilliam. 
Screenplay by: David Peoples and Janet Peoples.  
Produced by: Charles Roven.  
A Universal Pictures release.  
I can hear the faint moaning and groaning. A time travel picture? Have to 
think...Brain hurts...Smell smoke...Is something burning?...System overload...
Migraine coming on...Fading to black...Nighty-night...> 
What a revolting development! Filmmakers encouraging you to exercise your 
grey matter? Where do they get off? They deserve forty lashes! Step By Step and
Baywatch. That's quality. Television mind candy that doesn't require brain 
cells to produce or to watch.  
Mongoloid tube-heads bearing the attention spans of a box of stale donuts and 
whose usual reading material is... 
Beverly Hills, 90210 (cc) 1:00 
Brandon flosses his teeth while David smokes crack. Donna, the retard, attends
a self-help seminar and figures out how to operate a door knob. Valerie beds 
Steve, David and the California Angels starting lineup. Kelly is stalked by a 
serial rapist, sexually harassed by a co-worker, shot at by a street gang, 
kidnapped by an ex-boyfriend, blackmailed by the Mob, abducted by a UFO and 
gets a trendy haircut. Nat joins a Columbian drug cartel.  
...shouldn't be mentally taxed by 12 Monkeys if they cling to my handy TV 
references. 
Bruce Willis (David on Moonlighting) is a prison inmate in the year 2035 
(before Star Trek but beyond Melrose Place). The screws buzzed Bruce's 
cranium (Kojack, Capt. Picard), tattooed his prisoner number on it and 
deposited him in a cage. That's right, a CAGE not a cell. Hard ass dive 
this future world. Everyone's cranky since the holocaust.  
In 1996, a mutant virus devoured 99 per cent of Earth's population. The toxic
surface atmosphere drove mankind underground. Immune to the contagion, animals
(Flipper, Lassie) rule the planet. 
Scavenging Beta vcrs, gum wrappers, paper clips and duct tape from above
ground, the surviving scientists built a time machine (as in Dr. Who's 
Tardis) to send someone back to prevent the apocalypse. That "someone" is 
Willis. He's got a photographic memory. He ain't too sharp and he's haunted by
a childhood memory that could unlock the secret of the 12 Monkeys (the 
Egghead's solitary clue to who or what ignited the plague). He's got the job.
At least they didn't choose Pauly Shore or Jim Varney. Thank God for small 
miracles.  
The Eggheads botch the first expedition. Willis beams in too early and 
the local fuzz arrest him. His 12 Monkeys and apocalypse ravings land his 
sorry ass in the nut house. Incarcerated, he meets Jeffrey Goines (Brad Pitt),
the unstable son of a famous scientist and Dr. Kathryn Railly (Madeleine 
Stowe), a shrink and writer. Being tugged in and out of the present 
(therefore existing in two time frames) erodes Willis' sanity. The 
doomsday clock takes a lickin' but keeps on tickin' as Willis screws his
head on straight.  
The universes director Terry Gilliam conceives routinely bend and contort 
as if projected through fun house mirrors. People, places and things 
don't have rhyme, reason or a determined purpose (The Adventures Of Baron 
Munchausen, Brazil, The Fisher King). His experience as a cartoonist 
(Help! Magazine) and animator (Monty Python's Flying Circus) help and 
hinder Gilliam in the filmmaking process. His boundless imagination give 
genesis to eye-catching visuals. By the same token, the incessant flights 
of fancy stretch and snap continuity. 
Finally with 12 Monkeys, Gilliam has cleared his personal hurdle. Production 
designer Jeffrey Beecroft (Dances With Wolves) and cinematographer Roger Pratt
(Mary Shelley's Frankenstein, Batman) maintain the fabulous optics but the 
script is tight. There's structure. There's direction. We don't get lost 
in the shuffle. That is unless your idea of a weekly mental workout is 
whether Fraiser or Home Improvement wins out on Tuesday night.  
12 Monkeys is rated U for Unusual. Frank Gorshin (The Riddler on TV's Batman) 
x nitro-injected Brad Pitt - a slow midpoint + Pitt's naked butt - Willis' 
naked butt (twice) x spectacular set design x no convoluted time travel 
paradoxes + off-kilter camera angles + spottings of Monty Python humor x 
Gilliam's restraint = bad title, good film.  

Title
Review for Happy Gilmore (1996)
Eggbert: Good day, readers. I'm Reginald Eggbert, a multi-bazillionaire 
residing in Forest Hill. 
Driskel: Yo. How ya doin'? I'm Dean Driskel, an auto mechanic outta..ah... 
Rosedale...yeah...Rosedale!  
Eggbert: Rosedale? Rosedale! How can you perpetuate such a conspicuous 
falsehood? Shame on you! Proclaim contrition to the good people.  
Eggbert: Tell them you're sorry, you slobbering baboon.  
Driskel: Alright. I live in Parkdale. Happy now, Reginald?  
Driskel: Anyways, you Outreach readers wuz expectin' J.P. ta give ya da 
skinny on da flicks. Due to circumstances beyond his control, he couldn't 
make it. Me an' Egghead are fillin' in. 
Our Numero-Uno film is called Angels And Insects. My old lady. Sometimes 
I don't git her. She goes freakin' nutso for these kinda movies. You guys 
understand what I'm gettin' at. Stinkin' rich Brits dressed up fancy, 
smokin' expensive cee-gars, yappin' d'ose big words, sippin' wine and readin'
mushy poetry written by real dead guys. She loves dat stuff. She be slobberin'
all over me when the tape's done, so I close my eyes and pretend I fell
asleep. It works like a charm.  
Angels And Insects stars Patsy Kensit. She wuz dat South African babe who 
had hot tamales for Mel in Lethal Weapon 2. Personally, I thought she wuz 
better as da werewolf-ninja-commando-assassin in Full Eclipse. She severely
kicked Mario Van Peebles' ass. Not hard enuff though. He still made 
Highlander III and Panther.  
Eggbert: Desist dallying this instant! You're deluding yourself supposing 
that they revere your monosyllabic, incoherent babble.  
Driskel: No problem-o, Richie Rich. Geez. Tip da chauffeur an' you ain't 
hearin' da end of it. As I wuz sayin' before Eggbert threw a hissy fit, 
Patsy plays the useless Eugenia Alabaster. She don't work. She don't go 
ta school. Eugenia don't hafta do nothin' cuz her old man's rich. If she 
wuz my kid, I woulda booted her out da door.  
Driskel: The rest of da family are damn lazy too. Mrs. Jabba (The Hut) 
Alabaster crams powdered cakes an' candies down her yap like she wuz one 
of Sally Struthers' starvin' kids on TV. Eugenia's brother Edgar is a 
horny drunk. Old man Alabaster invites a poorbug scientist to shack
wit them and da family gits bent outta shape.  
Eggbert: The proper term for the character you ignorantly alluded to as a 
"bug scientist" is a "Naturalist".  
Driskel: They collect bugs and stuff, right?  
Eggbert: Yes. (Sigh) They collect bugs and..."stuff".  
Driskel: Man, did I pick the wrong line of work. I use ta be good at catchin'
grasshoppers. Do you know dat if ya stick a grasshopper inna freezer long
enuff they go into suspended animation?  
Driskel: Yeah. Then, if ya zap 'em inna microwave, they thaw out, turn red an'
explode.  
Eggbert: How delightful. Hours of entertainment, I'm sure. 
Driskel: More than I can say about Angels And Insects. I vote thumbs down.
It wuz like a nature special. I hate them. I only watch da ones where
alligators and sharks chew off da crew's arms and legs. Dat's kool. 
Eggbert: I beg to differ. As the honourable Naturalist, Mark Rylance was
superb. My predicament is, I can't recommend Angels And Insects in good
conscious because the filmmakers endorse an unjustifiable contempt for the
Victorian English aristocracy. Symbolically comparing a nobel, principled,
mannered peoples epitomizing refinement and propriety to loathsome insects
is an insufferable slight. My manicured thumb goes down.  
Eggbert: Our next film is Happy Gilmore. An impertinent farce brutishly 
mocking a gentleman's sport. Happy Gilmore features the uncouth Adam 
Sandler. He formerly of the Saturday Night Live television program.  
Driskel: Saturday Night Live sucks. They should do da humane thing an' 
take it out back behind da barn an' shoot it.  
Eggbert: Mr. Gilmore (Sandler), a failed hockey player, holds two 
illustrious records. He spent the most time in the penalty box and is the 
only player ever to attempt to lacerate an opposing competitor with a 
skate. The churlish lout has but one forte. A slapshot which transforms 
smoothly to a pulverizing, 400 yard tee shot on the links. Under the 
tutelage of golf pro Chubbs Peterson (Carl Weathers)...  
Eggbert: ...Gilmore joins the Pro Golf tour to save his tax-evading 
Grandmother. His uncontrollable temper and scandalous behaviour entice 
common riffraff to cheer their moronic hero.  
In 90 minutes, the boorish American filmmakers malign golf's opulent 
traditions and despoil a proud heritage taking centuries to cultivate. 
Rude gestures and obscene language on prominent golf courses? Unruly club 
house brawls? 
Driskel: Take a Valium, Reggie. Take a whole box.  
Driskel: Adam Sandler busted my gut. I laughed so hard, it brought tears
ta my eyes. Happy Gilmore stomps Caddyshack, dat's fer sure. It's worth da
eight bucks justa see Bob Barker git a whoopin'. Thumbs up!  
Eggbert: Precisely what I'd assume from an unlettered Neanderthal.  
Angels And Insects is rated S for Snotty. Mark Rylance - terminally dull 
dinner chatter - gratuitous swooning - heavingbosoms + extreme close-ups 
of hatching insects + dandelion handcuffs - pretentious highbrow symbolism
= National Geographic meets Merchant and Ivory.  
Outreach Rating: 3 cuddly ant farms / 10 
Happy Gilmore is rated C for Comical. Adam Sandler + a hockey 
stick-shaped putter + guest star Lee Travino + assault and battery on a
caddy x an AC/DC T-Shirt x wilful property damage to a mini-putt course +
one midget cowboy + Jaws from Moonraker x Adam Sandler vs Bob Barker in a
Texas Street Fight x golf balls dinging people in the head = a hole in
one.  

Title
Review for Mr. Holland's Opus (1995)
Published In The Outreach Connection Newspaper (Jan. 24, 1996)
Starring:    Richard Dreyfuss, Glenne Headly, Jay Thomas, Olympia Dukakis  
             and W.H. Macy. 
Written by:  Patrick Sheane Duncan.
Directed by: Stephen Herek.  
Produced by: Scott Kroopf and Patrick Seane Duncan. 
             A Buena Vista Pictures Distribution release.  
This review is dedicated to those whose love, guidance and support shaped 
and enriched my life. I am a better person for knowing you.  
Mrs. Shirley Powell: You shared your love of literature and film, inspiring 
your grandson to follow in your footsteps.  
Mr. Kellman: My high school English teacher. You opened my eyes to the special
"gift" I had. The purpose and direction of my life changed forever.  
John Lott, Lindy Oughtred and Steve Cogan: Journalism's "Holy Trinity". You 
altered my view of the world. My peepers thank you.  
Chris Farrer/Adrian Bromley: My partners in crime. You are more than friends
to me, you're my brothers.  
Julie Powell: My wife. If there ever was a choice between you and my "gift", 
this keyboard would fall silent.   
Bodies and minds recharged, we'd file into the ground floor music room, a 
leisurely stroll from the cafeteria. Chit-chatting, we unpacked our 
instruments. Hinges popped like fireworks. Metal clanged against metal. 
Trumpets blared. Tubas bellowed. Flutes cooed. Mr. Ford slung his jacket 
over a chair and rolled his sleeves up. The symphony of the damned 
evaporated into thin air. Class was in session.
Music was Mr. Ford's life. When he spoke, you half-expected a string of 
musical notes to cascade from his lips. He could play any instrument, any 
instrument at all, just like he'd crawled out of the crib with it tucked 
under his arm.  
He taught in earnest. It was in the intensity of his eyes as he conducted. It
was in his face which flushed blood-red when the class goofed off. It was in 
his smile when you really nailed apiece, stomped its ass and sent it home 
crying to Mother. 
I don't remember much from music class, though I pulled decent grades. If I
put a trumpet to my lips now, you'd swear a duck got its tail feathers 
caught in an outboard motor. Am I a failure? Nope. In that ground floor 
music room I learned the committment to hone a skill and the significance
of respecting the "gift" God gave you.  
Man, does my chest hurt. It hit me once the theatre lights illuminated the 
joint. I stood up. A sharp pain seared my ribcage. My family quack diagnosed
it as "Gumpcarditis" (E.T.'s Disease). The symptoms are nausea, shortness 
of breath and the aforementioned chest pains.  
Gumpcarditis manifests after prolonged exposure to sappy filmmaking. The 
kind that plucks at your heart-strings not with nimble fingertips but 
needle nose pliers. The cure? Plenty of bed rest and Clint Eastwood or John 
Woo flicks to cleanse the system. 
Mr. Holland's Opus pushes the hokey meter. Sugary scenes stand out as 
deliberate attempts at manipulating our waterworks. I would be in favor 
of marching the producers to detentionhall. Yeah. Dig it. Scrub those 
boards. Scrape the gum off those desks. Mop those floors. And if they do a
real good job, they'll be treated to lunch in the school cafeteria.  
"What kind of people like to go to work at seven-thirty in the morning?"  
sums up Mr. Holland's feelings towards his new job. A travelling musician, 
Holland (Richard Dreyfuss) has settled down with his wife Iris (Glenne Headly)
and at battle axe's urging, he nabs a teaching gig. Holland formulates a master
plan. Teaching in the day will accord him "free time" to compose at night. 
A teacher with "free time" on their hands? This guy has been watching too
many Welcome Back Kotter re-runs.  
The class is a tough crowd. Holland reads exclusively from the text and 
assigns homework. His students don't retain a thing. Frustrated, he almost 
calls it quits. Principal Jacobs (Olympia Dukakis) steps in, whispering words
of wisdom. Holland drastically modifies his technique and the students 
excel.  
In the meantime, Holland's relationship with his son isn't exactly Ward and
Beaver Cleaver. Cole is deaf and Holland, the musician, has a hard time 
relating to him. Ain't life ironic?
In spite of the incriminating deficiencies, Mr. Holland's Opus makes the 
grade. Enough superior scenes balance out the defects. Richard Dreyfuss 
hangs tough as the anchor, stopping this leaky ship from drifting out to 
sea. 
Mr. Holland's Opus is rated T for Touching. Dreyfuss bagging an Oscar 
nomination x two boxes of Kleenex x Glenne Headly - a nagging case of 
Gumpcarditis + a gym teacher who plays..chess?!?! - Dreyfuss butchering
a John Lennon ditty x sign language for the word "asshole" - MTV video
montages = a run on Teacher's College applications.
Outreach Rating: 9 bitter hall monitors / 10

Title
Review for Reckless (1995/I)
Published In The Outreach Connection Newspaper (Nov. 13, 1995) 
Starring:    Mia Farrow, Scott Glenn, Mary-Louise Parker, Tony Goldwyn, 
             Eileen Brennan and Stephen Dorff. 
Directed by: Norman Rene.
Written by:  Craig Lucas.
Produced by: Amy Kaufman. 
             A Malofilm Distribution release.  
(Sung to the tune of "God Rest Ye Merry Gentleman".)
God rest ye merry Mia, let nothing you dismay.
You're the mother of twelve children, how do you make it through the day?  
You took Woody to court. 
Now the lawyers he must pay.  
In the movie RECKLESS, Mia plays a naive spouse.  
She as dim as Polyanna.  
You'd think Rachel roomed at the Brady house.  
Rachel loves her husband Tom, but he's a scheming louse. 
Christmas is coming and Tom bought a gift for his wife.  
He phoned the local hitman and put a contract on her life.  
His plan is better than O.J.'s.  
No Kato or a knife.  
Christmas Eve finds Rachel and Tom lying in their bed.  
Remorseful, he confesses the plot to shoot her dead. 
She escaped out a window.  
"This is so mean," is all she said.  
Standing at a phone booth, her world in disarray. 
Rachel thumbs a ride from a driver on his way.  
Lloyd, a good samaritan, gives her a place to stay.  
Lloyd has a wife, she is confined to a wheelchair. 
They adopt Rachel into their family and she joins the devout pair.  
Year-long escapades do cease as Tom turns up there.  
RECKLESS is a dark comedy, on that we should be clear. 
If you're anal retentive, another direction you should veer.  
It's surreal zaniness that David Lynch would cheer.  
The handiwork of Rene is unmistakeably first-class.  
The fantasy landscape mirrors a Christmas ornament made of glass.  
Mia's so engaging, Woody can pucker up and kiss her...  
RECKLESS is rated Q for quirky. A Tim Burton ambience x Mia Farrow
- a wandering second half + one depraved regurgitation scene x
surprising twists - one Let's Make A Deal skit + the absence of a
Rudolph, Frosty and Santa = an unstable Christmas fable.
