Authors
Scott Mendelson
Number of Reviews
5

Title
Review for Twister (1996)
        In short, Twister is a perfect summer flick.  It's acting is adequate,
it's character are 1/2 dimensional, it's sub-plots are silly, but boy,
oh boy is it FUN!!!!
        The Plot:  Tornado chasers Helen Hunt and Bill Paxton duel with mother
nature while trying to rekindle their marriage and fend off a rival
chaser(Cary Elwes).
         The film starts out with a truly chilling bang.  Beginning in 1969,
the film starts with a family of three(four, if you count a dog that,
probably not coincidentally, looks a lot like Toto, from Wizard of Oz)
running from their home to an underground shelter, after a surprise
storm hits the town.  The little child, having never seen a tornado
before, is amazed at its power and can hardly believe her eyes when it
blows the shelter door to pieces and takes her father with it.  
        This scene is frighteningly effective in the same way that the opening
scene of Cliffhanger was(and is probably the only reason, why you would
question taking a young child to this film).  It builds tension by
delaying the inevitable, because we know what will happen, but hope that
it doesn't.
        Of course, the special effects are truly eye-popping(I gave them top
billing; they are the REAL stars of this flick).  There tornadoes are
frighteningly convincing, and so is the damage that it does.  All
through the movie, we wonder: what will we see in midair next(my
personal favorite are the flying cows, which bellow out a frightened
"MOO" as they fly through the air).
         As said before, the film is fun.  Aside, from the scary opening scene,
the film's "scares" are more of the "ooh, Ahh, oh no" variety as opposed
to truly horrific scenes of destruction(it helps that the body count is
kept to a bare minimum).
        OK, I wasn't exactly expecting the level of quality that went into the
characters of Jaws(the movie to which all other revenge of
nature/science  movies will be measured against, and rightly so). 
Still, director Jan De Bont did get great performances out of Keanu
Reeves, Sandra Bullock, and(especially) Dennis Hopper in Speed.  Of
course, Hopper and Co. actually had distinct personalities to play off
of.  Hunt, Paxton, and Ewles are given very little.  Hunt plays the
tough chick, Paxton plays the ex-husband, and Elwes plays the other
tornado chaser.  
        I feel particularly bad for Ewles.  He is a great actor.  Yet, he can't
seem to get respect.  Let's see, in The Princess Bride, he was great,
but was overshadowed by Mandy Patankin.   In Glory(the greatest film
ever made about an American war), he was great, but was overshadowed by
Matthew Broderick, Morgan Freeman, and Denzel Washington.  In Robin
Hood: Men in Tights, he was great but was overshadowed by the fact that
the movie sucked.  In Rudyard Kipling's The Jungle Book, he was great
but was overshadowed by Jason Scott Lee, and all the lions and tigers
and bears(oh, my!).        
        Michael Crichton(who wrote the screenplay) is known for injecting much
scientific knowledge in his(great) books.  In Twister, we get many
scenes of people in "weather watch"-like stations, with lots of fancy
looking, computer animated programs for tracking the weather.  Yet, no
one bothers to explain what any of the screens mean, or explain the
scientific dialogue that goes along with it.  Gee, and we could have
learned something too...
        OK, now, that all is said and done. 
As said before, it's silly, occasionally stupid, and it's characters are
ill-defined.  But, it's a great time at the movies.  If you want
quality, wait till fall.  If you just want a good time, then summer is
the season.  Twister is a summer movie.                        "B+"

Title
Review for Eraser (1996)
        Near the end of Eraser, there is a startling twist.  The film actually
falls upon... a plot!!!  Yes, Arnie has more to do than just kill
people.  That's right, he actually has to stop an arms-deal before some
really mean-looking rifles get sold to the Russian-Mafia.  Before this, 
Arnie(playing a Witness Protection Marshal, assigned to protect Vanessa
Williams, who has uncovered that her company is planning to sell weapons
to bad guys), basically runs about, and shoots and stabs bad guys.  Of
course, few go to Schwarzenegger epics for it's multi-layered plots, and
the film works because Schwarzenegger, James Caan(playing a fellow
agent/mentor, who is really a mole), and Chuck Russell(who made The
Mask, an underrated Jim Carrey flick) understand this. 
        When, while being ambushed by evil fiends, who wish to slay the pure
and true Vanessa Williams in her place of slumber, William's
ex-boyfriend walks in the house just in time to get blasted across the
room by some "neato gun"(which shoots green electric bolts of aluminum
at the speed of light, or something like that), we laugh and sigh in
recognition; yes, that is just what happens in these movies.    When
Arnie, while being pursued in one of them "abandoned flame factories",
notices that his shotgun is broken, he tosses it to the stalking bad
guy, who stares at it just long enough to be mistaken for our hero, who
of course, was seen by a sniper to be toting a shotgun.  We sigh, again
in recognition, as the poor villain is blasted away by another one of
those cool "neato guns".    Why did the henchman stand and stare at the
gun?  Because, he is a bad guy in an action film, thus, he is stupid.   
And, of course, no Arnold epic would be complete without scenes of
Arnold getting impaled(a BIG nail, a BIG shard of glass)  and shot
through his arms and legs, and then, moments later having all signs of
the wounds vanishing without a trace(who else besides Arnold, Harrison
Ford, or Sly Stallone, could get shot in the arm, and then use that same
arm to pull a damsel in distress to safety).
        Besides all the "fun-dumb" stuff, there are the usual Arnold staples. 
There is one cool stunt, involving Arnold throwing a parachute out a
plane door, and then flying out the plane to catch it.  There are lots
of would-be one-liners/catch-phrases(my fave: after shooting an
alligator in a zoo: "You're luggage.").  Most importantly, there are the
usual thirty-some bad guys dead in 111 min.
        Overall, Eraser is big, expensive, dumb fun.  The acting is exactly
what we'd expect.  Arnie plays a superman, James Caan plays the villain
that way he plays villains, and Vanessa WIlliams' part is basically run,
scream, look nervous, and look good during all of the above.  The stunts
are impressive, as are the shoot-outs.  Although the action does get a
little too gory at times(did we really need long close-ups of Arnie
pulling nails and glass out of his body?), generally, the tone is light.
While not nearly  as good as True Lies(the best shoot-em up ever made),
Eraser is  much better than Last Action Hero, which is enough for me.        
"B"

Title
Review for Broken Arrow (1996)
        Well, I just came back from Broken Arrow, and I must say, I was
disappointed.  While I still enjoyed it, it could have been a lot
better.
        First of all, the good stuff:  The action scenes are awesome(of course,
this being a John Woo film, anything less would be horrific)and the
stunt work is impressive.  As for the acting, it ranges from the
Great(John Travolta, who can now play a bad guy whenever he wants) the
Good(Delroy Lindo, great as always in a small part) the
mediocre(Christian Slater needs work before trying another action hero)
to the awful(Samantha Mathis... acting lessons anyone?).  Travolta, as
the loony navy pilot who steals two nuclear weapons,  has a calm style
of villainy and wisely doesn't go over the top.  This shows best when he
calmly asks a bad guy: "Would you please be so kind as to not shoot at
the thermal nuclear device?"  A lesser actor would have screamed at the
guy and probably killed him for a cheap laugh.  Sometimes this works,
but sometimes we wish villains would stop being so damn hyperactive.
        As for Slater, he just doesn't fit my idea of an action hero.  And his
stiff, wooden delivery does nothing to convince me otherwise.  But
Mathis is much, much worse.  She has absolutely no purpose to the film
other than to tag along, be saved by Slater, take her shirt off, and
keep saying: "This is a bad idea!" once every 10 minutes.
        But my big problem is that not enough happens in the movie.  Basically
the entire movie can be summed up in one sentence: Travolta steals
bombs, and duels with Slater, first in a desert, and then on a train. 
An action film of this type needs more locations.  Raiders of the Lost
Ark probably had a dozen different battle grounds.  This film has two.
        Another problem is the lack of surprises.  The film opens with Slater
getting his brains punched out in a sparring match. Travolta tells him
he lacks the will to win.  Is this foreshadowing?  Anyone who has seen 4
action movies in a lifetime can probably guess exactly what is going to
happen and when.  How do we know that Travolta is a bad guy?  Well,
during the opening flight, he squints his eyes and the camera gives him
a looming close-up!! Uh, huh...
        Also, there seems to be a lack of emotion in this film.  If your best
friend pulled a gun on you, tried to kill you, then ejected you out of a
plane, only to try to blow you up many times, just to get rich, wouldn't
you be a little hurt?  Also, after all this, you are unable to talk your
buddy out of this plot, you are forced to beat him up and leave him to
die, wouldn't this sadden you a little bit?  The script fails to give
one line or reaction of sadness to Slater over the fact that his best
friend has betrayed his trust.
        The plot seems a bit simplistic.  Hell, all you have to do to start a
bomb is punch in a 5 digit code, and all you have to do to disarm it is
to enter the wrong code three times,  or get this, touch a single button
on a remote control.   And, yes, this film's bombs do have those
convenient red timers, counting the seconds till doom.  
        Still, I did like the film.  It was well paced, with some amazing
stunts and action sequences. John Travolta has a lot of fun playing a
heavy.   And it does let Slater pull the official "Woo Dive" which is
when someone jumps forward or backward, while firing one pistol in each
hand at an enemy.  This time, it's a forward, head first dive.  And,
when it came, those who understood cheered.        "B-"

Title
Review for Cable Guy, The (1996)
        The Cable Guy will get attention for three things: for being the film
that Jim Carrey first got $20 million for, the film that gave Carrey the
chance to ssttrreettcchh, and for being Carrey's first minor box-office
disappointment.  The surprising thing is that it is a very good movie.
It's Carrey's best to date and Broderick's best performance since The
Freshman(a little seen masterpiece with Marlon Brando).
        When he's not watching television, Chip Douglas(Jim Carrey) works as a
free-lance cable guy as a way to meet potential friends(he was fired
from dozens of real companies for stalking customers).  His latest
target is Steven(Matthew Broderick), a man living alone after he was
turned down for marriage to his girlfriend.
         At first, he seems friendly but strange, taking Steven to a huge
satellite dish (where he believes the entire world's cable comes from),
or to a restaurant called Medieval Times, where Steven and Chip joust in
the center ring(watch for Janeane Garfalo in a great bit as a waitress
at the restaurant).  But, after awhile, Steven doesn't need Chip
anymore(Mann has come back).  Chip is deeply hurt by this and sets out
to ruin Steven's life.  He turns Steven's family against him, gets Steve
fired, and gets him tossed in jail for receiving stolen property. 
        Matthew Broderick is the perfect Jim Carrey foil.  His calm, quiet,
sane acting style blends perfectly with Carrey's anything goes method.
They should make another movie together in the near future(How about if
Broderick plays the bad guy in the next Mask picture?).  The rest of the
cast does it's job well, but the movie is simply a showcase for Matt and
Jim.
        One of my problems with Batman Forever(and anyone who's read my VERY
long statement about B.F.; i.e., the reason Joel Schulmacher deserves to
die slowly and then burn in hell for all eternity, knows I have a few)
was that despite Jim Carrey's witty take on Frank Gorshin's Riddler,
Carrey didn't project a sense of menace.  Well, he's solved that problem
pretty well and I actually look forward to him taking on another
psychopath. 
But, Chip is a truly pathetic character; a desperately lonely man who,
because he grew up in front of the television(he learned the facts of
life from "The Facts of Life"), cannot communicate in any normal
fashion.  Everything Chip Douglas knows, he learned from television.
Every piece of advice he gives was from the tube, every joke he heard;
from the tube, in essence, he IS television(no wonder his favorite
restaurant is Medieval Times, its phony atmosphere is just like
something that you'd see on TV).  In the end, Chip's lack of knowledge
of the real world has doomed him to live alone forever.
        He is such a tragic character that we(or at least I) wanted him to
die.  In the end, as he plunges from the cable dish(how perfect: the
device that gave him "life" brings him death), we think that his
suffering is over, that he is at last at peace(of course, Stiller copped
out in letting Carrey live, as if watching him die would be too much for
his young fans).
        Of course, this film is supposed to be a black comedy.  It is very
funny at times.  During the first hour, Carrey's antic are silly, as
usual(his singing of "Somebody to Love", during a karaoke party,  is a
classic).  Even during the final 25 minutes, when Carrey takes on
Broderick atop the dish, there is always a sense of spoof in the
madness,  I am particularly fond of the moment where Carrey mentions
that real life doesn't have good suspense music; after which he starts
humming the same tune on the soundtrack, or when he holds Mann hostage
with... a staple gun.  Best of all is a very funny subplot about a
murder trial on the tube with former child sitcom star Stan Sweet(Ben
Stiller) accused of murdering Sam Sweet(Ben Stiller), after their sitcom
was canceled and they joined a religious cult(Stan claimed repeatedly on
the 911 call that Asians killed his brother, a really nasty swipe at the
Susan Smith case).
        Broderick once again proves he is a master at effective underacting,
and Carrey proves he can play both good and evil.  While the film is
very funny, it was the creepy elements that entertained me. I'll
remember Chip Douglas much longer than I'll remember AceVentura or Lloyd
Christmas.        "B+"

Title
Review for Mars Attacks! (1996)
Jack Nicholson, Glenn Close, Annette Benning, Pierce Brosnan
Jim Brown, Sarah Jessica Parker, Lucas Haas, Natalie Portman
Tom Jones, Sylvia Sidney, Rod Steiger, Paul Winfield,
Martin Short, Michael J. Fox, Danny Devito, Joe Don Baker,
Pam Grier, Lisa Marie, Jack Nicholson, The Martians
This article should probably be taken with a grain of salt due to the
fact that I believe Tim Burton to be a God among men, incapable of error
and my idol in the filmmaking world.
"Ack-Ack-Ack-Ack!"  translation:  Mars Attacks! is not only the
funniest film of  1996(but, for artistic merit, Fargo is tops for 96),
but the funniest film that I've seen since Airplane!!  It's a terrific
mixture of top-notch writing and acting, THE best computer animation I
have ever seen, and, best of all, a healthy dose of VERY macabre bad
taste.
After thousands of martian ships are spotted surrounding Earth, the
President(Jack Nicholson), the First Lady(Glenn Close), the
scientist(Pierce Brosnan), the press secretary(Martin Short), and the
generals(Rod Steiger and Paul Winfield) try to decide what to do. 
Brosnan and Winfield suggest a peaceful welcome while Steiger suggests
they declare war on these bug-eyed, big brained "things".  An official
meeting is set up in a desert, several of the martians step out to greet
the thousands of on-lookers, and they declare that they come in peace.
At this point, they whip out their ray guns and take out hundreds of
earthlings, including several of the big stars. 
In fact, one of the main pleasures of this epic is the growing
realization that few of your favorite stars are going to make it to the
end credits. This being a Tim Burton film, the survivors consists of
those whose standing in society is lesser.  While politicians and
entrepreneurs are blown to bits, a down on his luck boxer and a southern
kid, who rush to save their grandmothers, live.  As usual, Burton sides
with the outsiders.  We love him for it.
Be warned, this is a very, very sick movie.  Millions of innocent people
die horrible deaths: men, women, children(a group of cub scouts in one
really funny but twisted scene), none are spared!  And yes, unlike ID4,
this flick has the guts to kill animals!  And, again, unlike ID4, where
popcorn was thrown at my head for doing so, you can root for the aliens,
because Burton is rooting for them too.
        Technically, the martians look great. With greenish-blue skin tone,
bulging eyes, and huge brains, they don't speak English, they do
understand when earthlings talk.  They speak in some kind of gibberish,
and Earth uses a translator to communicate with them: "ACK, ACK, ACK,
ACK, ACK!"  translation: "We Come in Peace!"
        The best thing about this film is that, unlike most invasion flicks,
where they just feel like props, the aliens actually have a personality.
The FX are so convincing, and the invaders are so unique in nature that
the martians become full-blown characters.  The martians are not truly
evil, but fiendish little pranksters who basically set out to destroy
the Earth because it'll be a fun way to kill a weekend(pun intended).
They actually take time to enjoy the mayhem while performing demented
experiments on those poor earthlings(wait till you see what happens to
Pierce Brosnan and Sarah Jessica Parker) and destroying many a famous
landmark(the Easter Island statues, the Eiffel Tower, etc.) with glee.
At times, they seem to be like a distant cousin to the Gremlins, but a
lot smarter. 
        While the film's first 40 minutes introduces its many human characters
and thus, is occasionally dull(grade: C+) the last hour is pure
"Burton-ion" craziness(A+++).  And although I wanted the martians to
triumph,  the way that the martians finally meet their doom is one of
the decade's best gags(and certainly more creative than ID4's: "let's
give them a computer virus" snore).   While obviously not for all
tastes, the film has  probably got the most creative way ever for
disposing of a hydrogen bomb.                                                                                                A+
Note:  Despite my many objections, it may be worth noting that I did
enjoy Independence Day as fun, slick, big-budget, garbage.  But Ronald
Emmerich  is no Tim Burton.
