Authors
Dan Frank
Number of Reviews
5

Title
Review for Who's That Girl? (1987)
     Imagine this premise: a vaguely owlish junior member of New York society
is due to be married to a spoiled, stupid socialite.  By accident, he is
saddled with a strange and impulsive woman, who gets him in a lot of trouble
with his stuffy associates.  There is a large member of the leopard family
involved, over whom the strange woman has a certain measure of authority.  The
story ends as we would expect, with the triumph of true love.
     What, you say, it's been done?  How about this one: a New York yuppie is
virtually kidnapped by an oddly dressed and sexy female petty criminal and
taken, not entirely against his will, on a set of adventures in a strange and
violent world.
     Shucks, are you kidding?  Ok--this one's got to be original.  This real
white-collar type guy gets involved for an evening with a ditzy female who gets
him in a lot of trouble with his boss, takes him into a neighborhood where his
car gets trashed, and generally lands him in a real mess.  In spite of his
anger at her, they really love each other, and love triumphs at a comic society
wedding held out on a lawn behind a big house.
     What?  I'm sorry, I can't think of any more, and neither could the the
writers of WHO'S THAT GIRL?, the new comedy starring Madonna and Griffin Dunne
(reprising his "I Hate NY" experiences from AFTER HOURS).
     Dunne turns in a somewhat inconsistent performance, although that may be
more the script's fault than his own.  He can't figure out if he likes the
woman ("Nicky Finn") or hates her, and if he's scared or having a good time.
This is, of course, what he is supposed to be feeling, but the changes in
character are so radical, and so telegraphed, as to be unbelievable.
     George Will once wrote about John Wayne that Wayne didn't act, he simply
played Wayne.  Similarly, Madonna has a perfectly serviceable screen persona
that is based on "playing Madonna."  This is not the same as acting, but that
never hurt John Wayne, either.  The danger is that Hollywood will be tempted to
build empty movies around her persona.  WHO'S THAT GIRL? treads dangerously
close, as the lack of care taken with Dunne's character suggests.  The
filmmakers rely on Madonna to anchor a cast of empty and stereotyped supporting
characters worlds away from the gritty and convincing misfits inhabiting a film
like SOMETHING WILD, or even better, DESPERATELY SEEKING SUSAN.
     That said, WHO'S THAT GIRL? offers some good laughs.  What the writers
lack in originality and consistency they make up in cleverness.  There are some
great gags in this film, and some lines that with any luck will be remembered
longer than the movie itself.  The jokes are good enough to almost make you
forget how bad the script really is.  Almost.
     WHO'S THAT GIRL?  gets the Dan Frank "Matinee" rating, which means, see it
on the cheap if you have some time to kill, it's hot, and the theatre has air
conditioning.
[By the way, there appears to be a cameo appearance by Spike Lee as a bicycle
messenger who comes to pick up the cat.  I forgot and didn't look in the
credits.  Can someone confirm this?  Lee is, of course, the very talented
actor and director of SHE'S GOTTA HAVE IT.  Too bad they didn't let him make
this one.]

Title
Review for *batteries not included (1987)
     I haven't written many reviews lately, mostly because the movies seem to
get to other cities before ours, and because they pretty much summed up what I
would say anyway.  In the case of *BATTERIES NOT INCLUDED, however, I want to be
the first to warn everyone: Stay Away From This Movie.
     Siskel and Ebert split on *BATTERIES NOT INCLUDED.  Ebert was in a good
mood, and recommended it for the special effects and the cute models.  Siskel
thought it just didn't work.  What neither mentioned, however, is that this
film is just plain depressing, when it isn't stupid and badly written.
     Hume Cronyn and Jessica Tandy star as a couple living in a tenement
building in New York, and running a diner in the commercial space on the first
floor.  The rest of the neighborhood has been bought up and flattened by a
Donald-Trump-style developer who now wants to demolish the one remaining
brownstone--theirs--so that he can build a lavish commercial development.  To
this end, he alternately bribes the residents of the building with envelopes of
cash, and threatens them with attacks by the local Hispanic gang, whose leader
is basically good but just Never Had a Dad (Big Brothers of America, where are
you?).
     Cronyn has it tough.  Tandy is senile, and believes that Eisenhower is
still alive and the Hispanic tough is her long-lost son Bobby.  Of course,
things are bad all over the building.  The sweet pregnant thing upstairs,
abandoned by her musician boyfriend, is scared for the health of her baby, so
she won't go to a doctor.  Her neighbor, the artist, has just been jilted by
his girlfriend.  The building super is a simple but sweet ex-boxer who spends
his days watching TV and trying to repair the tile in the foyer.
     This one building contains more Need than any other place in the universe,
as a result of which it attracts these mechanical elf things from outer space
who want to use the electrical outlets and fix the place up.  Do things get
better?  No!  Everything stays rotten, although the appliances now work.  All
the needy people stay unhappy, hopeless, and forgotten, for the most part.  The
air of unremitting sadness and gloom never dissipates for a moment.  The least
the stupid machines could do is fix Tandy's head, so she'll stop talking about
Bobby and Cronyn will stop scowling.
     Don't take your children to see this movie.  Don't take your loved ones to
see this movie.  Send someone you hate; it will make them suicidal.
     Do I sound too negative?  Then:  the machines were really cute.  I just
loved the little buggers.  If you think cute, mute flying robots are worth 90
minutes of pointless pathos, this is a film for you.
P.S.  If for some reason you are forced, at gunpoint, to see *BATTERIES NOT
INCLUDED, watch for the scene where the developer is fiddling with a model of
the development.  Look between the two towers for the wee model of the
tenement.  Very sloppy.
[Moderator's note:  There seems to be no consensus on whether the title
includes the leading asterisk or not.  Since the ads show it as part of the
title, I will presume that the makers of the film intended it to be that way
and include it here. -ecl]

Title
Review for Summer School (1987)
     It's gotten to the point now that when I see a Carl Reiner film
advertised, I say, "Aha!  That's like a Rob Reiner film, except that it's not
original!"  Both father and son make technically clean movies with good laughs
and pleasant people.  Apparently, Rob takes a little more time choosing his
scripts, which is probably why we see his work a little less frequently.
     If you've seen the previews (trailers?) for SUMMER SCHOOL, you know the
plot and have seen the best jokes, so you don't have to go.  If you haven't,
here's the basic idea:  Mark Harmon plays the gym teacher, who lives for and on
the beach, on a teacher's salary no less.  He teaches at Ocean Front High,
which in the real world would have been turned into condos years ago.  When the
fellow who was supposed to teach summer school (in a cameo appearance by the
director) backs out,  Harmon is drafted by the evil, politically ambitious
assistant principal to babysit a class of semi-literate misfits through
remedial English.
     Of course, neither Harmon nor the kids wants to be there, so at first he
tries to show them and himself a good time.  But then, threatened by the
assistant principal, and coached by the sultry honors teacher in the next
classroom (played by Kirstie Alley, reprising her Lt. Saavik persona), he does
an about-face, and tries to whip the kids into shape in time for the test.
     The rest of the movie is a disconnected episodic farce, as Harmon gives
the kids an incentive to perform (he bribes them), and helps them become
concerned and decent students.  Sort of.  Reiner can't decide if he's really
serious about this stuff, so the plot veers between melodrama, social
conscience, and utter nonsense.  He even manages to suggest at the end that the
kids would have done better if Harmon had sent them to the bathroom for six
weeks.
     Harmon himself doesn't disappoint us.  If you liked his Coors Beer
commercials, you'll like him in SUMMER SCHOOL.  He roller-skates his way
through the film in a good-natured way, doing his earnest best, and funny
things happen to him.  There is no chemistry between him and Alley, which is no
surprise, either.  You could have replaced either or both with a cardboard
cutout labeled, "Teacher," and had the kids carry it around from scene to
scene, with no difference in effect.
     Still, SUMMER SCHOOL is pleasant enough fare for a summer matinee, when
you'd just be hot outside, and you're not paying full price.  If you want to
kill some time, and they're not asking more than two bucks, go for it.  

Title
Review for Nadine (1987)
     When we go to the movies, we generally resign ourselves to enjoying the
films in spite of their imperfections.  We say, "I enjoyed this light comedy,
even though it was totally shallow and predictable," or "This was a fun
excursion into empty-minded comic-book-style violence," or something of that
sort.  It's rare to walk out of a movie and not think that somehow it could
have been better.
     NADINE provides such a rare experience.  It stars Kim Basinger and Jeff
Bridges as an almost-divorced husband and wife, who get mixed up by accident in
the schemes of a particularly nasty wrestling promoter, played with a wonderful
mix of debonair sliminess and bewilderment by Rip Torn.  Torn was the best
feature of EXTREME PREJUDICE, and his departure early in that picture was
lamented by many critics.  He eats up the screen whenever he's on, and only the
presence of Bridges keeps him from completely dominating this film.
     I complained in a recent posting about movies that mangle their settings,
acting as if the only unique thing about, say, Chicago is its name.  Movies
like ADVENTURES IN BABYSITTING are made by people who have no sense of the
unique contribution a locale can make, above and beyond mere script, to their
mood and tone.  NADINE is set, and mostly filmed, in Austin, Texas, which I've
had the pleasure of making my temporary home this summer.  Since the action
takes place in 1954, the filmmakers "fiftyized" several Austin locations of the
proper vintage to be used for the exterior shots.  When the characters are
supposed to be on Sixth Street, by God they really ARE on Sixth Street: the day
we saw the film, we happened down there, and the block they used (at Sixth and
Brazos) is almost identical to its appearance in the movie.
     There is simply no substitute for authenticity.  Chicago has it, and Texas
has it, and NADINE has it in large measure, both in its settings and its
characterizations.  I wasn't alive in 1954, so I can't compare it to my
memories, but I walked out of NADINE feeling, "That's the way it was!"  It's a
sort of honky-tonk MY FAVORITE YEAR (same year, in fact).
     I'm not going to talk about the plot, except to say that NADINE is a
comedy adventure with a perfectly plausible premise, and that you'll enjoy the
heck out of it.  You can pay real money for this one, folks.

Title
Review for Can't Buy Me Love (1987)
     Do you harbor secret reservations about the quality of John Hughes's
films?  Granted, his record is pretty good, even allowing for the dismal
characters in PRETTY IN PINK, but his scripts have always been marred by an
inability to see past the social stereotypes he is trying to send up.  Thus the
kids in THE BREAKFAST CLUB, while they learn to respect each other, could still
be from different planets for all we know.  We get no sense that they are all,
under the the mannerisms, just human beings.
     There is a funny time around the beginning of high school when kids start
developing what it's fashionable to call "identity."  Commensurate with their
lack of sophistication, they tend to ask "what" they are, rather than "who."
Kids who were formerly friends drift apart as they decide they are jocks,
nerds, freaks, and so forth.  They are uncomfortable stepping outside those
categories, and fear associations and actions that might leave them adrift
without a peer group and the sense of self that it provides.  Just as
adolescence is partly a process of defining oneself by these peer groups rather
than by one's family, the difficult transition to adulthood is partly about
moving from "what" to "who."
     CAN'T BUY ME LOVE is about some young people at an Arizona high school
trying to traverse the no man's land between group and self, and having a hard
time of it.  Ronald is a member of an all-male group of "nerds," but is
consumed with anger and envy at the lifestyles of the "popular" kids, and
desire for the head cheerleader, Cindy.  Ronald decides that Cindy can be his
ticket to the in group, and "buys" her for a month for $1000.  Despite Cindy's
certainty that you can't buy popularity, Ronald in fact becomes the New Kid in
Town, the most popular senior, discarding in the process not only his old
friends but also Cindy, who had discovered in the "old" Ronald qualities she
admired and wanted.
     This is a difficult and often painful story, told with sensitivity and
imagination.  There are none of the mean, bigoted stereotypes of PRETTY IN
PINK; we are able to like and care for Ronald's new friends as much as his old
ones.  This isn't REVENGE OF THE NERDS, either, although we come to realize
that revenge is precisely what Ronald really wanted.  The price of that almost
total revenge is a terrible self-knowledge and isolation.
     I felt that CAN'T BUY ME LOVE eluded perfection in its last moments due to
a morally weak ending.  Such is Hollywood, though, that it probably wouldn't
have made it into distribution with the one it really deserved.  That's a small
price to pay for what is in every other way a wise and well-told story of
growing up the hard way.
     CAN'T BUY ME LOVE gets the "Just Short of Perfect" rating, which means,
"Go see it, for full price if necessary, at a good theatre."  [It's not by John
Hughes, by the way.]
