Authors
JONATHAN F RICHARDS
Number of Reviews
7

Title
Review for Unbreakable (2000)
Written and Directed by M. Night Shyamalan
Make no mistake about it. As sure as his middle name is Night, M. Night 
Shyamalan has a taste for the dark side. When he grabbed our attention 
last year it was with an absorbing story called The Sixth Sense about a 
little boy who saw dead people, and Bruce Willis turned out to be one of 
them. This time it's Bruce Willis who sees the dead people. He's David 
Dunne, the only survivor of a train that jumps the rails at high speed; 
everyone around him is killed, and he walks away without a scratch.
The train wreck puts him in the news, and he's contacted by an eccentric 
comic book collector named Elijah Price (Samuel L. Jackson). Elijah is 
the opposite of David - his bones snap like fine china. In school he was 
so brittle the kids called him Mr. Glass, and he got so bitter he 
wouldn't go outside to play till his mother bribed him with comic books.
Comic books changed Elijah's life and gave him purpose. As an adult he 
runs a rare comic gallery, selling first editions and original art, and 
when he hears about David's miraculous survival of the train wreck he 
becomes convinced that David may be an indestructible man with 
extraordinary powers. "These are mediocre times", he tells David; the 
world is primed for an action messiah, a man uniquely equipped to do 
battle for good and foil the forces of evil. In other words, a 
superhero.
David's initially skeptical, and who can blame him, but the more he 
tests Elijah's crazy theory the saner it begins to look. He's never been 
sick a day in his life. Never been hurt, except one time as a boy when 
he nearly drowned. Not only that, but he turns out to have "super" 
powers. He even has his superhero's weakness, his own kryptonite.
He may be unbreakable physically, but he's pretty fragile emotionally, 
and his domestic life is on the verge of falling apart. His wife Audrey 
(Robin Wright Penn) sleeps in the guest room, and his son Joseph 
(Spencer Treat Clark) is pathologically attached to his old man, 
especially when the kid starts buying into Elijah's theory that his 
dad's a superhero.
Shyamalan writes a fascinating premise and an elegant story, but his 
weakness comes out in the telling. His characters ask and tell each 
other things that are justified only as exposition. He's hooked on 
atmosphere, using blue filters so regularly he might as well be shooting 
underwater, and he has Willis moving most of the time in what amounts to 
a virtual catatonic trance. You can understand David's stunned slowness 
in the aftermath of the train wreck, but it goes on, scene after scene, 
until you want to reach up through the screen and slap him out of it. As 
the movie pours on the water imagery, David himself seems to be moving 
underwater, and while it may feel dramatic as hell from his side of the 
screen, it soon becomes irritating from ours.
It's a shame, because so many fine elements are there. The story is 
original, a lot of the imagery is powerful, clues are scattered with the 
same intriguing cleverness that made The Sixth Sense such a satisfying 
puzzler. There are scenes of marvelous subtlety, such as one in which 
Elijah explains to a prospective buyer in his gallery the iconic 
complexities of a beautiful piece of original superhero comic art. There 
are some terrific performances, particularly Jackson, with his bent body 
and large head cocked at a painful angle, eyes set deep in shadowy 
darkness that reflects the anger and anguish of a tortured soul. Also 
impressive is Robin Wright Penn as the wife in a marriage that has gone 
south for no clear reason other than her husband's comatose personality, 
who seizes on the miracle of his miraculous survival as a chance to fan 
the fading embers back to life. Willis has the physicality for a comic 
book hero, with his square jaw and bulging muscles, but the studied 
lifelessness of his performance robs the character of the dynamism it 
needs. As he moves away from his action movie phase, he's becoming 
almost unbearable sensitive, relating wistfully to little boys and 
simplifying his range of expression down to one. His appealing cocky 
swagger has died hard, with a vengeance
Unbreakable has a strong core story, but it rambles at the edges. When 
it gets into the climactic sequence, with Willis plunging into his 
destiny hooded like Death or the Unabomber as he rights wrongs and 
defends the weak and distressed, it seriously loses its grip.
Shyamalan, who makes a Hitchcockian appearance as a suspected drug 
dealer, is fond of surprise endings, and he serves up a doozy here. He 
uses a lot of upside-down imagery throughout the film - comic book 
covers shown upside down, television watched upside down, a sign 
dangling - and he means to turn us upside down as well. It's an 
ingenious comic book twist, but the movie cries out for an infusion of a 
little comic book energy as well.

Title
Review for Golden Bowl, The (2000)
In the rich, dense world of Henry James, tension between Europe and 
America hangs like cigar smoke in a parlor, penetrating and clinging to 
every fabric, flavoring and corrupting the very air. Europe is old, 
calculating, saturnine, and devious; America is young, naEFve, rich in =
material wealth and impoverished in taste and judgment. In The Golden 
Bowl, James's last novel, these lines are clearly drawn, and then 
blurred with deft and subtle strokes.
There is nobody better suited to the Jamesian vision than the team of 
producer Ismael Merchant, director James Ivory, and screenwriter Ruth 
Prawer Jhabvala. They tackled his works twenty years ago in The 
Europeans and The Bostonians, with middling success, but since then 
they've hit their stride, fashioning some of their greatest works out of 
E.M. Forster (A Room With a View, Howard's End). Now they've turned back 
to James again, and this time they're ready.
The visual beauty of The Golden Bowl is breathtaking. Under the eye of 
cinematographer Tony Pierce-Roberts, the images are steeped in the 
paintings of John Singer Sargent and spread across the screen in 
rapturous elegance. We expect no less of Merchant-Ivory, but this talent 
is both a blessing and a curse; "that the visuals would be sumptuous was 
a foregone conclusion," sniffs one critic, and their detractors like to 
dismiss their work as "Masterpiece Theater", which somehow takes on a 
derogatory connotation.
The story is introduced with a grisly tale: a 17th-century nobleman 
discovers his young wife in bed with his grown son, and the adulterous 
couple is brutally executed. The tale is told by Prince Amerigo (Jeremy 
Northam), the 20th century scion of the now-impoverished (by princely 
standards) family, to Charlotte (Uma Thurman), his American lover. 
Sadly, she's poor too, and to refill the family coffers he's about to 
marry her best friend, Maggie (Kate Beckinsale), daughter of America's 
first billionaire Adam Verver (Nick Nolte). Maggie doesn't know Amerigo 
and Charlotte know each other. Fond as Charlotte is of Maggie, she's 
fonder of the prince, and doesn't mean to allow a thing like his 
marriage to interfere with her pleasure. When Charlotte and Adam are 
thrown together and Adam proposes, it knits the four of them into one 
big and briefly happy family.
But the Americans are not the easy dupes the Europeans take them for 
(Charlotte is American but she thinks like a European, complicating 
things even more.) As they begin to wise up, a mesmerizing pattern of 
strategy, protection, and chilling retribution emerges. None of the four 
principal characters are bad, but all are flawed. The story is rife with 
duplicity, obsession, repressed incest, and ill-gotten gains.
Subtle, intelligent acting by the six principals (including Angelica 
Huston and James Fox) takes the characters and the story beyond the 
surface a movie's timetable affords. Particularly good are Thurman's 
reckless Charlotte and Nolte's frighteningly powerful Adam Verver, a man 
whose immense wealth and taste clothe the brutal sinews of the man who 
acquired them. Verver has amassed a fabulous collection of European art 
by the brute force of his money and intellect; and by brute force he 
intends to stuff them down the throats of an uninterested American 
public by building them the Metropolitan Museum of Art.
Merchant and Ivory set the stage so lushly we feel the silks and 
brocades against our skin and breathe the air of fin-de-siE8cle =
European elegance. Jhabvala, who can dissect a classic novel and extract 
its central nervous system like a surgeon, has done a beautiful job of 
it here.
The golden bowl of the title makes several fatefully-timed appearances 
in the story. It is an exquisite piece of gilt crystal, but the gilding 
conceals a crack; and by the bowl's final appearance, the metaphors and 
double-entendres are swarming like swallows on a spring day in 
Capistrano. It's one of the few flaws in an otherwise exquisite piece, 
but the gilding is so masterful one hardly need take offense.

Title
Review for Crew, The (2000)
With Richard Dreyfuss, Burt Reynolds
What is it with all these movies about four old guys? Has someone made 
off with the SAG pension fund? Space CowboysB8 a yarn with wit and =
style and four old geezers recapturing their youth, is still live meat 
in theaters. Now along creaks The Crew, which has everything but the wit 
and the style.
The cut-rate oldsters here are Richard Dreyfuss, Burt Reynolds, Dan 
Hedaya, and Seymour Cassell, and they're not astronauts, they're retired 
wise guys. As far as we can tell they've been inseparable since they 
were young wise guys, which does make you wonder a little. They're all 
living together in the South Beach section of Miami (think of them as 
Beach Cowboys) rocking away their dotage (Dreyfuss is all of 53, but the 
mob must have a generous retirement plan) on the front porch of the Raj 
Mahal, a seedy waterfront apartment building, when a rent hike forces 
them into action. They rub out a corpse in front of the building to give 
the appearance of a mob hit and cause a scandal that will force down 
property values. A Colombian drug lord and the Miami cops get involved. 
So does a hooker (Jennifer Tilly) and her stepmother (Lainie Kazan).
That's more plot than you need to know. There's a contrived 
tug-at-the-heartstrings subplot involving Drefuss's long-lost daughter 
(Carrie-Anne Moss). What there isn't is the substance and character and 
inventiveness that comedy needs to work. It really is not enough having 
Reynolds doing his bad-boy leer at sexy babes or asking Dreyfuss, a very 
good but not very Italian actor, to say "that dumb scavoots" or, god 
help us, "fuhgeddaboudit." Hugh Grant did it more convincingly in Mickey 
Blue Eyes. These actors have all been good, but here they provide an 
object lesson in the importance of script and director to the film 
process.
This is one of those movies where the creative team began a lot of 
brainstorming sentences with the word "see." As in "See, we got these 
four old mobsters.." Or "See, the corpse turns out to be.." The idea is 
that we're so desperate for entertainment that we'll settle for 
manufactured plot, ersatz emotion, second-hand inspiration, and tired 
humor that can't work up the energy to appear effortless.

Title
Review for Art of War, The (2000)
Screenplay by Wayne Beach and Simon Davis Barry
The Art of War is a movie that asks the question " How do you give a 
medal to someone who doesn't exist for something that didn't happen?" 
Specifically, it is Donald Sutherland who asks the question. Sutherland 
is the Secretary General of the UN, a post that this movie suggests is 
vaguely pathetic and faintly comical. He is speaking to the UN's head of 
covert operations, Anne Archer, to whom he sometimes plaintively 
suggests that maybe the UN shouldn't be doing this sort of thing. They 
are speaking of Wesley Snipes, the UN action hero who is under such deep 
cover that no one can acknowledge his existence. How anyone can break 
the amount of glass Wesley breaks and stay under deep cover is a matter 
of mystery. This is a man who will not go through the front door of a 
building if he can rappel down its face or crash through a skylight. 
When he does go through the front door, as he does at a diner, it's apt 
to be in a car. He has, quite literally, a chip on his shoulder.
This is neither as good a movie as you might hope, nor as bad as you 
might fear. There are some rousing action sequences, with Snipes showing 
off dazzling martial arts moves. He spends so much time leaping off high 
places he should get frequent flyer miles. There are flurries of clever 
dialogue. But it's a movie that gets lost in its elements, a movie that 
bogs down in a welter of plot and incident and action, a movie that 
ultimately fails because it is all trees and no forest. As the villain 
says, "You, like most people, fail to look at the big picture."
It's a movie built on racial profiling, a movie that believes that if 
you have one good Chinese you can make all the rest of them bad and 
you've covered your bases. You almost expect poor Wen Ho Lee to pop out 
of a closet waving some hard disks. Our good Chinese is Marie Matiko, 
who is Snipes's love interest, and who has something encrusted on her 
nose that you're relieved to discover is a diamond. There's no chemistry 
between them, but the movie comes up with a way of getting her naked 
that may catch on. Fleeing the scene of another explosion in a stolen 
car, Snipes tells her to get undressed. "Take all your clothes off," he 
orders. "How do you think they knew where we were? They've got you 
bugged!" What's a girl to do?
"The Art of War" is an ancient military text by Sun Tsu, who believed in 
winning by destroying the enemy from within. This movie is a step in 
that direction.

Title
Review for Remember the Titans (2000)
Sports movies, with their clearly definable elements of winning and 
losing, lay out a simple blueprint for our emotions. We identify with 
the protagonist, and then cheer when he wins. It's fun, it's easy, and 
anyone can play.
There's all of that in Remember the Titans, a visceral football movie 
based on the true story of the forced integration of an Alexandria, Va. 
High school in 1971. It's a feel-good, feel-bad, feel-good roller 
coaster ride, replete with the familiar signposts of the genre. But it's 
not really about football. It's about race relations, and there are 
plenty of familiar signposts from that route as well. What is 
surprising, then, is what a terrific movie it turns out to be.
How accurate it is we can only guess. But Alexandria's T.C. Williams 
High School was integrated in the fall of 1971, and its popular white 
football coach was replaced with a black man. Coach Yoast (Will Patton) 
agreed to stay on as an assistant under Coach Boone (Denzel Washington), 
a decision which may have been motivated by an understanding that the 
minute Boone stumbled, the Board would kick him out on his unpopular 
black ass. The movie isn't clear whether Yoast is in on this this from 
the start, but it's not far from everyone's mind.
Boone is not a man who requires any such motivation to succeed. He's a 
tough leader who demands perfection from everyone, black and white, with 
the tyranny of a marine drill sergeant. And he understands that a 
football team beset by racial division is a losing football team. So his 
away-from-home preseason camp is devoted to forcing his black and white 
players to accept each other as much as it is to teaching football and 
fitness. A highlight is a brutal predawn run through the woods which 
ends in the early morning mists of the battlefield at Gettysburgh, where 
the coach delivers a moving inspirational speech.
Bonding a bunch of kids with a common goal is one thing. Translating it 
to the community is another. Virginia in the early seventies was a place 
with a deep-seated perspective on the mixing of races; back from camp 
and in the real world, the integrated Titans have to test their 
hard-earned brotherhood in the fires of the bigotry of their families 
and friends.
Success is measured the old-fashioned way, one perfect season at a time. 
One wonders what the effect of a few tough losses would have been on the 
history of integration in Northern Virginia. But this is a movie, and 
there are certain conventions to be followed. I don't mind a movie that 
pushes my buttons if it pushes them well, and this pushes them like E. 
Power Biggs hitting the stops on a church organ.
There's plenty of credit to go around, starting with another commanding 
performance by Washington and a smart, tough assist from Patton and a 
likable cast of young actor/athletes. And it would be a crime not to 
single out young Hayden Panettiere as Yoast's pint-sized, 
football-obsessed daughter. Pulling the strings masterfully are 
screenwriter Gregory Allen Howard and director Boaz Yakin (Fresh). And 
don't forget producer Jerry Bruckheimer, who finally hits after two duds 
this year, a record that would have had him out on his white ass if he'd 
been coaching the Titans.

Title
Review for Pearl Harbor (2001)
Coming out of the new three-hour extravaganza about the bombing of Pearl 
Harbor I heard a teenage boy say "That's the best movie I ever saw!" But 
then again, back in the '70s I heard a teenage girl in a record store 
say to her friend "Did you know Paul McCartney was with another group 
before Wings?" The point is, teenage memories are short and context is 
limited.
Pearl Harbor is likely not the best movie you will ever see, but it is 
probably not the worst. For the palate refreshed by explosions there is 
plenty of nourishment here, though it's long in coming. For the eye 
delighted by Hawaiian sunsets and attractive young people there is much 
to feast on. For the mind that craves emotional subtlety, historical 
complexity, or depth of character, the menu is thin. For the ear that 
lives for true and credible dialogue, there are always earplugs (and 
these will be handy too for Hans Zimmer's bombastic score - how did they 
expect people to fight a war with all that music going on?)
Producer Jerry Bruckheimer, director Michael Bay, and screenwriter 
Randall Wallace understood that three hours of bombing were too much 
even for an American audience, so they constructed their tale of the 
Japanese sneak attack on the American fleet around a love triangle. 
Cocky, square-jawed Rafe (Ben Affleck) and shy, square-jawed Danny (Josh 
Hartnett) are childhood pals from Tennessee whose love of flying lands 
them in the military flying planes first chance they get (Affleck, 
crowding 30, looks like he might have already logged about ten years in 
the service, but who's counting?) Rafe meets lovely nurse Evelyn (Kate 
Beckinsale) while she's jabbing a needle into his bare fanny in the 
induction center, where she overlooks his inability to read an eye chart 
because he's obviously a born flyer even if he is illiterate (but not 
too illiterate to write and read eloquent love letters later on.)
Who wouldn't fall in love with a girl like that? Rafe does, but then he 
volunteers for a dangerous assignment to the Battle of Britain, and is 
shot down. After a suitable period of mourning Danny steps into the 
romantic picture, and the triangle is joined when something unexpected 
(to them, not to us) transpires.
Soon (some would say not soon enough) romance is overshadowed by infamy 
(or, as a tearful Evelyn puts it to Rafe, ".and then all this 
happened!") On come the Japanese, and the havoc wrought is truly 
spectacular. Some of it is viscerally stunning, some of it is 
emotionally devastating, and some of it looks like a video game.
Meanwhile, back in the White House, FDR (Jon Voight) is waging a heroic 
battle against his infirmity - not the polio that has crippled his legs, 
but the latex wattles that threaten to fall off his face whenever he 
waxes wroth. And in the Japanese fleet, Admiral Yamamoto (Mako) 
struggles with portentous doubts and dialogue ("Brilliant, Sir!" 
exclaims an aide, and he retorts "A brilliant man would find a way not 
to fight a war.") And nobody fights more hopeless odds than Alec Baldwin 
as the valiant Colonel Jimmy Doolittle, who is saddled with some of the 
worst lines in the movie ("There's nothing stronger than the heart of a 
volunteer,") but still manages some welcome swagger.
Bruckheimer & Co. don't want to leave us bummed out over the devastation 
of Pearl, so they've tacked on the bonus of Doolittle's daring 
retaliatory raid on Tokyo, and a romantic coda at the end which leaves 
us wondering how these sorely needed veterans got out of the service 
while, by the evidence of the age of the little boy, the war must still 
be raging.
Pearl Harbor is overwrought and underwritten, but for a generation to 
whom WWII is vague and ancient history, it serves to bring into focus a 
time when America lost its innocence and rose up to kick foreign butt.

Title
Review for Aimée & Jaguar (1999)
Screenplay by Farberbock and Rona Munro from the book by Erica Fischer
Aimee & Jaguar is also a true story of racial intolerance and people 
rising above it, but here the stakes are even higher and the ending less 
uplifting. We're in Berlin in the closing months of WWII, with sirens 
wailing and bombs blowing neighborhoods to rubble, and Jews being herded 
into trucks for concentration camps, while in the concert halls and the 
hotel bars life tries to struggle along with a semblance of normalcy.
Felice Schragenheim (Maria Schrader) is a beautiful, intelligent, 
free-spirited girl with two serious strikes against her under the 
circumstances: she's a lesbian, and she's a Jew. She conceals these 
Nazi-unfriendly traits, and works in the belly of the beast, as the 
trusted secretary of the editor of a Nazi newspaper. Lilly Wust (Juliane 
KF6hler) is the lonely, flibberty-gibbet wife of a German officer, a =
blonde blue-eyed mother of four blonde blue-eyed sons, who cheats on her 
husband to reassure herself while he's at the front.
Felice seduces Lily for fun. Frau Wust has boasted to her nanny Ilse 
(Johanna Wokalek), Felice's lover, that she can smell a Jew. When they 
meet, Felice proffers a perfumed wrist for her to sniff. "Lovely," says 
Lily. "It's French, isn't it?"
But what starts as sport becomes achingly serious. They fall in love. 
There's not much sex, but what there is is intense and beautiful.
Lily is a sweet woman who is not as shallow as circumstances have made 
her, but her naivete leads her to make a couple of terrible blunders. As 
the movie begins and ends, she is an old woman remembering. The real 
Lily Wust still lives in Berlin.
Both actresses are superb. The story is sometimes confusing, and at two 
hours plus it runs to fat, but it's well worth while.
