Authors
balaji@nexus.yorku.ca
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Eszkimó asszony fázik (1983)
     ESKIMO WOMAN FEEL COLD is a 1983 feature film by Janos Xantus
which for some reason has found its way into the 1995 Toronto
International Film Festival. (An unkind voice whispered to me later
that a Hungarian-Canadian sponsor had insisted on Hungarian content at
this year's festival.  This includes a retro of the always disagreeable
and depressing Bela Tarr.)  The story is of an unpleasant concert
pianist named Laci who is looking to get laid after a recital.  He wants
a blonde, he says rudely to some fawning brunettes.  Sure enough, a
blonde happens by, and is apparently unable to resist this talentless
drunk.  It turns out Mari's married to a deaf-and- dumb zookeeper,
Janos, who rescued her when she was a teen runaway.  And so an unlikely
triangle emerges.  The film recounts the sordid unfolding of this affair
between unlikable people, and the beginning of Mari's singing career.
It ends with Laci being murdered by Janos (that's the first scene, so
I'm not giving away anything here).  The title seems to refer to the
white man's fable of Inuit men offering their women to their guests,
though no mention of this is made.
     The director shows undeniable talent in eliciting natural,
unconstructed performances from his principals, and an eye for minor
detail that lends the film an air of gritty and squalid realism.  One
scene stands out: starting with a scuffle between Laci and Janos, and
ending with the three jamming together, Janos on drums, Laci on piano,
and Mari's voice.  Speaking of which, it's awful: flat, and off-key,
and we are forced to listen to her caterwauling "blues" numbers not
once, but several times.  The audience burst into spontaneous laughter
during one of her songs, which began "This will never end..."
     Maybe there is some aspect of East European realism that escapes
me here, but I am truly baffled as to why this movie was made.  This
tale of unpleasant marginal characters is unredeemed by any relevance
to a universal human condition, the relationships are abusive, not to
mention the sex, and I am honestly unable to see how any of these
characters could be attracted to any of the others.  And especially the
unbearable singing is difficult to sit through.  A truly tiresome
film.
