Authors
Wil Tirion
Number of Reviews
4

Title
Review for At First Sight (1999)
I was becoming a little worried that Val Kilmer might be fast turning into a
typecast actor. He's been a drug debased rock star in The Doors, a drink
infested gun-toting cowboy in Tombstone and more recently a gambling junky
in Heat. Add to that the flying rodent obsessed figure of Batman and you
have a line up of characters who would do well from a long break at the
Jenny Craig clinic (Batman may require a little more help than the others)
Imagine my relief when I discovered Kilmer's new role involved a blind man
who regains his sight and falls in love - not a drug or obsessive compulsive
characteristic in sight.
Unfortunately the change in character hasn't paid off and I find myself
wondering if Kilmer isn't naturally suited to presenting surly, self
absorbed roles. In At First Sight he plays Virgil Adamson an architect who,
having been blind since birth, undergoes a miracle operation and suddenly
finds he can see for the first time. The beautiful Mira Sorvino plays the
workaholic architect, Amy Benic, who falls for Adamson and helps him
reluctantly regain his sight. What should be a joyous event, however, soon
turns sour as Adamson is forced to come to terms with a world of shape,
colour and light which he cannot understand.
Happily the mushiness you'd expect from such a movie never really
materializes and the story focuses more on Adamson's struggle to cope with
his newfound world of visual perception than on the developing romance
between him and Benic. Unhappily Kilmer's hot-headed narcissistic portrayal
of Adamson's plight makes the gravity point of the movie extremely hard to
pin down. If you've read the book you'll know the story of the true life
Virgil Adamson is gut-wrenching and will draw a tear from even the most
thick-skinned reader. The movie won't even cause a quivering lip, simply
because its so hard to feel sympathy for Kilmer, particularly when the far
more loveable character of Benic is shown as the insensitive and berated bad
guy.
Overall the film tries hard but, and I know I'm contradicting myself here,
Kilmer just isn't right for the part, Sorvino is simply wasted to bits and
the whole thing could have been so much more but for the awful directing
skills of Irwin Winkler. I'd far sooner recommend, Awakenings, a far
superior version of an almost identical story.
At First Sight opens in the UK 30th April 1999
More reviews at Saturn UK. http://www.saturnuk.com (updates every Thursday)
Posted by Wil Tirion (movie cor.)

Title
Review for True Crime (1999)
True Crime, Clint Eastwood's 41st starring role and 21st film as a director
follows the done-to-death storyline of a prisoner on Death Row. Isaiah
Washington is Frank Beechum, a black man in the wrong place at the wrong
time who suddenly finds himself convicted, sentenced and forgotten for a
convenience store robbery he never committed.
Six years later he is due a lethal injection at one minute past midnight.
What he actually gets is a cliché. The cliché arrives in the form of Steve
Everett (Clint) an ageing - and I do mean ageing - alcoholic and the kind of
stereotypical movie journalists who wakes with a fag and a bottle of Jim
Bean every morning in a cesspool apartment; the kind who can best be
described as a hard-nosed, well lived-in maverick who makes up the rules as
he goes along; the kind who could as easily be a long divorced,
turned-to-the-bottle hard nosed maverick cop, or a downtrodden turned-to-
the-bottle hard-nosed maverick private eye, or any number of other one
dimensional hard-nosed maverick characters from a 70s thriller movie.
His boss at the Oakland Tribune is James Woods and here your heart begins to
lift, you wonder if this might be the saviour of the movie. But no. Woods'
character is such a cliché himself (cold-hearted, loud-mouthed, hard-nosed,
seen-it-all editor-in-chief,   with a real dislike for mavericks) you find
yourself wondering if in making the film Eastwood and his team of writers
didn't actually use the Reader's Digest Book of Failsafe Hollywood Formulas
to contrive the whole deal. Indeed the film and its characters seem like a
parody of themselves and James Woods' appalling overacting only contributes
wholeheartedly to this impression.
When Everitt becomes convinced of Beechum's innocence, Woods gives him one
last chance - allowing him just 12 hours to come up with some hard evidence,
save an innocent life and get the scoop, thus presumably saving himself from
the next step in the evolutionary life of the alcoholic reporter/cop/private
eye, that of unemployment and a chance to really hit the bottle with some
vigour.
In all fairness you can't blame Clint for the dull plot. Andrew Klan, author
of the original book must shoulder that particular responsibility. What you
can blame Clint for, and blame I shall, is the evident gallon-load of
Eastwood-ego he has poured shamelessly into the film. To be frank, Clint is
passed it. He looks his age (69) and he certainly can't carry off the role
he has awarded himself in True Crime, without looking decidedly out of
place.
Think back to In the Line of Fire where he played an ageing bodyguard barely
capable of keeping up alongside the President's car as it ambled along at a
steady 2MPH, and you'll recall thinking you were watching Clint's last
action role, his farewell to those glory-days of guns n' babes with an
amusing send-up of his own debilitating OAP status. Unfortunately Clint
seems far from ready to hand in his sex symbol status and bidding a sensible
farewell to the glory days of guns n' babes is evidently the furthest thing
from his mind.
Washington is the movie's only plus, carrying out his role as the sentenced
convict with dignity and shrewd depth. You might suspect Denis Leary would
add a credit or two to the film as well as some light relief, but sadly the
strange bluntness of Leary's unsubtle humour and the serious racial
undertones of the main plot mix as well as you'd expect. i.e. not atall.
So at the end of the decade we see another of life's unhappy events unfold -
a man long past his sell-by-date refusing to go out gracefully. To my mind
only Brando ever successfully accomplished such a feat and Eastwood is
certainly a long way from entering that particular class of actor. Lets just
hope, if he must return again with another film like this, its as director
only. Like I always say, liver spots and action thrillers simply don't mix.

Title
Review for Waking Ned Devine (1998)
The lottery is an absolute hot-bed of comedic possibilities and
unsurprisingly there've been a few films take advantage of this. The latest
is Waking Ned in which the golden finger of fate pokes decisively at an old
age pensioner in a small Irish village who then celebrates by promptly
dropping dead.
Jackie O'Shea (Ian Bannen) discovers that lady luck has selected one of
Tullymore's 52 inhabitants and  sets off on a personal quest to find out
exactly who it is. His bullish investigations soon lead to the conclusion
that the winner must be Ned Devine. But Ned's unlikely to be spending any of
his windfall because Ned - no not Zed, Ned - is dead. And with Lottery rep
Jim Kelly (Brendan F. Dempsey) on the way, the claim will die with him
unless Jackie and best mate Michael played by David Kelly of Robin's Nest
fame (he was the one armed waiter) can pull enough of a fast one to convince
the lottery rep and the town that the winning ticket belongs to them.
The cast is wonderfully unstarry and quite frankly, that makes the movie.
Originally Kirk Jones received offers from Walter Mathau and Jack Lemmon to
play the parts of the Irish penny-pinching duo but Jones turned them down
and chose Dempsey and Kelly instead - both small screen heroes of his. The
decision to turn down Hollywood big bucks and big names was a brave one.
Reviewers in the states may be more than willing to bad mouth their native
city's stars but when an outsider chooses to shun those same stars a strange
patriotism emerges. As a result there are fears Waking Ned won't do as well
in the States as it most certainly will over here in the UK.
Watching the film you can't help but think of the Full Monty. Kirk Jones
saturates the story with charming subplots and quirky humour while keeping
the level of sentimentality in check throughout. There are daft moments and
hilarious moments but never unrealistic or plot-pandering moments that might
otherwise wreck the whole thing. Bannen and Kelly hurl themselves into their
parts with the vigour and enthusiasm of two British talents left out of the
picture for far too long, and whether skinny-dipping at a picturesque cove
or steaming along naked on a motorbike, they never fail to raise a laugh.
As much a testament to the two likeable old coots who've proved you don't
need to be under 30 to be an excellent British actor, this film is an
exemplification of Kirk Jones' comendable love for homegrown talent,
location and movie-making which should, at the very least, earn him a BAFTA.
More reviews at Saturn UK http://www.saturnuk.com (updates each Thursday)
Posted by Wil Tirion (Film & Cinema cor.)

Title
Review for Swing (1999)
Serving porridge for attempting to withdraw building society funds other
than his own, Martin (Hugo Speer of Full Monty fame) meets saxophonist and
would-be phillosopher Jack (Clarence Clemons) who passes on worldly wisdom
and, when Martin's parole comes up, his beloved instrument, along with the
advice that Martin should go forth and blow his own trumpet.
Inspired, Martin forms a swing band, with soccer fanatic Buddy (Scott
Williams), intelligence- challenged NF croney Oi (James Hicks) and the brass
section of the Orange Brigade members led by Mighty Mac (Sayle). And
although she is now married to the police officer responsible for banging
Martin to rights, even ex-girlfriend Joan (Lisa Stansfield) is persuaded to
come along for the ride.
What ensues is the Commitments thrown into the blender with the Full Monty
and a few episodes of Brookside then baked for a few hours to produce a nice
fruity laughter cake. If you liked the Commitments but found the constant
in-fighting and dark humour something of a down point then you'll like
Swing - you won't love it, but you'll like it.
Its a feel good movie with lashings of Alexie Sayle's wit, Nerys Hughes'
sharp tongue, and Lisa Stansfield's singing. Dermot Kierney as the
lottery-winning nutball fails to add to the broth and Nick Mead's
made-for-TV style of direction will do little to impress cinema-goers. Lisa
Stansfield too seems a little bland as the leading love interest for the
stricken Martin, but her powerful singing voice makes up for this and she's
amiably likeable in a scousish kind of way.
Unfortunately, in a month which sees the debut of such British giants as
Notting Hill, Swing will find it hard to hold its own without coming off as
predictable and under-produced. Any other time and it might have won more
recognition.
