Authors
Zach Douglas
Number of Reviews
4

Title
Review for Four Rooms (1995)
     Four rooms, four stories, four directors.  The film is split four
ways between directors:  Aliison Anders (Mi Vida Loca), Alexandre Rockwell,
Robert Rodriguez (El Mariachi), and Quentin Tarantino (Re-writes for
"It's Pat", Just Kidding).  Tarantino (hereforth, "QT") has a bit more
influence over the picture as a whole, as he was also an executive
producer, and even directed the animated title sequence.  It's difficult
to review this much hyped movie without reviewing all four pieces
separately. For the sake of time and space though, I'll try not to go too
in depth on each since this may end up lengthy anyways.
By now you probably know it's "Ted (Tim Roth) the bell hops first
night on the job" at the classic but run-down Mon Signor Motel.  It's
New Years eve and Ted is in for a wild night.  Allison Ander's room is
Ted's first stop in the segment "Strange Brew".  A coven of witches is
convening there to perform a ritual to bring their Goddess back to life.
The witches are a lively bunch including Valeria Golino (For some reason
her most memorable performances to me have been Hot Shots and Pee Wee's
Big Top), Madonna (Her acting hasn't really improved, but has gotten no
worse),  Ione Sky. Alicia Witt, and Lili Taylor. Together they begin to
throw the ingredients in the cauldron, but it seems one didn't bring what
she was supposed to.  I won't go into it, but they need Ted's help.
I was disapointed with the story here, as it was pretty straight forward
when I expected something more clever like a short film might deliver.
Also, isn't this a comedy?  THere was also a lack of humor if so.  Anders
uses some cute special effects and screen wipes, but I didn't really find
them attractive.  Roth's Ted is most annoying here as it takes a while to
get used to him playing the part that would have been more suitable for
Cosmo Kramer than Mr. Orange.  Enough said about room one, I found it
rather uninteresting, but at least we get it out of the way first for...
The second room, Alexander Rockwell's "Two Sides to a Plate".  Ted
is trying to deliver some ice to the drunken party in 409 (Was that long
haired yuppy scum Lawrence Bender? Again! I think so!)  but he ends
up in a different sort of party.  Sigfried (David Proval) has his wife
Angela (Jennifer Bales) in the ol' Marvin Nash position - bound and
gagged and at gunpoint.  From there, Sigfried has some good old fashioned
fun with Ted as he refuses to let him leave.  He pops some pills and
continues to booze while he gives his wife and Ted the third degree.
The story takes a minor turn, but it's an interesting situation left just
sitting there.  I was confused as again, there wasn't a lot of humor yet
there was also nothing in the story to make up for this shortfall, like
some interesting conclusion we are driving toward.  Jennifer Beals
is very good even while bound and gagged, but Ted is again flinchy and
awkward throughout the segment.  I'd like to be a better critic and say
more about what was wrong with the segment, but it seems to me that the
story being told just wasn't good enough to be interesting regardless
of the acting or the director's style.  Oh well, got those two out of
the way, two of Hollwood's most talked about new comers up next.
Third Segment, Robert Rodriguez (The 7000 dollar man) directs, "The
Misbehavers".  Word on the street was that Rodriguez's segment blew the
other three out of the water.  Yet I didn't find this entirely true.
Rodriguez's story DOES have some structure to it though.  The segment
revolves around Antonio Banderas and his Wife (Tamlyn Tomita) attempting
to go out for a night on the town while leaving the kids 'home alone'.
Yes, that's right Home Alone.  So Father politely demands that Ted watch
over the kids (or else) and slips him a quick $500.  Of course, all does
not go well with the kids, and wacky wild mayhem ensues.  This segment
was a lot better than the other two.  The characters get some good, quick
definition early on, and the it's off to the races.  The main problem
here seems that Rodriguez's style is quite restricted by the setting and
characters.  He wants to do his trade mark super-stylistic camera work
- but on what?  We see a nice take of Ted sweeping shoes of the bed and
also of Ted turning the key in the lock.  Ooh, Exciting.   Also, it's
supposed to be wacky fun with the two misbehaving' kids, yet Rodriguez
seems to forget they are kids.  There are many things that go harshly
against the grain here including the language and some violence.  I
found these things mildly funny, but mostly awkward and bewildering in
this setting.  Overall though, nice work with a memorable conclusion.
Definitely not bad at all.  Which leads us to wonderboy himself,
Tarantino.
QT takes the reigns a bit early as he has a short transition piece
where Ted calls up a manager to try and get some help (Why, if the
manager isn't Shocked Lady/Shot Lady herself from Reservoir Dogs/Pulp
Fiction!).  But, his call to the manager is taken by one Marisa Tomei
doing a HUGE stretch to play a stoned chick playing some nintendo after
the big party. This was probably my favorite part of the entire movie!
Tomei is excellent, and you can tell that the dialogue has made that
sudden change, a change over to...the Tarantino Zone.  Even Ted is
slightly calmed now, speaking fluent English.  Ted finally get to
speak with the manager. She tells him to take care of the hotel's only
Hollywood client if it's the only thing he does right the rest of the
night.  Flamboyant Movie Star, Chester Rush (Played by QT himself, imagine
that) is that big star. So Ted makes the trip to the penthouse to deliver
some bizarre items that the party requested, and from there on out it's
full-fledged Tarantinoverse.  In the penthouse are Chester, and his
apparent parasite/friends Norman and Leo (Paul Caldron and Bruce Willis
respectively, both in Pulp Fiction - Caldron is Paul, and that's up to
ya'll' if his name doesn't ring a bell) and also Angela from down the
stairs (Jennifer Beals character!  Perhaps Sigfried was RIGHT to have
tied her up!)  Like QT's previous works, the characters yak about
bullshit that has nothing to do with anything, yet somehow, it does.
Also, you seem to remember hearing bits of dialogue in another movie
some how - was it in..another QT movie? I think it was.  Chester curses
a lot and cozies up to Ted while Norman sits quietly and Leo is on the
phone arguing with his wife.  Once the gang feels ready though, they
let Ted in on the secret of why they want him to hang out with them -
to help them reenact an old episode of Alfred Hitchcock Presents!  You
could feel the anticipation (curiosity?) of the audience rise instantly
at that point.  Chester then must sell Ted on staying to help them out.
I'm going to stop right there and let you watch the rest because it was
truly a great 20-25 minutes for me and I don't want to spoil anything as
it took all I could do to avoid hearing what happened myself before
watching it (Many have seen the original Hitchcock episode, although I'm
sure it's quite a bit different!).
I found this segment to be imperfect, but pretty damn entertaining.
I'll admit I'm a big QT fan, and he really puts more of a stylistic stroke
onto the canvas in his segment where the others couldn't seem to find
enough room to do so (perhaps that is why QT made sure HE got to film
in the roomy penthouse!).  Some of the camera work is amazing as the
camera slowly moves and turns while the actors just keep spitting out
lines, and eventually when the camera comes to rest, the actors are all
lined up on screen in perfect form, right where QT wants them to be.
He also shoots an incredibly long take (5-6-7 minutes or more?) and even
shoots a scene with the character's shadows talking. The dialogue is
funny, but nothing near as memorable as in his other works thus far.
There is a LOT of cursing which could be distraction.  I guess QT figured
he would get his quota in this new time frame somehow.  QT's acting is
slightly flawed as usual, but not terrible.  Caldron also didn't win my
respect as I thought they could have found someone else either inside or
out of the Tarantinoverse for this role (and QT's also).  Willis is
so-so but and Beals is even better than before, but it doesn't really
matter, as all the characters get better collectively throughout the
segment to pull off the punch line.
The segment is much like a condensed Tarantino movie.  There's the
B.S. which is like a shot to numb you and make you forget whatever it was
you were thinking about, then the anticipation that something is going to
happen, and then it builds (slowly, slowly), and then something happens
and in a big way, and then you have a nice stylish ending, role the theme
music.   It's got everything, just squeezed down a little smaller for the
limited time frame.  OK, so I'm an obviously biased Tarantino fan, but if
you don't agree that the end of this movie makes you think "Whew, it
wasn't a total waste of time" - then I'll stick a red hot poker up my..
ahem (sorry another QT dialogue reference).
Well, I covered what I could and the major points of what I thought
worked or didn't.  Overall, it's just not a very good film.  But, taken
in parts, it does have some interesting moments.  I failed to mention
earlier, another big minus for me was some grotesqueness/toilet humor in
the first three segments.  All three contained something that wasn't
very pretty (bodily fluids, references to bodily fluids, other icky
things).  None of them were very funny either, and somewhat low-brow
which also seemed to go against the grain at times.  Again, the setting
seemed to handcuff the first three directors the most and it's obvious
from their other works that they are no where close to talentless, just
perhaps not as adept at these shorter pieces.
On the good side, it's a very different movie.  Even different
than other experimental movies where different stories/directors are
combined. Tomei and Beals displayed the most talent and the acting all
in all wasn't bad. Bad and good aside, if you are a true Tarantino fan,
I think you'll eat up his latest offering and perhaps find some merit
in the other three where you can.  If you aren't, I can only hope you find
at least ONE room in the building that you can enjoy!

Title
Review for From Dusk Till Dawn (1996)
This is my early draft as I couldn't locate names and spellings
for all involved parties!  Forgive me if I've made a grammatical
error or two also.  I'm a busy man!  Send me corrections if you
find mistakes please.  Also, I haven't given away anything that
isn't given away in interviews or on t.v. but
read at your own risk.
First off, let's consult Webster's College Dictionary
    Gen-re (zhan're) n. 1. a class or category or artistic endeavor 
having a
    particular form, content, technique, or the like.
    be-wil-der (bi wil d'upside down e'r) v.t. 1. to confuse or puzzle
    completely.
    Ok, lets not kid anyone.  We all know Dusk Till Dawn is being hyped
because of Quentin Tarantino's involvement.  He's done a re-write here, 
some
less than good acting there, even a sandbox project for grownup directors
gone terribly wrong - but here is what he does best: Write scripts.  We
ALSO know or should know by now that his new movie is about killing 
vampires.
More things we know are that Harvey Keitel, Julliete Lewis, and George
Clooney are in the film.  Oh yeah, we also knew that hot-shot Robert
Rodriguez is not only the director but the 'Camera Operator' as the 
credits
say.  OK, you think you're set up pretty well. You are expecting the 
worst.
Maybe your expecting the best.  I'll just say that no matter what you 
expect,
you will in no way be prepared for this film!
    OK quick synopsis if you haven't heard.  Notorious criminals
Seth and Richie Gecko are armed, dangerous, and on the loose after
a jail break and bank robbery.  While fleeing to Mexico they take a 
family
hostage.  Keitel is the ex-minister/dad, disgruntled with the Lord for 
the
loss of his wife and heading to Mexico with daughter (Lewis) and Chinese
son (?).  So, the band swings on down to the rendevous point where they
proceed to KILL VAMPIRES.  AND MORE VAMPIRES. AND MORE AND MORE.
Mr. Blue: "How many vampires is that?"
Mr. White: "A LOT"
    Now, I don't recall ever having watched a movie with this sort
of genre splicing in my life.  This movie is 50% road/heist film and
50% Splatter/Horror.  I've seen movies that hovered on the fringe of it
(most recently, Dead Presidents) but never, never, never have I seen
something like this.  For that alone, I admire Tarantino much like Todd
admires Butthead when he says, "You're TWISTED MAN!". (p.s. that's
a compliment; Also, mentioning of Beavis, Butthead, or Todd in any
followup posts or mail is punishable by death)
    But, I guess we must dig to the heart of the matter and ask the
bigger question: Does it Work? CAN it work?  Yes and No.  It works
as 50% of a heist film, and it definitely works as 50% of a splatter
film.  But I'm not sure if those parts put together are as fulfilling
as 100% of either genre.
     The first half of the film is pretty tight.  Reminiscent of The
Getaway (No dummy, the one with Steve McQueen, not that Baldwin freak)
and Natural Born Killers if they had featured two brothers instead of
lovers.  First off we notice that Clooney can play the tough guy!  This
guy smokes. Tarantino also shows that he was really meant to play
a psychopath all this time also!  I rather enjoyed his performance,
and the two make quite a team.  We also  catch a good look at what
NBK would have looked like in it's original form (Die Oliver Die).
There's violence, tension, and humor, but it's all as black as the
outfits the Gecko Brothers are wearing.  The dialogue is Tarantino gone
Texas, and fairly accurate. The characters even throw in a few movie
references to get their point across.  But, before you get your panties
in a wad by saying that QT's a one trick dialogue spewing pony, it's
really not that similar to his last writing jobs.   OK, so maybe it is,
but different at the same time; Just don't let me hear that 'one trick
pony' line because I hate it.  Rodriguez does his usual magic with the
camera, and he does the desert road justice.  There is one disturbing
scene I won't mention which is rather well done, but quite bewildering
and I'll leave it up to you to figure THAT one out.
    The second half of the movie finds the unlikely gang making it to
the rendevous point (an insanely wild titty-bar, pardon my French) where
they are greeted by Cheech Marin and a load of Vampires.  They have a
couple of bruisers lend a hand for a while - a Black Vietnam Vet and a
Large Mexican Fellow.  From here the movie takes on the likeness of one
of the greatest splatter flicks ever made, Dead Alive.  As in Dead Alive,
the ex-minister must gain strength to fight the evil ("I kick ass, for 
the
Lord! - from D.A. not Dusk, but Keitel gives a similar, more sedate
monologue).  Also, the point is not really to escape, but to KILL every
last Mexican turned undead evil minion from the whorey nether regions.
They go at the task with great vigor, and the camera work may leave your
head spinning at times!  Drawback here as that any attempt to recapture
anything from the first half of the movie is lost.  Acting or dialogue
is no longer important, and so you've lost sight of the creative effort.
It's just too much of a shock to the film-goers well trained mind!  For
me it was a pleasent shock, but I can imagine many will be repulsed by 
the
total abandoment of basic film structure
    Having said all that, I'd say that if they had a genre for this
genre, it would be at or near the top.  But since they don't, this film
will probably be forgotten only to live on as a best renter in the cult
classics section of the video store 15 years from now.  I liked it
personally, and will probably see it again just to relive the bizarre
experience (note, still nothing has topped the experience of sitting
through Tetsuo's Ironman!).  I won't put it on my top shelf with 
Reservoir
Dogs and Pulp Fiction, but I will always marvel at the fact that 
Tarantino
actually got away with getting this film made, and doing it as grandly as 
he
did with the help of Robert "water into wine" Rodriguez. I see it as 
another
visually strong effort from Rodriguez and another page in Tarantino's
bizzarre film resume.  One that, when he is finished writing, will indeed 
be
more bizarre than anything that the good Doctor Seuss could come up with.

Title
Review for Jackie Brown (1997)
     A lot of the reviews I read for Jackie Brown started to sound the same. 
 Too long, bringing back Pam Grier like Travolta, yada yada yada.  So I 
wrote my own thoughts down which I haven't had time to do in some time.  I 
cut through a lot of crap like re-telling the plot which you already know if 
you watched it.  Everyone said Jackie Brown was too long and self indulgent. 
Guess what - so is my criticism, read it or not!
     First off, Tarantino didn't have to cast Pam Grier for this role.  
There were no other options.  Pam Grier IS Jackie Brow. In my book it's a 
beautiful thing that Tarantino has written this role, better yet, this MOVIE 
for Pam Grier.  Altering Elmore Leonard's original title of "Rum Punch" 
(What's that mean any ways?) and Jackie's last name to more closely fit 
Grier's persona as the 70's biggest female blaxploitation star (Actually, 
Grier was one of the biggest box office draws of the 70's - period).  
Jackie's description could be Grier's - Strong but aging, black and 
beautiful, still working but having seen better days. Grier plays Jackie 
with above all - determination.  Like James Brown howled, "Got to get over, 
'fo we go under" - Grier and Jackie both get over magnificently.  Might as 
well stick to casting since the other characters DID have to be cast.  
Samuel Jackson as Ordell - excellent of course.  I've read some people say, 
"He's pretty much like Jules in Pulp Fiction".  No, he's not really much 
like Jules at all.  Jules Winfield was the real thing.  Ordell is a 
wannabee.  Unlike the real Macks with a whole stable of 'fly ho's' Ordell's 
has three - a stoner, a simpleton, and an chubby loon.  He put's on gloves 
like I used to do pretending to be David Hasslehoff in Knight Rider.  He 
wants to be important, a player... and that is why he must surround himself 
with the likes of Lewis, Beaumont, Melanie, Sheronda, and Simone - they are 
less bright than he and thus to him he's the Man. Ordell's character is a 
lot closer to the one Jackson played in John Paul Anderson's "Hard Eight"  - 
an up and comer who is pulling some strings, but can't close the bag (I'm 
speaking of the character of course, but the same might apply to Anderson). 
 Robert Forster as Max Cherry.  I'm unfortunately somewhat unfamiliar with 
Forster's 70's T.V. and B-Movies work.  Nevertheless, it was all the more 
surprise to see such a great performance from this 'unknown'.  Max Cherry IS 
a "Cherry" (Virgin) of sorts... I don't think we know if Max is single, 
divorced, or what, but it's obvious he has lived a calculated life somewhat 
removed from a more sexual or emotional existance... much too calculating to 
know what to do when he is smitten by Jackie Brown. Poor Max calculates 
until the very end, and as his time runs out he can't compute the options 
fast enough.  Forster plays Max with the all the restraint required as his 
prominent role could have been easily overplayed.   Keaton as the cop.  It 
works I guess.  In Tarantino's world cop's are generally a. White and B. 
Dorky and Keaton performs both with ease.  He's fairly on the ball, but he 
like Ordell, has a long way to go - if you want to BE the man, you gotta 
BEAT the man right?    Bridgette Fonda as Ordell's "Little Surfer Girl" 
Melanie. Perfect. Bridgette=Gidget?  Good to see her do something 
substantial, Singles and Bodies, Rest, and Motion seem like eons ago.  Maybe 
get a new agent?  Chris Tucker as the short lived Beaumont Livingston - just 
fine - Tucker is perhaps the blackest of the young black actors.  Easily 
black enough to hang with Jackson and Grier.  If Chris Rock hadn't 
overexposed himself and done so many goofy commercials perhaps he would have 
been the one getting in the trunk?  Last but not least - DeNiro as Lewis.  I 
had some problems with this.  I first thought, "DeNiro can't play such a 
looser!".  Then I thought.. "But he played two of the greatest losers in 
film history".  So what was the difference?  DeNiro before played sick, 
angry losers.  Here he is asked to simply to be a stupid, sad, looser in 
which some stupid, sad, looser should have been cast.  The role was beneath 
Bob, but DeNiro gives Lewis all he possibly can muster with such a limited 
task.  Ok, that's casting.  Tired yet?  Too bad.
     Now where?  Direction?  Tarantino's direction is a major break from his 
previous works.  While Tarantino is still quite indulgent with the camera, 
he is more restrained than before.  Absent are Tarantino's post modern 
tendencies - the "new" new wave tendency of drawing attention to the film 
itself. Gone are the prefabricated gaffes, stylized deaths, slowed motion, 
cartoon boxes drawn in the air, etc.  Jackie harkens back to the 70's ultra 
realistic, slowly spun crime tales such as Friedken's French Connection or 
Lumet's Serpico, Dog Day Afternoon, and the Anderson Tapes (Tarantino is no 
doubt a fan of all).  And while Dogs and Pulp were comprised from so many 
different bits and pieces and styles - in Jackie, Tarantino invest in a
singular style - (will this be called "his own" now?) which is something he 
really hasn't done before.  I could find no distinguishable film references 
in Jackie in either dialogue or shots other than one mentioned later.  One 
might say this was because it was an adaptation and not Tarantino's own 
writing - yet I believe this was a deliberate action by Tarantino to hush 
the loud mouths who said he has no talent as a director above and beyond 
homaging other's works.  It wouldn't be that hard to make film references 
regardless of the source material...  Danny Boyle took Irwin Welsh's 
Trainspotting and meshed a wide range of references from the likes of A Hard 
Days Night to a Clockwork Orange.  Again, I believe it was a deliberate 
choice.  One of Tarantino's smaller trademarks does survive... the POV shot 
from the car trunk now appearing in 4 Tarantino movies.  Another difference 
is in the look of the film as Guilermo Navaro must have been a cheaper 
Cinematographer than Andrzej Sekula who worked on Dogs and Pulp.  I liked 
Sekula better, but Navaro's images seem a little brighter and sharper which 
does work ok with the more realistic style of Jackie. 
     Ok, what about those 2 obvious 'tricks' that Tarantino does use in 
Jackie?  The Split Screen, and the repeated time sequence.  The split screen 
job might be considered an all-purpose homage to 70's film making (see QT 
favorite De Palma use it in Carrie or Norman Jewison back in 68 in a 
probable QT favorite the Thomas Crown Affair).  The shot is ballsy.. but 
masterful.. it would be difficult to envision the scene being done any other 
way after viewing it.  Secondly, the repeated time sequence.  I read others 
say it's similar to his previous non-linear time constructions. Again, 
totally different.  Previously Tarantino has taken the entire story and 
shuffled it, overlapping small portions creating a disjointing effect on the 
narrative that takes multiple viewings or some brainstorming to figure out 
exactly what DID happen.  In Jackie, the same small portion of the story is 
told exactly the same way, three times, from 3 different view points.  This 
actually increases the amount of information received, instead of 
diminishing it (of course, not much to think about later).  Prominent (and 
hard working) internet critic James Berardinelli likened it to Rashomon or 
more recently Courage Under Fire - yet those tales were repeated multiple 
times by different narrators and each narrator took his own liberties with 
the story and each version is told with direction to reflect the differences 
(well, at least Roshomon was).  I think the sequence in Jackie to be much 
more akin to Stanley Kubrick's "The Killing" where a strictly objective 
camera captures a heist from multiple view points and angles.  From one 
angle, a character is merely peripheral while the other character does HIS 
important task.. yet switch the angle to the peripheral character and now we 
see what HE is going through while the other character is now just a figure 
in the distance.  Thankfully there is no narrator to explain things to us as 
was needed in the Killing, but Tarantino does include a (visible) 'stop 
watch'  just as Kubrick provided an oral one to help out.  I think it's a 
fascinating use of film technique to tell the story. Is it necessary?  Of 
course not.  Then again, what in film really is?  They could have just 
filmed Jack Palance in an easy chair reading the story and it would be just 
as good right?
    The music - typical Tarantino fair?  Again, not really.  Not much of  
the surf and rockabilly of Pulp, and barely any of the 70's pop / rock which 
permeated Dogs.  Tarantino has turned to some fine, fine soul music.  More 
importantly, most (but not all) of the songs are used in a genuine manner - 
not as ironic counterpoint,  as could have been expected from the guy who 
had a cop beat to Joe Tex singing "I Gotcha" and brutal assaults set to 
"Stuck in the Middle" and "Commanche".  Tarantino treats these songs with 
much more respect and actually repeats songs as 'Themes' (every good hero 
should have one) for his characters which is something he has not done 
before.  The Delfonics "Didn't I Blow Your Mind This Time" scores the 
attraction between Jackie and Max.  An incredibly nasty instrumental tune 
which I have no idea what the name or artist is (Since it's an instrumental 
AND since they left it off the soundtrack) plays when Ordell is laying forth 
his halfbaked but nefarious plans.  Jackie's theme is "Across 110th Street" 
by Bobby Womack, incredibly telling for the character - "Pimps trying to 
catch a woman that's weak", "Doing whatever I had to do to survive, I'm not 
saying what I did was all right.."  The movie opens and closes with the song 
and to those (like me) who hold such soul music near and dear to their 
hearts, Jackie mouthing the lyrics while departing haven risen above her 
predicament is a pretty stirring moment.  This deep fried soul is no doubt 
much less accessible to the average Tarantino demographic from his previous 
two films but to those who have an appreciation for black music (and film) 
should really, really, really dig it.
     Well, I've just about covered most of the things I had in mind to say 
about Jackie Brown.  Lastly, some small themes and or sub text I picked up. 
 Usually it takes two viewings for this, so they are a bit scarce now.  
First is the somewhat obvious theme of "age" in the film.  Looking back, 
Tarantino's previous films do touch on the subject...  in Dogs everyone is 
to respect the Elder Joe Cabot who is referred to throughout as "Papa" or 
"Daddy".  More so in Pulp Fiction - Marcellus tells Butch he is too old to 
realize any dreams of being a contender.  Jules quits the business declaring 
"My ass is retired".  Travolta gained pounds as it was important that 
Vincent also be a hit man past his prime.  The Wolf is an elderly statesman, 
he tells his girlfriend she should "respect her elders".  In Jackie, most of 
the 'bad guys' are aging. It's not so much sub-text because they talk about 
it openly, but it's an interesting theme nevertheless.  Lewis coughs and is 
a bit too old for sex with Melanie (and on a separate thought.. has his 
incarceration made him more comfortable with front to back sex?).  Max and 
Jackie talk about how they are getting old while listening to a selection 
from her vinyl collection (at this point there is also some clever innuendo 
concerning how "black coffee" would be fine).  Any ways, I wonder if this 
theme of aging is something Tarantino has highlighted or created (perhaps 
some Allenesque paranoia exists in Tarantino?) or if this was merely part of 
Leonard's character traits that he chose to remain faithful to?  Lastly, 
some symbolism in a reverse fashion from Reservoir Dogs (literally, 
fashion).  In RD, the Dogs start the movie dressed immaculately in the super 
cool black and white retro-fitted suits made famous twice before by the 
likes of Godard and Woo.  As the film progresses though, sunglasses are 
lost, jackets tossed, and white shirts come un tucked and blood soaked.  
Jackie Brown encounters the reverse - as her situation improves, so does her 
outfit.  Jackie starts in her Stewardess uniform - nice enough, but a symbol 
of her, well, shitty commercial job.  She goes downward to "County Blues" 
and bathrobes and other unflattering attire.  But as Jackie is on the rise, 
she dawns a tight fitting red dress and is filmed notably more attractively. 
 Finally, with the execution of her plan - she purchases a chic, 70's style 
pant suit - black and white - not so much unlike the black and white duds of 
both the Dogs (before they all got trashed)  and of Jules and Vincent 
(before they had to dress like 'A couple of dorks'). This is no doubt 
nothing new to film as symbolic colors and wardrobe have always been 
important to the best film makers - but it's attention to such details that 
I believe will keep Tarantino among those great ones in the years to come.  
     Was Jackie Brown too long?  I can't hardly stand people objecting to 
the length of a film as a criticism for 'what's wrong with it'.  A bad film 
can be too long.  How can a good film be too long?  Why do people go to 
spend big bucks on a movie, and then bolt from the theater like they have 
something better to be doing?  I make it a point to get a seat before the 
trailers start.  I love trailers. By the time they are through I'm already 
through a box of Jr. Mints.  I watch the movie, I get comfortable, I focus 
on the whole screen and try and take it all in.  I listen to the music, and 
then when it's over I WATCH THE CREDITS.  Why not?  Is there not music 
playing on a sound system that costs thousands of dollars?  Aren't you in a 
comfy seat with a climate controlled environment?  Don't you want to see the 
songs and artists?  Do you know any of the people Tarantino thanked at the 
end of the credits??  Did you see the beautiful Jackie Brown logo in 198 
point "Boogie" font scroll up the screen to close the credits?  How about 
the inserts in credits of L.A. Confidential?  Are you watching the movie 
because you like film or you are killing time?  If you answer the latter, 
that's fine - we all need to kill some time.  It's just disheartening for 
people like me to hear an artist's work criticized for being too long simply 
because some folks's inability to relax and let those 'important' things 
rest for a few hours and REALLY take in a movie.
     Overall, Jackie Brown is not a monumental film.  It's almost as much 
pulp fiction as Leonard's novels are - entertaining, but somewhat 
forgettable.  No one will quote Ordell or Jackie on a daily basis.  The 
Simpson's won't have a homage to it.  Furniture commercials won't start 
featuring soul music.  But, it was a very, very good film and one that lets 
the load of 'what comes next' come down of his back.  Hell, I feel more 
relief than he does now that's it's over and done with.  It proves Tarantino 
is not a 'one trick pony'.  It shows a great deal of consistency when fellow 
film makers who were declared "Auteurs" after one film are failing miserably 
on their second and third.  It shows a definite turn towards a more serious 
style of film making, and perhaps, if he wants to make another, will lead to 
another monumental film.
Any comments or corrections are greatly appreciated.

Title
Review for Eraserhead (1977)
(Note: I highly recommend reading Ray Wolf's excellent web guide for his 
insights on Eraserhead. I left out a lot of information because I couldn't 
bring myself to regurgitate all the things I read on Ray's page and instead 
tried to bring forth a few new elements that I didn't find there or 
elsewhere. Other recommended readings on the subject is Danny's Pearry's 
review in his book Cult Movies. Here is Ray's web page:
http://members.aol.com/RayWolf1/eraserhead/index.html 
It's been a long time since I have watched a film as intricately detailed, 
thought provoking,  and scary as Eraserhead. While my opinion of David Lynch 
was was somewhat mixed after having seen all of his films except for The Lost 
Highway, it has become apparent to me that having some understanding of the 
meanings of his films is of up most importance to the enjoyment of them. Many 
will say Lynches films are "visually entertaining" or "bizarre" enough to be 
entertaining but don't fully endorse the films because they can't fully 
embrace just what the hell the film meant. That is understandable. Lynch 
himself says that people should not try so hard to understand his films in 
absolute terms. I will agree with him so far as saying that precise 
interpretations of films such as Eraserhead are impossible.  However, I 
refuse not to give up that easily and not attempt to grasp at an 
interpretation and contribute my thoughts, regardless where it leads, how 
misguided it might be, or how much time on a nice Saturday afternoon it might 
take me to do so. 
I've read a few different ideas on the meaning of Eraserhead. I can for the 
most part agree with them, but I must seek to fill in some crucial and what 
seems to me - obvious elements that seem to me missing from many 
interpretations. To add to the popular theories concerning Eraserhead I (like 
others) have turned to the Auteur theory (1.) for insight. With what 
understanding I do have of Lynch's other films and also with a general 
knowledge that many of our greatest film makers continually made
autobiographical works wherein they cast leading men who resembled 
themselves. Another aspect in Eraserhead of which I am not sure exists in his 
other films are visual puns to be explained later. Going back to leading men; 
Lynch would later utilize Kyle McGlaughlin as his alter ego, it is Jack Nance 
in Eraserhead who is Lynch. If we imagine Lynch telling his own story of 
troubled days in a hellish area of Philadelphia when he was 21, then this is 
what I believe Eraserhead is saying: 
As Henry lies prone at the first of the movie, we see him yawn and from his 
mouth he emits a sperm-like worm. The yawn is the first pun - Henry has had 
intercourse or "slept" with a woman who turns out to be Mary. We see the man 
at the window looking down. The man pulls the levers of the great machine and 
we see the sperm head toward a swirling black pool and enters. Yes, it's God. 
>From here see Henry's life. We don't know much about it but know he is a 
depressed, sad man. Henry then meets his girlfriend Mary's parents and they 
declare he is to be married because he and Mary had
intercourse. It's notable that Henry doesn't have any say in the matter and 
just accepts his fate as if he has no control over it. Henry's premature 
mutant baby comes. Henry looks at the radiator and sees a funny puffy cheeked 
woman. This woman is death, and Henry is contemplating suicide when he thinks 
of her and sees her singing her happy tune, "In heaven, everything is fine". 
Mary leaves Henry. Henry takes care of the baby when it gets sick. But Henry 
soon wants to leave but baby won't let Henry leave. Henry has sex with the 
bad lady across the hall. Things then get really bad for Henry as his head 
falls off. From Henry's neck comes the head of the child. Henry later kills 
the baby and goes on to be with the puffy cheeked lady (and embraces death). 
Now, a smaller point of interest before getting to what my main point is what 
Lynch is saying about old people. From Blue Velvet we can see that Lynch 
likes to poke fun at American traditions such as family, religion, teen 
romance, and the like. In Eraserhead we see a strong contempt for the family 
of Mary X and perhaps for the elderly in general. Lynch says they are are 
stupid, frightening, and useless. "Grandma" sits motionless, posed as 
Whistler's Mother, except with a cigarette dangling from her mouth
reinforces her pathetic pose. Her uselessness is shown by her "helping" 
mother X make salad as Mother X puts the bowl in her lap and then tosses the 
salad herself, reaching her arms under Grandmother's to toss the salad. 
Father X is near senile and beats his arm which he tells Henry he has lost 
use of and lost feeling in. Lynch obviously finds it disgusting, yet somewhat 
comical that old men often are overly eager to relate their physical 
infirmities to others. Once Henry and Mary are "married" the in-laws are 
removed from the picture. 
The new focus is on the "Baby" that enters their lives. Another key is the 
statement that the baby is premature which is important later. Mary can't 
stand the baby and leaves. Henry begins to look toward the radiator (suicide) 
as an option. He tries to take care of the baby. Finally, he steps on the 
stage with the woman from the radiator and it's at about this time that Henry 
loses his head. I find it easiest to apply the most basic of visual metaphors 
(the puns) to the following key sequences after Henry's head falls off. 
First, Henry has "Lost his head". Equivalent to Lynch thinking that he is 
crazy to have been married (or living with someone) and having a child in the 
prime of his life. When his head is found by the boy, he takes it in to the 
shop. Before they use the material in Henry's head the proprietor of the shop 
first drills in to the head to get a core sample of the material inside. He 
says that it is "OK". Lynch is saying that someone in their prime should 
"have their head checked" if they become shackled by wife and child. This is 
backed by the proprietor's findings: That the material in Henry's head is 
grade A
material for making pencil erasers. It is now confirmed that Henry (Lynch) 
must have been very stupid to make the decisions he made. It is this point 
that seems to have gone unspoken in deciphering Eraserhead's meaning. Perhaps 
we are too sympathetic toward Henry (because he must endure such a hellish 
life and appears like a scared boy) or toward Lynch (because he is an artist 
we respect) to make that statement to say that being an Eraserhead means 
being an idiot. That's my main point. 
To further iterate, we see that from Henry's body has sprung the tiny head of 
the baby. Remembering now that the baby was premature, we again see now that 
it is also Henry/Lynch himself who was premature in their decision (or lack 
of a decision) to take on a wife and child. 
Now, of course there is a lot left unexplained that I won't go in to, or 
perhaps can't go in to. Does Henry die? Why is the lady behind the radiator 
so grotesque if she represents a beautiful way out of the hellish life? Why 
does she kill the worms? Is she like an angel? Does that make the lady across 
the hall a demon? There are many other questions, but once you have a tiny 
grasp of what might be happening in this film, it becomes really fascinating 
to dig deeper and deeper as Eraserhead is so intricate that new aspects will 
surface with each viewing. I think I have done about all the digging in to 
the film and my mind that I can do on this viewing, so perhaps when I watch 
the film again someday I will return with some more thoughts on Eraserhead. 
Postscript: Do I like Eraserhead? Yes. I think it is one of the most 
monumental achievements in modern film history. I really don't know of any 
other full length, live action film that so fully creates such a singular, 
visceral, and personal world as Eraserhead. The closest works I can think of 
might be films such as Fellini's 8 1/2 or La Dulce Vita and the works of 
Louis Bunuel who's nightmarish surrealist films might be Eraserhead's only 
equals.  I take that back, one other film that I can think of is Tetsuo: The 
Iron Man.  Check that out some time if you dare.   Also, I don't know of many 
other films who's soundtrack (consisting of what Sounds like saws, grinding 
metal, and other various industrial noises) has been so carefully 
constructed. Only the Kubrick films such as 2001 and The Shining come to 
mind. The only thing more disturbing than watching Eraserhead might be to 
listen to it. 
1. - Auteur Theory. Critical theory on films originated by Francois Truffaut. 
The theory focused on the director's of the films rather than stars, plot, or 
production company. The theory states that by becoming more familiar with all 
the works of a director, that familiar themes would arise from the 
filmmaker's personal visions, desires, and sensibilities. These themes can 
then be used to explain individual films which might, when viewed as singular 
works, be hard to explain otherwise.  
Any comments or corrections are greatly appreciated.
