Authors
Christopher E. Meadows
Number of Reviews
15

Title
Review for Feiying gaiwak (1990)
(1990; American release 1997; written and directed by Jackie Chan,
produced by Leonard Ho)
Jackie Chan's "Armour of God II: Operation Condor" is scheduled to hit
American theaters sometime early next year (with the "Armour of God
II:" part of the title removed so as not to confuse the American
audience).  In an effort to make a pre-emptive strike on
rec.arts.movies.reviews well ahead of the crowd, I went out and rented
it from a local specialty film rental shop [any specialty film buffs
in or near Columbia, MO who don't know about it already, email me!] to
see what I thought.
The version I rented was dubbed, using actors whose voices I
recognized from Streamline Pictures's anime releases.  It was actually
a pretty good dub, compared to some I've seen, but it will almost
certainly be redone for American release, likely with Jackie Chan
doing his own voice.
Dub quality aside, this is what I have to say about the film.
It will be interesting to see how "Operation Condor" goes over in
America.  The two prior Jackie Chan films to see American mass-market
cinematic release (both directed by Stanley Tong), "Rumble in the
Bronx" and "(Police Story III:) Supercop," mostly follow the
traditional Western action-movie formula--relatively tight plotting, a
straight and serious story, lots of action.
"Operation Condor", on the other hand, typifies the traditional
Hong Kong movie style--more laid back, with abrupt and sometimes
bewildering mood swings--fairly serious one moment; complete goofball,
often slapstick humor the next moment.  It's directed by Jackie Chan
himself; this is the style of movie he likes to make.  But is it the
style of movie that American audiences will like?
In "Operation Condor", Jackie Chan reprises his "Armour of God"
role as "Jackie," a gadgeteering fortune hunter who is kind of a cross
between Indiana Jones and James Bond.  Shortly after a narrow escape
from a savage tribe, Jackie returns to civilization to find himself
asked to assist the hunt for hidden Nazi gold, buried in a secret base
in northern Africa at the end of World War II.
However, this expedition is not going to be easy.  Along the way,
Jackie has to contend with the three inept women who comprise the rest
of his party, and at least two different groups who both want to get
their hands on that gold.
The word that best describes "Operation Condor" is "zany".  Here
are some of the most oddball chase scenes and fight sequences ever
filmed, including a car chase where Jackie just can't seem to stay on
his motorcycle, and hand-to-hand combat in a wind tunnel blowing at
full force.  Jackie fans won't be disappointed; the fight scenes are
some of the best since the original Police Story.  It remains to be
seen whether American audiences will enjoy the odd mix of humor and
action, or else just not "get it".
In a way, both "Armour of God" movies contain some not-so-subtle
homages to the James Bond films, from the pre-theme opening gambits to
the gadget-laden vehicles and devices Jackie uses, and Jackie's
character also borrows from the Indiana Jones films.  One of the later
scenes is drawn almost directly from "Indiana Jones and the Last
Crusade".
All in all, I'm not surprised that "Operation Condor" is acclaimed
by Chan fans as one of his all-time greatest films.  I just wonder
whether American mass-market audiences will agree.
This review is copyright 1996 by Christopher E. Meadows.  Permission
granted for distribution through rec.arts.movies.reviews and all
associated archival.  Permission granted for free redistribution via
cyberspace as long as this message remains attached.  All other rights
reserved to the author.
-- 
Chris Meadows aka  | Author, Team M.E.C.H.A., Crapshoot & Co.
Robotech_Master    | on the Superguy Listserv (bit.listserv.superguy)
robotech@jurai.net | With a World Wide Web homepage located at
robotech@eyrie.org | http://www.jurai.net/~robotech/index.html

Title
Review for Hsiao chuan yi chao (1979)
MPAA: Not rated (Though I expect it would get a PG, for martial arts
violence and language)
Long before Jackie Chan rumbled through the Bronx, he was rumbling
through ancient China in low-budget kung-fu movies from the 1970s and
80s.  Sometimes referred to derisively as "chop sockey" films, films in
this genre often featured most of the same plots, most of the same
settings, most of the same actors...in short, they were mostly the same
movies, and most of them weren't all that great. 
Still, when done well, these films are enjoyable and fun to watch.  Even
the badly-dubbed versions for sale in Wal-Marts and video stores across
the land for under $10 have their redeeming selections.  One such film,
which bad dubbing doesn't completely manage to ruin, is "The Fearless
Hyena". 
In "Fearless Hyena", Jackie Chan plays a cocky, lazy kung-fu student,
who is in hiding with his grandfather from the chief of a clan who all
but wiped his grandfather's clan out.  Despite his grandfather's
warnings not to show his kung-fu to anyone, Jackie starts fighting for
money at a martial arts school...which soon draws the evil clan chief's
attention. 
The story is nothing unique--in a sense, it's a reiteration of almost
every other kung-fu movie of its day, including a better Jackie Chan
film also from 1979, "The Drunken Master".  In some ways, the so-called
plots from these films are little more than excuses to string comedy and
fight scenes together.  Still...the comedy and fight scenes are good
enough that a little plot flimsiness can be overlooked.  After all, you
know going into it that you're not exactly watching "Casablanca". 
In "Fearless Hyena", as in most Jackie movies of the period, Jackie Chan
was the fight director and choreographer.  However, Jackie also wrote
and directed the picture as a whole.  In both cases, it shows.  Jackie's
sense of humor is quite evident, in scenes where he takes humiliating
beatings at the hands of his martial arts masters, or hands out beatings
dressed as a mentally-deficient drudge or even as a woman (predicting
the scene in "City Hunter" thirteen years later where he appears briefly
as Chun Li from the "Street Fighter II" video game).  There's one
particularly humorous scene in a coffinmaker's shop, where Jackie has
gone to seek employment, finds the coffin seller...isn't the most honest
of people, and accidentally upends a heavy coffin onto him. 
The hilarity of these scenes, and of similar scenes that pop up in other
Jackie movies, is what sets Jackie Chan's pictures apart from other
kung-fu movies of the era.  Why see martial arts alone when you can see
martial arts and comedy together?  Jackie's sense of humor is one of the
things that have made his movies constant top box-office draws in Hong
Kong, even in an era when Hong Kong's other movies aren't doing so well. 
The other big draw is the fight choreography.  Jackie Chan is a master
of the fighting art, and was so even back then.  Seldom is this so
evident as in "Fearless Hyena".  Fairly early in the movie, Jackie bests
three street thugs with his kung-fu, making utter fools out of them
while barely even breaking a sweat.  Then he goes to work for their
master, defeating tough opponents for money in the best fight scenes of
the entire film, comparable to those in "Drunken Master" and easily
better than anything Jean-Claude Van-Damme's ever done. 
Dressed as a kitchen drudge, Jackie Chan uses his surroundings (most
notably, the small benches used in place of chairs at the eating
tables--also used in fight scenes in "Drunken Master" and "Drunken
Master II") to devastating effect.  He soundly thrashes a swordsman,
first with his bare hands and then with a staff, and goes on to defeat a
big bruiser of a thug while dressed as a woman. 
Toward the end of the film, Jackie learns a secret new kung-fu technique
based on playing on the opponent's emotions, and, after fighting his way
through three henchmen armed with naginata-style sword-staves, uses it
in his final fight against the film's main villain.  These fights are,
of course, everything you'd expect from the final fight scenes of a
martial arts picture, but they don't have as much of the "use your
environment" fun that runs through those earlier scenes. 
On the negative side, the cinematography isn't particularly great, the
film is shot on inferior-quality stock, the story is kind of slow and
drawn-out (you may get bored a few times while you watch it), and the
dubbing is pretty bad.  Still, this movie is a lot of fun to watch, even
with its bad dubbing, and it's cheap enough--you can get it in a 2-pack
along with its sequel, "Fearless Hyena II", for just $10.  At the price,
and for the entertainment value you'll get from it, I recommend this
film.  For great humor and amazing martial arts, I give it a 7 out of
10. 
This review is copyright 1997 by Christopher E. Meadows.  Permission
granted for free distribution over Usenet and associated archival, and
for archival and display associated with the Internet Movie Database
(http://www.imdb.com).  All other distribution requires permission from
the author.
-- 
Chris Meadows aka  | Author, Team M.E.C.H.A., Crapshoot & Co.
Robotech_Master    | on the Superguy Listserv (bit.listserv.superguy)
robotech@jurai.net | With a World Wide Web homepage located at
robotech@eyrie.org | http://www.jurai.net/~robotech/index.html

Title
Review for Mighty Morphin Power Rangers: The Movie (1995)
     Capsule: See it if you or the kiddies are a Power Rangers fan, but
catch the matinee or discount show; it maybe be worth $3 or $4, but not
$7 or $8 (unless you're *really* into it).  Take the kiddies again and
again when/if it comes to the $1-$2 discount theater in your location.
A definite renter when it comes to video.
    Go, go, Power Rangers, you Mighty Morphin' Power Rangers...
     All the reviews I've seen of MMPR:TM tend to be rather harsh.  I
can understand this, coming from film critics.  However, I have to say
that I disagree with the ratings I've seen--for instance, the "one eye
out of five" rating that On Screen gave it.  They're rating it from
their perspective, and I'm rating it from mine.
     These critics, you see, are not MMPR fans.  In fact, they probably
don't even tolerate the show.  Now, while I'm no big fan of it myself,
I am a fan of the giant transforming robots (especially Japanese) and
martial arts (esp. Japanese) genres, and I'm also a fan of high
production values.  And I've seen a couple episodes of the Rangers.
Even if the plot could be better, I'm still willing to give the movie a
chance.  And I did.
     The plot is standard Power Rangers fare, meaning it's rather
campy, and you could probably quote the major plot elements almost
verbatim without even walking into the theater.  Which is to be
expected, really.  But, it's standard Power Rangers fare stretched out
to an hour and a half, with extremely high production values and a
soundtrack composed partly of old favorites and partly of new tracks.
     And besides, if there's one thing I've learned in the last few
years, it's not to watch Power Rangers for the plot.
     The story deals with cosmic villain Ivan Ooze (Paul Freeman) who
has been trapped in what appears to be a giant purple easter egg for
the last 6,000 years.  Construction workers unwittingly unearth the
egg, then Rita and Lord Zedd release him.  He proceeds to trash the
Power Rangers HQ, and the Power Rangers have to seek out a new power
source or else Zordon will die and Ivan Ooze will take over the
universe.
     As you'd expect, the Rangers meet various challenges, do a lot of
fancy martial arts moves (including quite a few
special-effects-simulated ones which come off as rather fakey-looking,
but the kiddies won't mind), and get new costumes and Zords.  And then
it's a wonderfully computer-animated Zord battle to the finish.  (Gee,
I wonder who's going to win this one?)
     (By the way, stay in your seat after the credits start rolling.
About two minutes in is a little "gotcha" which you'll miss unless
you're watching for it.)
     From start to finish, this film is obviously designed to
catch and hold the kiddies' attention.  It starts out with a nicely
choreographed skydiving sequence (with the Ranger-secret- identity-kids
wearing color-coded jump suits, and Bulk and Skull along for comic
relief), then almost without pause segues into the color-coded-clothed
kids rollerblading along the sidewalks (and doing some fancy acrobatics
while they're at it).  Before you know it, the evil easter egg is
unearthed, and the action gets started.
    The production values are quite high, and that (along with the
soundtrack) may prove to be this film's saving grace.  The
computer-animated robots are a joy to behold, even if they only appear
in the film's last few minutes.  The henchmen that the Rangers fight in
place of Putties, being made of either purple goo or stone, either
explode or shatter most picturesquely, and squish quite nicely too.
And Zordon actually has *lips*!
    Ironically, it might also prove rather detrimental to the TV
show--the production values of this movie are going to be a hard act
for the show to follow next season.
     If you don't let your kiddies watch Power Rangers, then you're
obviously not going to take them to this movie.  However, if they're
morph-o-maniacs, it's certainly no worse than your average episode of
the TV show, and if anything, the computer animation makes it more
worthwhile to sit through.
     I would say that it's *definitely* worth $1-2 at a discount
theater, and worth maybe $3-4 to see now (if you're a big fan, or your
kids are worrying about being left out of the crowd who has already
seen it).  I think I would hesitate at paying anything more if I were
you, unless you have a lot more money than I do or (have kids who) are
*really* into the show.  And it's a definite rental (though I'd be
hesitant about buying it unless it was priced *really* cheap) when it
comes out on video.
     In summary, I gave it a 6.5 out of 10 because I thought it really
wasn't that bad for what it was.  Of course, keep in mind that a 65% on
a paper is still a D; hardly a passing grade.  This was a clear case of
"The production values are willing, but the plot is weak."
    And yet, when I was coming out of this movie, which I spent $3.25
on, I didn't have the "cheated" feeling I had when coming out of
Passenger 57, which I only spent $1 on, so they had to have done
something right.  I don't know that I'll go and see it again, at least
not until it comes to the $1 theater, but I'm not sorry I did this
time.
     Oh, and I think we can probably take for granted that this movie
is going to do really well in spite of all the bad reviews it's
getting, and there's going to be a second Power Rangers movie.  The
REAL power of the Power Rangers is the power to sell a *lot* of toys,
videotapes, and undoubtedly movie tickets.

Title
Review for Crow: City of Angels, The (1996)
My score: 2/10 (* out of a possible *****)
    If you loved Highlander and groaned at Highlander II and III...if
you loved Alien and Aliens but Alien^3 made you want to beat your head
repeatedly against the wall...if you enjoyed The Crow, then use the
money you would have spent on City of Angels to rent the original and
watch it again.  City of Angels is a waste of money and a waste of
time.
    Why did the original Crow work so well, and the sequel fall so
flat?  Let's compare the two movies, look at what The Crow had that
COA (or, perhaps more appropriately, _DOA_) did not.
    Leaving aside the issue of morbid curiosity and publicity (which
shouldn't have anything to do with how good the movie actually is in
the first place), firstly, The Crow had Brandon Lee.  His poise, his
screen presence, his sardonic humor...the more I watch The Crow, the
more I mourn his premature passing.  City of Angels had Vincent Perez,
who just went around killing people.
    When it comes right down to it, one of The Crow's greatest assets
were its characters.  Brandon Lee's Eric D'Raven, Ernie Hudson's
sympathetic beat-cop Albrecht, Michael Wincott's fiendishly
charismatic Top Dollar, the thugs, Sarah, Sarah's mother, the whiny
pawnshop owner...whether you loved them or hated them, they were all
memorable, they said memorable things ("At least he didn't do that
'walking against the wind' shit.  Man, I hate that...") and it made a
difference to you whether they lived or died.  
    City of Angels gives us cardboard cutouts who wander the movie's
dark backdrop and occasionally get killed and/or mutilated, many of
whom are direct clones of characters or aspects of characters from the
first movie.  Whereas in The Crow, I watched Eric Draven hunt down and
kill his murderers and relished every moment, in CoA I just wished he
would get _on_ with it.  We just don't _care_ about these people,
which means what happens to them has very little impact upon the
viewers.
    And then there's the story of the film itself.  It may not be _War
and Peace_, but there _was_ a story to The Crow that was, if I might
be so bold, uplifting.  It wasn't just a "guy comes back from the dead
for revenge" movie; in a very real sense it was a story about seeing
the desolation and depravity of your surroundings and rising _above_
them--as the song went, "it can't rain all the time."  Some people are
capable of this redemption on their own (like Sarah); others (like her
mother) need a little help, and there are still people out there
trying, even if they doubt they'll ever make a bit of difference
(Albrecht).  City of Angels, on the other hand, just gives us a dead
guy running around killing people.
    City of Angels, while it rips off the basic plot of The Crow and
even clones a scene or two, so utterly and completely misses the point
that it's just not worth sitting through.  More attention is paid to
the atmosphere than to the story, and with the rock soundtrack and the
avante-garde cinematography, it sometimes feels more like you're
watching a 90-minute music video on MTV.  Viewers are treated to an
hour and a half of depravity and violence, with none of the humor, the
emotion, the redemption of the original movie.  Not only is it
pointless, it commits the cardinal sin of being _boring_, and it
cheapens the first film.
    Leave this one for the same teen Goth crowd that keeps White Wolf
Games in business...I imagine _they'll_ eat it up.
--
(This review is copyright 1995 by Christopher E. Meadows. Distribution
is okay as long as it's not for profit and this notice remains intact.
Permission granted for all rec.arts.movies.reviews and Internet Movie
Database archival, including CD-ROM.  Distribution on any other CD-ROM
is verboten without Chris's permission, however.)
-- 
Chris Meadows aka  | Author, Team M.E.C.H.A., Crapshoot & Co.
Robotech_Master    | on the Superguy Listserv (bit.listserv.superguy)
robotech@jurai.net | With a World Wide Web homepage located at
robotech@eyrie.org | http://www.jurai.net/~robotech/index.html

Title
Review for Jui kuen II (1994)
Directed by Carina Lau; starring Jackie Chan, Anita Mui, Ti Lung
In the wake of the smashing success of "Rumble in the Bronx," it's
looking more and more likely that more Jackie Chan films will see
American release.  Rumor has it that one of these films will be
Drunken Master II.
The version I have is a copy from the laserdisc; it's widescreen and
bilingually-subtitled, as are most Hong Kong films these days.
Availability over here in the United States is very limited; these
films must either be purchased via pirates or sought out from Asian
distributors such as Tai Seng.  The subtitling on the copy I have is
slightly hard to read; the letters are white and a bit small.
Although the American release will almost certainly be dubbed, this
review is of the subtitled version, so please keep that in mind if
you're reading this review to help you decide whether to go out and
see it.
To be fair, I must admit that I've never been very fond of
"period-piece" martial arts movies--the ones set in some nebulous
China of the distant or not so distant past.  Perhaps it's because
most of those I've seen were filmed on inferior stock, with either
butchered dubbing or all-but-illegible subtitling, or perhaps it's
because their plots all tend to be very similar to each other and, in
many cases, all but nonexistant.  In fact, many of them get so wrapped
up in their subplots that they seem to forget their main plot entirely
until only a few minutes before the end.
Or, for that matter, it might be because the Jackie Chan films with
more modern settings (Armour of God, Rumble in the Bronx, etc.) tend
to have more spectacular stunts, often involving large motor vehicles
and large explosions, whereas period pieces simply have the martial
arts.
Having said that, I must now turn right around and say that Drunken
Master II is a remarkable exception to all or most of the above, is
one of the better martial arts films I've seen, and I quite enjoyed
it.  Surprised?  Well, so was I.
Drunken Master II is about a young man named Wong Fei-Hong (played by
Jackie Chan) who is a master of the Drunken Boxing style of Kung Fu.
Where he learned this style is uncertain, as his father, Wong Kei-Ying
(Ti Lung) is steadfast in his opposition to Fei-Hong's practicing it
rather than some more normal style of kung fu.
Apparently, Fei-Hong is some sort of figure from Chinese folklore,
rather like Paul Bunyan is for Americans, but I've heard very little
about this, and could quite well be wrong, so I'll leave analysis of
that to the people who know it better.  One of my friends points out
that the character of Wong Fei-Hong is also featured in the "Once Upon
a Time In China" movies, but I have not yet seen those.
The plot of Drunken Master II is somewhat hazy, as are the plots to
many such films, but if you're watching a Jackie Chan film, odds are
you aren't expecting something on the order of "War and Peace".  The
story seems to revolve around Those Evil Foreigners who are spiriting
away ancient Chinese relics (and hence, China's cultural heritage)
while overworking, underpaying, and beating up Chinese workers in a
nearby steel mill.
However, this plot merely serves as a framework for the other main
story of the film--Fei-Hong's perpetual struggle to win his
girlfriend, supplicate his father, keep his (pregnant) mother (played
by Anita Mui) from fighting, and keep from getting beaten up by Evil
Foreigner thugs.
The MacGuffin that drives the plot(s) is a precious antique jade
imperial seal which is being taken away by the Evil Foreigners.  In
the beginning, Fei-Hong accidentally steals it while trying to recover
an identically-wrapped box containing the medicinal ginseng his father
was bringing back for a customer.  In the process, he clashes with
another thief, who is himself trying for the seal but ends up instead
with the ginseng.
After Fei-Hong narrowly avoids getting caught with the seal by the
Evil Foreigners' lackies, thanks to some timely intervention by a
general's son (a cameo appearance by Andy Lau, who would later take on
the starring role in Drunken Master III!), comedic chaos ensues back
at the Wong household when Fei-Hong and his mother attempt to come up
with a replacement for the missing ginseng.  And so it goes.
And the plot thickens later on, such as when Fei-Hong's girlfriend
maneuvers him into a kung fu match with a rival, or when Fei-Hong and
the thief, now revealed to be a loyalist Manchu officer trying to
recover the seal and stop the Evil Foreigners, are attacked en masse
(another grand kung-fu movie tradition), but I think I've already
spent more time on the plot than it really deserves.  Let's move on to
the real draw of Jackie Chan movies...the action.
There's plenty of martial arts action to be found in this movie...of
course, in a kung fu film, that's to be expected.  However, this isn't
just another kung fu movie; this one has Jackie Chan doing the fight
and stunt choreography, and Jackie Chan is a genius.
The primary martial arts "style" featured in the film is Drunken
Boxing, a form of Kung Fu which attempts to draw the adversary off his
guard by making it seem like the fellow using it is drunk.  Further,
for the purposes of this film at least, Drunken Boxers fight better
when they actually _are_ intoxicated...but there's a fine line between
just drunk enough and drunk into a stupor.
Under normal circumstances, the idea of someone staggering around
looking sloshed but managing to fight effectively and even incredibly
might seem rather stupid, but Jackie pulls it off with flair.  The
kung fu sequences are so intricate in their staging and execution that
it is pointless to try to describe it on paper, so I'll just say that
the fights--especially the big climactic fight at the end--in
themselves make the movie worth watching.
Another thing Drunken Master II has going for it is the stunt work.
Even without motor vehicles (well, not counting a train), there are
some remarkable stunts in this film.  Among other things, Jackie dives
off a balcony into a table and crawls across hot coals (not once, but
at _least_ twice, if you count the outtake shown during the credits).
(Quicktime movies of these stunts can be found through the WWW movie
database.)  Unlike in American films, these stunts are _not_ faked.
Drunken Master II stars several veteran actors of the Hong Kong movie
scene, including Jackie, Ti Lung ("A Better Tomorrow" 1 & 2), and
Anita Mui (the "Heroic Trio" series, "Rumble in the Bronx").  The
performances are first-rate, especially when it comes to the comedy
parts of the film.  The scene where Fei-Hong and his mother conspire
literally behind Fei-Hong's father's back to cover up for the missing
ginseng root is hilarious, as is the scene where Fei-Hong's mother,
having just revealed that she is pregnant, is threatening to hurt
herself (in order to draw her husband's anger away from Fei-Hong).
Jackie has developed his knack for physical comedy into a sort of
mastery over the years, and he's in fine form all through Drunken
Master II.
As far as cinematography is concerned, it certainly works for this
film.  It's nothing spectacular, but is at least a dozen times better
than all those old kung fu movies of the 70s.  The picture is crisp
and clear.  One thing I find particularly worthy of mention is that,
at least in the copy I have, the screen was wider than any film I've
ever seen on videotape before--almost a whole 1/3 of the screen was
blocked out above and below.  (Watch this on a bigscreen TV or movie
theater if you can.)  It will be an utter shame if this film is
eventually pan-and-scanned for American video release.
Drunken Master II shows the full potential of "period piece" kung fu
movies, and it's good enough to overcome even my usual distaste for
such movies.  The plot does meander a bit, but that's to be expected
in this type of film.  If you like this kind of movie, you'll love
this movie, and if not, well, give it a chance anyway.  If nothing
else, the martial arts and stunt sequences are by themselves worth the
price of admission or rental.
This review is copyright 1996 by Christopher E. Meadows; permission
granted for distribution and archival via rec.arts.movies.reviews, the
World Wide Web Movie Database, and associated databases; permission
granted for free electronic dissemination as long as the text of this
review is not changed, this notice remains attached, and no money is
charged for it.  All other rights reserved to the author.
-- 
Chris Meadows aka  | Author, Team M.E.C.H.A., Crapshoot & Co.
Robotech_Master    | on the Superguy Listserv (bit.listserv.superguy)
robotech@jurai.net | **TAKE NOTE!**  My homepage has changed to
robotech@eyrie.org | http://www.jurai.net/~robotech/index.html

Title
Review for Tonari no Totoro (1988)
Produced, Directed, and Written by Hayao Miyazaki
1988 (1993, American release), color, 87 minutes
     I'm an anime fan.  Yes, that's right, one of those people who
religiously collects Japanese animation by methods of sometimes dubious
legality, huddles in dark screening rooms at science-fiction
conventions to get my "fix," complains prodigiously about dubs
(especially those from Streamline), and is probably looked upon rather
oddly by most of the people I know because of it.
     As I said, I tend to complain prodigiously about dubs, especially
those done by Streamline.  As such, it's probably more than a little
surprising to you that I'm rating this particular Streamline dub so
highly.  I know it's *damn* surprising to me.
     You see, Streamline has this annoying little habit of *changing*
the lines that they're supposed to be dubbing.  The most notable
example that comes to mind is when Goemon the samurai cuts Lupin's
burning clothes off of him in the movie LUPIN III: CASTLE OF
CAGLIOSTRO.  In the original, he says afterward, "Once again, I've cut
a worthless object."  In the Streamline dub, he says, "Should've worn
an asbestos suit."  And the president of Streamline, Carl Macek, has
stated that he will never subtitle any of his films.  Purist that I am,
I find this kind of thing totally unacceptable, so I was, to say the
least, highly dubious of Totoro.
     What made the CAGLIOSTRO dub all the more disappointing was the
fact that the movie was one of my favorites in the subtitled format.
It was a Hayao Miyazaki film, and Miyazaki is my favorite anime
creator.  He's done some truly beautiful films--CAGLIOSTRO, LAPUTA:
CASTLE IN THE SKY, KIKI'S DELIVERY SERVICE, NAUSICAA OF THE VALLEY OF
THE WIND, and MY NEIGHBOR TOTORO, to name a few.  It is sadly ironic
that Streamline got its hands on most of these, and thus no "decent"
commercial version will ever be produced.
     Anyway, enough Streamline bashing; that isn't the point of this
review.  As I've said, I was skeptical of TOTORO, even though some
friends and acquaintances told me it was quite good.  However, since
Miyazaki *is* my favorite director, I knew I would eventually have to see
it.  But as my concession to myself before seeing a Streamline dub (an
act which tends to make me come away feeling rather dirty), I decided
to obtain and view the fan-subtitled version first.  Thus, I watched
the TOTORO fansub one night and the TOTORO commercial dubbed release
the next.
     Even though TOTORO is touted as a children's movie (and a very
good children's movie it is, too), is is a film that will likely
enthrall and at the very least not bore (or, for that matter,
nauseate--Barney, anyone?) any grown-ups who watch it too.  The story
is fairly simple--two young girls and their father move into a house in
the Japanese countryside to be closer to their hospitalized mother, and
the girls meet and befriend the magical creatures that live in the
forest nearby.  But there's more to this film than that.  My Neighbor
Totoro gives us sort of a window into Japanese culture, painting a
picture of life amid the rice paddies that is filled with all the
wonder and magic it has when seen through the eyes of a child.  It's
not my favorite Miyazaki story, but I couldn't help but be entranced by
its simple charm all the same.  Miyazaki always does that to me.
     One thing about Miyazaki is that he likes to make references to
other films.  For example, in both LAPUTA: CASTLE IN THE SKY and an
episode of the "Lupin" TV series that he directed, a robot is featured
that looks remarkably similar to one from a 1930s Fleischer Superman
short.  In MY NEIGHBOR TOTORO there are references to at least a couple
of children's movies--namely, MARY POPPINS and ALICE IN WONDERLAND.  I
had to smile.
     As I've said, I was quite skeptical up to the moment when I put
the dub into the VCR and pressed play.  My skepticism began its
immediate decline when the opening theme began playing.  As this is a
children's movie, it was to be expected that the music would be
translated into English, and I was half-expecting some sort of stupid
kiddie song that would be entirely unrelated to the spirit of the
original.  But as soon as the theme began, my jaw dropped, for they had
somehow managed to translate that song almost *excatly*.  The English
singer even sounded like the original Japanese one!
     And it was thus throughout the entire film.  Not only were the
translations nearly flawless but even the voice-acting was dead-on!  My
friend had said to me that the voices in the English version sounded
just like the voices in the Japanese version.  And they did!  The
translations were 98% accurate--even trivial lines that weren't
important to the story were often rendered correctly.  By the time the
closing credits had rolled, I had realized that my fansubbed copy of
this movie was going to be gathering a lot of dust.
     A brief summary of the most noticeable differences between the
original and the dubbed versions:  The opening and closing songs are in
English, as I've said.  The minor elements of Buddhism (the religion
usually depicted in anime) have been removed: where in the original the
older sister prays at a shrine to let them take shelter from the rain
there, she now asks, "Would it be all right if we stay here?"; where an
old lady was chanting a prayer to Buddha she is now murmuring in the
style of someone praying under her breath.  The film has been
pan-and-scanned, as well.
     One thing which particularly relieves me is that Carl Macek didn't
pull any of his usual "hide-the-kanji-at-all-costs" tricks which so
often make the opening credits of movies he dubs look like crud.  (In
order to hide the Japanese symbols in the Castle of Cagliostro opening
credits, for example, he slowed down the opening animation and reframed
parts of the picture, and it looked utterly disgusting.) In the scenes
where a bus's sign changes to indicate its destination, he dubbed in a
voice (provided, so I'm told, by Carl himself) that said, "Next
stop..."  In one instance a subtitle is provided for translation.  As
many instances of kanji as there are in this film, I'm glad he didn't
try to hide them this time.
     Another thing which relieves me is that none of the names are
changed.  All the original Japanese names are still used, and even
pronounced properly, as far as I know (I especially like the way the
older sister pronounces "Totoro").  This is one more element that adds
to the general Japanese ambiance of this movie.  It makes me feel as
though the characters actually *are* Japanese, but I just happen to be
able to understand them for some mysterious reason.  Very few dubs have
ever done that for me.
     And now I've reached the point where, in summing up, I'm probably
supposed to draw upon those phrases that have become cliches by virtue
of repeated use in magazine movie reviews and inclusion on the backs of
video boxes.  Things like "This is a magical film for all ages," for
example.  But I'm not trying to advertise this movie; it's not like I'm
going to make money off of it or anything.  So, I'll just sum up with a
few observations, instead.
     This is one of very few dubs that I would not feel ashamed to show
to other people.  It maintains the integrity of the original almost to
the last detail.  The film itself is easily comparable to some of
Disney's best, with an attention to detail that Disney sometimes
lacks.
     If you're looking for something you can show the kiddies that
won't have them karate-chopping around the house afterward, get MY
NEIGHBOR TOTORO.  If you're a fan of good animation yourself, get MY
NEIGHBOR TOTORO.  If nothing else, rental will only cost a buck or two,
and trust me--the experience is more than worth it.
(This review is copyright 1995 by Christopher E. Meadows.  Distribution is
okay as long as it's not for profit and this notice remains intact. 
Distribution on CD-ROM is verboten without Chris's permission, however.)

Title
Review for Tomorrow Never Dies (1997)
Starring Pierce Brosnan, Jonathan Pryce, Michelle Yeoh, Terri Hatcher,
et al.
>From that first magical moment when the spotlight sweeps across the
black screen and James Bond turns and fires, accompanied by that
oh-so-familiar musical sting, "Tomorrow Never Dies" delivers the kind
of Bondian punch that was sadly lacking in "Goldeneye".  The 18th
official Bond franchise film, not counting "Never Say Never Again,"
brings us fully back to the old familiar Bondian formula, a formula
which has been sadly lacking in recent Bond movies.  And it brings in
a few _new_ tricks as well.
As far as the storyline is concerned, TND owes a lot to past Bond
films.  As in "Moonraker" and "The Spy Who Loved Me," Bond runs into
and must work with an agent from a foreign intelligence outfit with
whom the British Secret Service normally competes.  Also as in "The
Spy Who Loved Me," the villain plans to use assaults on naval military
vessels to play both Britain and the foreign power du jour, China, off
against each other, starting a war by attacking the military forces of
both sides.  However, in a uniquely '90s twist on the old James Bond
formula, the villain, Elliot Carver (played with panache by Jonathan
Pryce) doesn't want to rule the world, or kill everyone in it and
found an empire based on his eugenically-handpicked select few.  He
just wants the media rights.
This film, more than any other Bond film in at least the last ten
years, is a Bond devotee's delight.  There are literally dozens of
scenes harking back to Bond movies of the past.  The guns.  The girls.
The gadgets.  The vodka martinis.  The supercar (a BMW this time,
thanks to the magic of product placement, though the old Astin Martin
does make a brief appearance).  The chase scenes, including the
occasional jaw-dropping stunt.  The heavily-guarded-and-beweaponed
enemy stronghold to be stormed.  The pre-credit opening gambit.  The
venerable Desmond Llewellyn, once again on hand as the venerable Major
Boothroyd, more commonly known in the movies simply as Q, who once
more gets to tell Bond to "grow up".  (Funny how Bond keeps getting
younger and younger, and Q keeps getting older and older...)  All the
things that keep the Bond movies a working franchise are _all there_.
Even the good old original Monty Norman James Bond theme makes
repeated appearances in the soundtrack, after being absent from the
last several films.
Many people are prone to knock films for being "formulaic."  In many
cases, they're right.  Formula can be the deathknell of many a film,
due to Hollywood's habit of jumping on a bright new idea and wringing
every last penny out of it, and beating the dead horse until it
resembles finely-ground chuck.  (Witness "Home Alone," and the endless
parade of clones and sequels it has inspired.)  However, with Bond
films, "formula" has meant something else--in the Bond films' heyday
at least, it was a near-guarantee of some good, solid entertainment.
When the Bond franchise first began, it broke new ground for both the
science-fiction _and_ the action genres.  It improved over the years,
particularly while Sean Connery was the leading man.  Now, however,
James Bond is no longer the only spy-action movie game in town.  In
order to distinguish itself from all the other action movie games in
town, Bond has stopped trying to reinvent himself as a strict (and
strangely monogamous) action hero, as he had become through the
Timothy Dalton Bond films, and has returned to a more traditional Bond
formula, suitably updated for the '90s.  The appeal of "Tomorrow Never
Dies" to fans of past Bond films may be summed up in just one word:
_nostalgia_.
However, this is not to say that TND is strictly "same old same old"
Bond.  There are some interesting new twists, most notably perhaps the
first Bond girl ever who can fully take care of herself, and is not
simply around to look pretty and be rescued by Bond in time of need.
Michelle Yeoh plays Wai Lin as an almost exact reprise of her
"Inspector Yang" character from "Supercop"--the Communist Chinese
agent who has to work with an agent from the British Empire (in
"Supercop," it was Jackie Chan from Hong Kong) to prevent some great
threat to China.  Michelle even gets a one-on-many fight scene all to
herself, which she handles with great grace and poise, thanks in part
to the Hong Kong stunt crew she brought in to play the bad guys.  When
it comes time to storm the enemy stronghold (in this case a stealth
ship), Michelle's Wai Lin takes her place as an equal partner to
Brosnan's James Bond insofar as ass-kicking and name-taking goes.
How do all the Bond regulars do?  Pierce Brosnan seems to have settled
into the role of Bond, playing him with a kind of spirited panache not
seen since Connery's portrayal of the agent.  Judi Dench plays M in a
dry-witted manner much after the fashion of Bernard Lee's portrayal of
Bond's old boss.  Samantha Bond's Moneypenny is a witty foil to Bond
in the scenes they share, and gets one of the best lines in the entire
film, about James Bond's linguistic skills.  Desmond Llewellyn is
inimitably Q, though at his age, surely he won't be for very much
longer.  Even Joe Don Baker is back for two scenes, reprising his
Felix Leiterish role of Wade, Bond's liason with the CIA.
As for the villains and the bit players, they are mostly also to the
film's credit.  Elliot Carver (played by Jonathan Pryce) is a
wonderful evil mastermind, harking back to the Blofeld/Goldfinger
school of villains--the kind who are megolomaniacal and aren't afraid
to show it while explaining precisely what they plan to do and how
they plan to do it.  He chews the scenery in grand style, and carries
off the villain's part with a wonderfully evil flair.  Gotz Otto plays
Stamper, the consummate henchman, who is more than up to the task of
giving Bond a hard time.
The bit players are mostly unremarkable; they come on screen, they
speak their parts, they (for the most part) die.  Vincent Schiavelli
renders a brief but interesting turn as Dr. Kaufman, a hit man who
just happens also to be a forensic doctor and pistol marksman.  Terri
Hatcher, the film's "other" Bond girl, is the only bad part in the
film; supposedly an old flame of Bond's, she is nonetheless so flat
that we the audience have a hard time figuring out just how James Bond
could have fallen for such an uninteresting person.  This also seems
to conflict with the established history of Bond as having only ever
loved one woman in his entire life (from "On Her Majesty's Secret
Service").  Fortunately, Miss Hatcher's role in the film is rather
abbreviated compared to the far more interesting and vital Michelle
Yeoh's.
It seems that director Roger Spottiswoode, or someone on the film's
production staff, is a fan of Hong Kong movies.  Michelle Yeoh's
inclusion as a very similar character to her "Supercop" portrayal is
one clue, but there are other little borrowed touches of note.  At one
point, Bond dives onto a mechanic's creeper and lets it carry him
through a door, keeping him low to avoid enemy fire--rather like Chow
Yun-Fat did in "A Better Tomorrow."  At several points, Bond and
Wai-Lin fire simultaneously from guns held in both hands, another Hong
Kong film trademark.  These little touches are just another example of
how Hong Kong cinema, the latest new wave to sweep across the western
cinematic horizon, is revitalizing western action movies in general.
TND also benefits from a nicely satirical wit, taking the opportunity
to poke fun at a variety of subjects, from Microsoft to cable
deregulation to President Clinton to car commercials to the media.
The storyline of "Tomorrow Never Dies," as stated before, borrows from
prior Bond films.  There are also scenes that are _very_ familiar,
also being prior Bond retreads.  We've seen Bond scuba-swim through a
sunken ship filled with dead bodies in "For Your Eyes Only."  We've
seen him play with gadgets and make witty one-liners about them in
_many_ Bond films, and the assault on the villain's floating fortress
of doom is familiar as well.  We've seen many of these things before.
Bond detractors will sneer and say, "So?  Why watch them again, then?"
For Bond fans, however, I suspect this will be much like meeting a
long-lost friend after a long time of separation.  It's the _formula_
that makes Bond movies Bond movies, and the minor variations that make
them worth watching individually.  Forget the line at the end of the
credits crawl that says "JAMES BOND WILL RETURN."  He has already, and
he was _long_ overdue.
(This review is copyright 1997 by Christopher E. Meadows.  Permission
granted for Usenet distribution and associated archival, including the
Internet Movie Database, but other distribution rights reserved to the
author.)
-- 
Chris Meadows aka  | ICQ UIN: 5477383
Robotech_Master    | http://www.eyrie.org/~robotech/index.html
robotech@eyrie.org | -----------------------------------------
robotech@jurai.net | Co-moderator, rec.games.mecha

Title
Review for Transformers: The Movie, The (1986)
Directed by Nelson Shin, Written by Ron Friedman
Starring Eric Idle, Judd Nelson, Leonard Nimoy, Robert Stack, Lionel
Stander, and Orson Welles
Many, many critics have knocked "Transformers: The Movie" as being a
toy-line-inspired cartoon, derivative of "Star Wars" and designed only
to sell toys to the kids.  It's been called overly-violent, confusing,
too loud, and a host of other names. 
"Transformers: The Movie" appeared at the height of the toy line's
original popularity.  The Transformers toy line, along with G.I. Joe,
was for a long time one of the most popular toy lines in the United
States, and practically a household word among children everywhere in
America (and Europe, and Japan...).  It spawned a TV series that
lasted several years, and a comic book that went all the way to 80
issues.  It's not a big surprise that a theatrical movie would be
attempted. 
The animation (by Sunbow Productions, a premiere animation studio in
Japan) was very good for its day, sometimes incredible.  The voice
cast included an all-star lineup, most notably the great Orson Welles
(in his last featured role in any film).  There were thousands of kids
with the toys who were presumably all ready to rush to the theaters.
There was even a G.I. Joe theatrical feature waiting in the wings
should "Transformers" be a success. 
At a guess, Hasbro forgot that, to be a success, the movie would have
to appeal to the filmgoing public as a whole, as well.  "Transformers"
was a loud, raucas movie, with a heavy metal soundtrack and a
storyline that was somewhat confusing to people who'd never seen any
of the Transformers TV show.  Almost no background was given, beyond
the somewhat minimalistic voiceover at the beginning.  While the kids
might have loved it, the adults were left mostly in confusion.  And
let's not forget that the film was pretty violent, with planets being
destroyed and characters dying sometimes left and right. 
All the same, was it really such a bad movie?  Fans of the
Transformers franchise don't think so.  In fact, it's quite a
sought-after video now that it's out of print, and screenings are a
big event at yearly Transformers conventions.  The Internet Movie
Database rates it at 8.8 out of 10, with 521 votes recorded.  But why?
Perhaps at least part of it has to do with the similarities and
differences between this movie and the Transformers TV series.  In the
TV series, which had gone on for two years prior to the movie,
Autobots and Decepticons (the "good guys" and "bad guys") clashed
repeatedly, but with no real resolution on either side--nobody died,
there were no clear victories, thanks to what some cartoon fans refer
to as "parachute syndrome" (from the G.I. Joe TV series habit of
showing parachuting pilots for every Cobra airplane that was shot
down)--to show death in a children's cartoon might risk offending
parental watchdog groups.  But here, in a theatrical movie, they had a
bit more artistic freedom.  Hence, in "Transformers: The Movie", there
was conflict, there was death, and there was _resolution_.  It felt
more mature somehow to have the good guys take losses, and then blow
the bad guys away. 
And we also shouldn't discount the thrill of seeing time jump eighteen
years ahead and finding out what happened to all our favorite
characters years down the road.  Of course, the story focused mostly
on _new_ characters, but the old ones were still there (even if a lot
of them died).  They had a lot of the best lines, too. 
And the storyline itself.  Maybe it _was_ derivative of "Star
Wars"...there were lightsabers, a female robot with a Princess Leia
hairstyleish look, a giant sphere that destroyed planets, a saber duel
between an old respected warrior and the evil bad guy...the warrior's
spirit speaking to the young warrior type and helping him win...okay,
in some ways it was _very_ derivative of "Star Wars".  All the same,
it was a _good_ story, quite action-packed, very exciting, and
gripping to those of us of the right age to enjoy it.  The people who
liked the rest of the movie also liked its heavy-metal-oriented
soundtrack, and the quality of the voice talent was also incredible.
Robert Stack, Eric Idle, Leonard Nimoy, Orson Welles...?  You just
didn't usually find people like that voicing animated movies outside
of Disney. 
In retrospect, perhaps "Transformers" might have done better for
Hasbro, not losing so much money, as a direct-to-video release, as its
successor, "G.I. Joe: The Movie" was released the following year.  All
the same, I personally think "Transformers: The Movie" was not such a
bad film, and perhaps deserves a bit more respect than it's gotten
from professional critics.  As an admittedly biased fan, my rating is
8 out of 10. 
This review is copyright 1997 by Christopher E. Meadows.  Permission
granted for free distribution over Usenet and associated archival, and
for archival and display associated with the Internet Movie Database
(http://www.imdb.com).  All other distribution requires permission
from the author.
--
Chris Meadows aka  | Author, Team M.E.C.H.A., Crapshoot & Co.
Robotech_Master    | on the Superguy Listserv (bit.listserv.superguy)
robotech@eyrie.org | With a World Wide Web homepage located at
robotech@jurai.net | http://www.eyrie.org/~robotech/index.html

Title
Review for Kid keisatsu patoreb: The Movie (1990)
118 Minutes; Not Rated (though I suspect it would be rated PG for
adult themes and language)
Mamoru Oshii is a name that probably isn't very well-known to most
American audiences, but perhaps it should be.  Oshii was the director
of last year's best-known Japanese animated film import, _Ghost in the
Shell_, and is known among fans of Japanese animation, or anime, for
making films with a deep philosophical bent. 
One of these films was the first theatrical venture for the Patlabor
animated series.  In its many incarnations--graphic novels ("manga"),
two different runs of made-for-video episodes (Original Animation
Videos, or OAVs for short), and a television series running to nearly
fifty episodes--Patlabor has proven to be one of the most popular
series ever in Japan.  Set in the very near future (though it was a
somewhat farther away near future when the series was first
conceived), this atypical giant robot anime features the characters,
rather than the machinery, as the primary focus. 
As a whole, Patlabor is the story of an exciting time for Japan.  As
the prologue to each episode of the television series explains, giant
industrial robots, known as "Labors" (an interesting play on words,
considering that "robot" is derived from the Czech word for labor),
have come into widespread use in Japan toward the close of the
twentieth century.  With the rise of Labors, however, has come a new
menace--Labor crime.  This led to the creation of the two Special
Vehicle divisions, using Patrol Labors to fight Labor crime. 
The Patlabor story centers around the second Special Vehicle division,
SV2, who, through no fault of their own, have acquired a bad
reputation for destructiveness.  Sometimes utterly hilarious,
sometimes almost deadly serious, the Patlabor series explores the
interpersonal relationships of the Special Vehicle crewmembers, and
also looks at the effects of technology on modern life. 
Those who are unfamiliar with the Patlabor story and characters may
find themselves slightly confused coming into the movie, although
there is ample background exposition provided for new viewers.  The
story, as has much of Patlabor before, centers around the
controversial Babylon Project, a gigantic seawall that will, on its
completion, allow the reclamation of thousands of square miles of land
from Tokyo Bay.  This project has been an almost constant target of
environmentalist terrorists, most notably the House of Sea
organization.  However, the threat in this case comes not from any
terrorist, but from someone who is already dead... 
Shinohara Heavy Industries, the premier Labor manufacturer in Japan
(if not the whole world), has just come out with a new operating
system that increases Labors' movement speed and efficiency by 30%.
This Hyper Operating System, HOS for short, has very quickly been
installed into well over 90% of the nation's Labors...including the
Patrol Labors of SV2.  Since that installation, dozens of Labors,
including a heavily-armed military model, have begun to go on berzerk
rampages for no apparent reason...and the only factor they all had in
common was that they were all running under the new HOS.  (Some wags
have compared this to Windows 95.)  It's up to Asuma Shinohara, labor
command officer with SV2 and the son of the president of Shinohara
Heavy Industries, to find the source of these problems before more
Labors--including SV2's own--fall victim to them, and before HOS drags
his father's company down with it. 
As was the case with _Ghost in the Shell_, if you just want a
no-brainer actionfest, this might not be the movie for you.
_Patlabor: The Movie_ is more of a psychological thriller, a
technological suspense drama.  It is closer, perhaps, to a Chrichton
novel than to an action movie (Crichton novels that have been made
_into_ action movies notwithstanding).  There are long, thoughtful
montages of dialogueless footage as two investigators make their way
through slums and derelict housing in old quarters of Tokyo, similar
to sequences from _Ghost in the Shell_.  This movie is fraught with
symbolism--in fact a large part of it is based on Christian symbolism. 
Patlabor's near-future setting is, aside from the giant robots
tromping around, very similar to our own present day.  The film uses
this setting to make its central point: is progress moving too fast
for humans to keep up?  Are history and culture falling by the wayside
like the old buildings that are being torn down and replaced with new?
This is a question just as applicable to today as it is to Patlabor's
alternate-1999 setting.
As far as the technical aspects of the film go (referring to the
subtitled version, as that's the only one I've seen), the film
transfer is clear, almost phenomenally so.  The animation quality is
incredible, though the character design is different from what most
Patlabor fans will be used to.  The OAVs and TV series were more
cheerful, better-suited to humor; the movie, however, makes everyone
look a great deal less cute, and emphasizes that this is going to be,
for the most part, a deadly serious storyline. 
As far as cinematography goes, there are many interesting moments in
_Patlabor: The Movie_.  I don't think I can recall ever seeing a
fish-eye perspective used in any other animated film (save for _Ghost
in the Shell_, another Oshii film), or indeed, in many other movies at
all.  The cinematography is well-suited to the storyline, emphasizing
what it needs to, though a couple of scenes (where characters'
features are exaggerated in anger) may seem slightly strange to
Western audiences. 
The audio track of _Patlabor: The Movie_ is in glorious hi-fi stereo,
and should be used to demonstrate home theater systems--it _is_ that
good.  Even without headphones, sounds from either side of the screen
can be clearly heard to _come_ from that side.  Giant robot footsteps
are deep and booming.  The sometimes-understated, sometimes-blaring
score is crisp and clear, and always right on the mark, enhancing the
moods created by the animated scenery. 
As far as the subtitles go, I have to say that they're among the most
easily-readable subtitles I've ever seen for _anything_.  Large enough
that they don't strain the eyes, but small enough not to conceal too
much of the screen. 
Although it does have several action sequences in it, most notably the
climactic conclusion, _Patlabor_ is foremost not an action movie.
Although it is a superbly-realized film, it relies in large part upon
prior familiarity with some of the characters to carry the story, and
that could detract from some people's enjoyment.  My rating: 9 out of
10. 
(As an aside, the Patlabor OAVs and TV show are being released by
U.S. Manga Corps, and the first and second theatrical movies are
released through Manga Video.)
-- 
Chris Meadows aka  | Author, Team M.E.C.H.A., Crapshoot & Co.
Robotech_Master    | on the Superguy Listserv (bit.listserv.superguy)
robotech@jurai.net | With a World Wide Web homepage located at
robotech@eyrie.org | http://www.jurai.net/~robotech/index.html

Title
Review for Zongsheng sihai (1990)
Written & Directed by John Woo
Starring Chow Yun Fat, Leslie Cheung, Cherie Chung
    I first discovered John Woo through this film--or, more correctly, 
through a couple of excerpts from this film, shown in a film criticism 
course I was taking at Southwest Missouri State University.  The 
instructor, Dr. Dave Daly, is a big Hong Kong movie fan...and he made 
me into one as well, for which I am eternally grateful.
    I don't think that many people who enjoy movies these days could 
possibly not have heard of John Woo; his two entries into the field of 
Hollywood cinema ("Hard Target," "Broken Arrow") have both done quite 
well in American theaters.  However, they may not be aware of his 
earier works.
    Starting with "A Better Tomorrow" in the mid-1980s, a seminal film 
which marked the beginning of the so-called "hero film" genre in Hong 
Kong, John Woo has made about a dozen action-packed adventure films, 
the most notable of which include "The Killer," "Bullet to the Head," 
and "Hard-Boiled."  
    These films contain action sequences the like of which most 
American movies no longer see; incredible feats of gunplay and 
acrobatics, accentuated by the inimitable Woo directorial style which 
makes use of slow-motion, camera angles and movement, perfect pacing, 
and incredible choreography that turns gunplay into a kind of bloody 
ballet.  
    Woo protagonists often clutch a gun in each hand and fire 
constantly, often apparently immune to the necessity of reloading.  
They have incredible coordination, deftly tossing and catching guns or 
other implements, often while performing a backflip or some other 
acrobatic feat at the same time.  They make use of what they find in 
their environment in ways that would make MacGyver jealous.  Getting 
shot once or twice barely slows them down.
    Admittedly, these are largely characteristics of all Hong Kong 
action cinema, or even the action genre in general to some extent.  
Still, they're never used quite so agilely as in a John Woo film.
    Sadly, Woo's style has been muted somewhat by the Hollywood 
environment in which he's made his latest films.  Still, John Woo's 
first two Hollywood films have been remarkably well-received by the 
moviegoing public; perhaps as he becomes more comfortable with the 
Hollywood studio system, he will begin to exert more creative control.  
One can only hope.
    "Once a Thief" stars two veteran actors from other John Woo films: 
Chow Yun Fat, who also starred in "A Better Tomorrow," "A Better 
Tomorrow 2," "The Killer," and "Hard-Boiled" plays Joe, and Leslie 
Cheung, who co-starred with Chow Yun Fat in "A Better Tomorrow," plays 
his foster brother, Jim.  Together with foster sister Cherie (Cherie 
Chung), they make up a trio of expert art thieves, who specialize in 
stealing paintings from museums.
    Over the course of the film, the threesome decides to retire from 
thievery and start a family of their own.  However, before they can do 
this, they are manipulated by their cruel foster father, who raised 
them to become thieves, into stealing a painting for him.  This they 
do, under duress...but they have no intention of actually giving it to 
him...
    Fans of John Woo's ultraviolent bulletfests such as "The Killer" 
or "Hard-Boiled" may be disappointed by "Once a Thief".  This film is 
a marked departure from the shoot-em-up style of other recent Woo 
films, a kind of return to the light-hearted comedies he directed 
prior to "A Better Tomorrow".  There is action involved, and plenty of 
it, but the gunfights are neither as intense or elaborate as 
"Hard-Boiled" (though it _does_ have the best vehicular chase sequence 
since James Bond).
    Of course, this does not detract from the movie at all; where Woo
shoot-em-ups are ponderous dramas with weighty philosophical and moral 
considerations, "Once a Thief" is simply pure, unadulterated _fun_.  
It's a thrill a minute to watch the thieves get themselves into and 
out of one improbable situation after another, and the acrobatic feats 
and a remarkable dance scene make it plain that Woo's wonderful talent 
for choreography is not limited to gunplay.
    The acting.  Chow Yun Fat is an experienced actor, with two 
decades and dozens of movies, television series, and other productions 
under his belt.  As in all his films, he is smooth, believable, and 
his style, his charisma, his lopsided grin at times put me in mind of 
Sean Connery.  Unlike in "The Killer" or "Hard-Boiled," here he gets 
to display his talent for comedy...and he certainly has that.  I wish 
I could see him in such roles more often.  Cheung, Chung, and the 
other members of the cast aren't bad either, but Chow Yun Fat 
generally steals almost every scene he's in.
    The scenery.  "Once a Thief" is set partially in Paris and 
elsewhere in France, and is filmed on-location.  Paris, Notre Dame, 
the villa from which they must steal the painting...it's beautiful, 
and it really adds to the ambience of the film.  And unlike in many 
American films, there is no reluctance to have conversations be held 
entirely or mostly in other languages than Cantonese--excellently- 
spoken French and English are both heard at various points in the 
film.  I suppose since they're subtitling it in Chinese anyway, it's 
no hassle for them to leave it be.
    The comedy.  This film has some wonderful comic moments, starting 
with the very first few scenes.  I won't give any of them away, as 
they're funnier when you go into them unprepared, but I will say that 
there are a couple of hilarious moments involving classical music that 
shouldn't be missed.
    The music, the visuals, the dialogue...all the elements in this 
film click and click often, and the plot moves along like a 
finely-tuned clock.  All in all, the only problems "Once a Thief" has 
are a couple of scenes where the editing is slightly jarring--the 
parachute landing where Chow Yun Fat abruptly changes direction 
between cuts, and the dance sequence where Cherie's hands change 
positions from cut to cut several times.  Of course, these are only 
minor problems, and anyone who was able to forgive the "mysterious 
vanishing robot arm" and other inconsistancies in "Jurassic Park" 
should have no trouble here.
    Another slight problem, though not with the film itself, is its 
availability.  Sadly, "Once a Thief" has not, to my knowledge, been 
released to the American video market save on laserdisc.  
Unfortunately, not everyone has an LD player, or is willing to buy the 
expensive foreign-import disc, or lives in an area where Asian 
theaters regularly show these films, so the only way many people can 
see "Once a Thief" is through pirating a copy of the LD from someone.  
Also, the subtitling is standard Hong Kong, in Chinese characters with 
English below them.  Sometimes it's a little hard to read, and the 
translation isn't always the best.  (At a couple of points in the 
film, someone is saying something in English, while the English 
subtitles at the bottom of the screen say something different!) 
    In conclusion, if you have a chance to watch this movie, see it, 
by all means.  Once again, John Woo proves that he could teach 
American cinema a great deal.
This review is copyright 1996 by Christopher E. Meadows.  Permission
granted for distribution through rec.arts.movies.reviews and all
associated archival.  Permission granted for free redistribution via
cyberspace as long as this message remains attached.  All other
rights reserved to the author.
-- 
Chris Meadows aka  | Author, Team M.E.C.H.A., Crapshoot & Co.
Robotech_Master    | on the Superguy Listserv (bit.listserv.superguy)
robotech@jurai.net | **TAKE NOTE!**  My homepage has changed to
robotech@eyrie.org | http://www.jurai.net/~robotech/index.html

Title
Review for Overdrawn at the Memory Bank (1985) (TV)
Starring Raul Julia, Linda Griffiths, Wanda Cannon, Donald C. Moore,
Chapelle Jaffe, Louis Negin
Produced by Robert Lantos & Stephen J. Roth
MPAA: Not Rated (though from language, violence, medical-gross-outs,
and sexual content, I'd put it at PG)
Though made in Canada, "Overdrawn at the Memory Bank" traces its roots
to the BBC school of film production.  Using, for the most part, cheap
computer and video special effects, chyron text, wildlife documentary
footage, and sets that are sometimes obviously faked up, it
nonetheless manages to tell a good enough science fiction story that
by the time you're twenty minutes into it, you should be hooked.
Raul Julia plays Aram Fingal, a drone data processing worker for
Novicorp whose active imagination and predilection for hacking gets
him into trouble with authority.  Caught watching "Casablanca" on his
desk monitor, Fingal is sentenced to "doppling" rehabilitation--he is
to spend forty-eight hours in the body of a baboon.  (How exactly this
is supposed to rehabilitate him is anybody's guess.)  As it happens,
thanks to a visiting schoolboy's prank, his body is temporarily
misplaced, and his mind has to be shunted into the central computer to
keep him alive until they can find it.  As time ticks away before his
memory cube self-destructs, the frantic search for his body is
on...while Fingal first creates a virtual reality fantasy world, then
finds there's no better way to hack the system than from the inside.
During the chaos, computer technician Apollonia James (Linda
Griffiths) maintains contact with Fingal through a datalink,
manifesting several different times to offer advice or warnings.  Over
the course of their interactions, interest on both their parts grows
into a budding romance.
Given that "Casablanca" is Fingal's favorite film, and the basis for
his fantasy world, a great deal of the movie is homage to
"Casablanca".  In fact, the Humphrey Bogart and Peter Lorre characters
make appearances (played by Julia in a dual role and Louis Negin,
respectively) in a bar called "The Place".  Julia's portrayal of
Bogart is passable, and avoids becoming the "schweethaat"-spouting
parody seen in cartoons.  Negin's Peter Lorre is quite credible, and
easily the best Peter Lorre I've ever seen who wasn't the real thing.
The two of them, as characters created by Fingal's imagination, serve
as aspects of his personality, driving him on in his quest to hack the
computer system.
Those aren't the only Casablanca characters to put in appearances.
The Sydney Greenstreet character also happens to be around...as "The
Fat Man", the alternate aspect of the film's main villain, the
Novicorp Chairman (Donald C. Moore).  While Fingal's body is lost, the
Fat Man tries to stop him from hacking the system...with less than
salutory results.
It's interesting to note the futuristic slang words that are thrown
about left and right during the film, in the best golden-age science
fiction tradition.  Words like "dopple", "psychist", "computech",
"cinema", and "reconst" are apparently in common use.  And while
people of today may well laugh at fourteen years past's idea of
futuristic data processing clerks, some aspects of this film are
surprisingly perfectly in keeping with the way we think of "virtual
reality" today.  As cyberpunk films go, this may not be a staple of
the genre, but it's definitely recommended viewing.
The special effects are very primitive, placing this production in the
realm of low-to-medium-budget television.  The music is completely
electronic-synthesized, which fits the low budget but isn't really out
of keeping with the genre.  However, the writing quite makes up for
it.  There are some very funny moments, and quite a few little
in-jokes that one needs to have seen "Casablanca" to appreciate
properly.  All in all, I give "Overdrawn at the Memory Bank" a 7 out
of 10.
This review is copyright 1997 by Christopher E. Meadows.  Permission
granted for free distribution over Usenet and associated archival, and
for archival and display associated with the Internet Movie Database
(http://www.imdb.com).  All other distribution requires permission
from the author.
-- 
Chris Meadows aka  | Author, Team M.E.C.H.A., Crapshoot & Co.
Robotech_Master    | on the Superguy Listserv (bit.listserv.superguy)
robotech@jurai.net | With a World Wide Web homepage located at
robotech@eyrie.org | http://www.jurai.net/~robotech/index.html

Title
Review for Zui quan (1979)
Directed by Yuen Woo Ping
Starring Jackie Chan, Hwang Jang Lee, Simon Yuen, Dean Shek
MPAA: Not Rated (though I feel it would likely be PG, for martial-arts
violence.)
With three movies already (re)released theatrically in America, and at
least three more on their way, Jackie Chan is one of the newest "hot
properties" in action adventure stardom, and it's just about time.
For over twenty-five years, Jackie's been starring in martial arts and
action movies in Hong Kong, thrilling audiences with both an
incredible grasp of acrobatics and martial arts and a wonderful sense
of comedy. 
"Drunken Master" has the distinction of being the first Jackie Chan
movie to "make it big"--this is the movie that supposedly set Jackie
up for big stardom in Hong Kong.  I'm not entirely sure why, exactly.
In many ways, "Drunken Master" is similar to most of Jackie's other
early films, such as "Fearless Hyena" I and II, "Master With Cracked
Fingers", "Half a Loaf of Kung Fu", "Spiritual Kung Fu", and others.
In fact, looking at all these early films together, one gets the
impression that they were stamped out, cookie-cutter style, at a rate
of four to six per year, all using the same casts and telling very
similar stories. 
To be honest, I think that early Jackie Chan movies are something of
an acquired taste.  They're quite different from action movies as we
know them in America.  These films tend to be set in the Chinese
countryside in an indeterminate period sometime in the distant past,
with fairly slow plots that often meander far afield and sometimes
seem to exist only for the intention of stringing comedy and fight
scenes together.  "Drunken Master", though its plot is tighter than
some, is no exception. 
(As an aside, "Drunken Master" was the first Jackie Chan movie I ever
saw, and I saw it the way it was meant to be seen...in a movie theater
in Seattle, as part of an Asian film festival.  At the time, I didn't
really think it was anything special...but after having seen more
films like it, it's kind of grown on me.)
"Drunken Master"'s storyline is very similar to that of other early
Jackie Chan movies, such as "Fearless Hyena" I and II and "Master With
Cracked Fingers"--slacker martial arts student is taught the martial
arts by a harsh-seeming master, and has a big fight with an evil bad
guy in the end (a formula that has been "adapted," to put it kindly,
by American films such as Karate Kid).  More specifically, Jackie Chan
plays the part of Wong Fei-Hong, aka "Naughty Panther," a fun-loving,
practical-joking Kung Fu student who is too good at Kung Fu for his
own good, but not _quite_ good enough. 
After embarrassing his instructor's assistant by beating him roundly,
then beating up a bully in a marketplace, Wong Fei-Hong tries to hit
on a pretty girl, but discovers that she, and her mother, can hit
back, better than he can...and is further chagrinned to discover that
the two women are his cousin and aunt, respectively.  His father, Wong
Kei-Ying, is unhappy about this, and is further annoyed when the
father and brother of the bully show up to sue for damages.  Kei-Ying
soon institutes a harsh regimen of punishment, which Fei-Hong does not
like at all. 
While escaping from this punishment, Fei-Hong meets up with a drunken
old man, who proceeds to thrash him soundly, then take him on as a
student and thrash him some more.  This turns out to be Su Hua-Chi, a
legendary master of drunken-style Kung Fu.  He assigns Fei-Hong a
series of bizarre tasks, such as filling jugs with water while hanging
upside down from a frame, cracking walnuts with his hands, and other
such exercises, that seem like more pointless cruelty but are actually
strengthening him up.  Then, when he's ready, he teaches him the seven
styles of drunken Kung Fu.  Unfortunately, the lazy Fei-Hong only
practices six of them... 
"Drunken Master" features some wonderful martial arts sequences, with
Jackie winning some fights and losing others.  It's been said before,
but I'll say it again--these fights don't just _happen_, they're as
carefully choreographed as any ballet performance, and it shows.  In
his fights, Jackie often makes use of objects found in his
environment-- benches, jugs, cups, bowls, fruits and vegetables--often
in new and surprising ways.  The fight scenes, particularly those
toward the end of the film, are unparallelled in most American films.
Whether Jackie wins or loses, it's really something to see...and it's
often as funny as anything, too. 
And funny is the other thing Jackie Chan is very, very good at.
There's very little that's new in this movie--Jackie winning fights,
Jackie getting beaten badly by a master, Jackie going through
punishment or training...these schticks have all been seen before, in
any one of several dozen similar Jackie movies from the seventies and
early eighties.  But they're still hilarious as ever.  Likewise,
Jackie has a _great_ supporting cast, many of whom were also in other
early Jackie films, and they're often the source of plenty of hilarity
on their own. 
The really big thing about "Drunken Master", though, that inspired
several copycats (including a couple starring Jackie himself) and a
sequel fifteen years later, was the drunken-style Kung Fu.  I'm not
certain whether or not this is actually a genuine style of Kung Fu,
but the principle behind it is to imitate the wobbly movements of a
drunkard to lull the enemy into a false sense of security...and it
apparently helps if you're drunk while you're doing it. 
Genuine or not, I have to admit, there's just something incredibly fun
about watching a fellow who looks utterly sloshed wading into a group
of startled opponents and making mincemeat out of them before they
even realize what's going on.  Come to think of it, perhaps this
element is what accounts for this film's success over any of the other
Jackie films...it's not just martial arts, it's the kind of martial
arts that makes you stop and go, "Whoa..."
On the negative side, the cinematography in this film is nothing
special, the film stock is rather primitive, the plot is often rather
slow, and the subtitles are sometimes extremely hard to read against
the background.  "Gone With the Wind", this isn't.  Still, if you like
martial arts films, or like what you've seen so far of Jackie Chan and
want to see more, give it a shot.  It's much more "real" than Chuck
Norris or Jean-Claude Van Damme.  You might very well like it. 
Another interesting thing about "Drunken Master" has to do with its
video availability in the US.  "Drunken Master" is the only early
Jackie Chan movie that I know of that you can find in its original,
letterboxed, Hong Kong subtitled form, commercially available on VHS
(from Magnum Video, in a gold box, for about $10).  There are plenty
of other early Jackie films around, but these are typically either in
dubbed, pan-and-scanned form or else import tapes priced for rental
instead of purchase.  Thankfully, "Drunken Master", at least, is
available in the aspect ratio in which it was meant to be seen, at a
very affordable price. 
If you like "Drunken Master", take a look at the numerous other early
Jackie Chan films that are out there (even the dubbed ones aren't
really _too_ bad...if nothing else, you can enjoy the martial arts
choreography while making fun of the dialogue).  I particularly
recommend "Spiritual Kung Fu", "Half a Loaf of Kung Fu", the "Fearless
Hyena" movies, and "Snake & Crane Arts of Shaolin".  Also, the
mostly-unrelated-storywise sequel, "Drunken Master II", will hit
theaters in American release sometime later this year (though what its
American-release title will be is still uncertain) and comes _highly_
recommended by this reviewer. 
Also, for a rather different interpretation of the character Wong
Fei-Hong (who is in fact a popular figure from Chinese folklore), I've
been told to suggest the "Once Upon a Time In China" series starring
Jet Li (though I haven't personally seen any of them yet). 
If you choose to watch "Drunken Master", I really hope you enjoy it,
and I hope it starts to open your eyes to the wonderful world of Asian
cinema that's out there.  All in all, I give this film an 8 out of 10.
--
Chris Meadows aka  | Author, Team M.E.C.H.A., Crapshoot & Co.
Robotech_Master    | on the Superguy Listserv (bit.listserv.superguy)
robotech@eyrie.org | With a World Wide Web homepage located at
robotech@jurai.net | http://www.eyrie.org/~robotech/index.html

Title
Review for Shuang long hui (1992)
Starring Jackie Chan, Maggie Cheung, Teddy Robin Kwan, Nina Chi Li,
    Philip Chan, etc.
Many people laud Jackie Chan's kung-fu fighting and stunt-performing
abilities without realizing the true secret of his cinematic success.
Martial artists and stuntmen are a dime a dozen, but what really sets
Jackie Chan above the rest is his wonderful knack for physical comedy.
He has few equals in that field, at least among those working
today--Bruce Campbell and Jim Carrey are the only other names that
come immediately to mind.  And it is comedy, rather than fighting,
that makes "Twin Dragons" worth watching.
The premise of "Twin Dragons" is that Jackie Chan plays both halves of
a pair of twins who were accidentally separated at birth, grew up into
entirely different people, and eventually run into and get confused
for each other in Hong Kong.  Sound familiar?  The same basic idea was
done by Van Damme in "Double Impact," which was also set in Hong Kong
and made the year before...but whereas in "Double Impact" the point
was to have two Van Dammes to show twice as much beefcake and kick
twice as much butt at once, "Twin Dragons" plays up the comedy aspect
of mistaken identities--in fact, one of the Jackie Chans can't fight
at all.
After the opening, in which the twins are split, they grow up
separately--the one who was lost becomes Boomer, a tough auto
mechanic, road racer, and street hustler, while John Ma, the one who
went with his parents to America, grows up to be a virtuoso piano
player and orchestra conductor.  
As the film begins, Boomer's friend Tyson (played by Teddy Robin Kwan,
also the film's producer) falls for a karaoke singer named Barbara
(Maggie Cheung).  In pursuit of her, Boomer and Tyson bust up a party
for a Triad (mob) figure, Brother Wing (Alfred Cheung).  In lieu of
breaking Boomer's leg, Wing challenges Boomer to a road race, with
stakes of three hundred thousand Hong Kong dollars (about $33,000 US).
When the twosome attempts to flee Hong Kong, they get into a boat
chase with Wing's men which ends up critically injuring Wing.
Meanwhile, John Ma has come to Hong Kong for the first time since his
family left, to conduct a concert, and is set up with a rather
attractive female nurse, Tammy (Nina Li Chi), by Tammy's father, an
old family friend.  As fate would have it, the Ma twins _almost_ meet
several times, confusing all those with whom they come into contact
(including Tyson, a waiter, Tammy, Barbara, Tammy's ex-boyfriend
Rocky, and each other), accidentally get switched with each other,
meet, switch back and forth two more times, and get stuck in each
other's roles when it comes time to conduct the concert and the
mobsters have a job they need Boomer to do.  In the end, they join
forces to save Tyson from the mob brothers in a climactic kung-fu
comedy battle.
Chan fans expecting the sort of back-to-back fighting action seen in
"Double Impact" may be disappointed.  This movie has only one fighting
Chan in it, that being Boomer--when the thugs come after John Ma, he
has to run away or get beaten up.  However, the fight scenes where
Boomer does his thing are everything we've come to expect from Jackie
at his prime--constant motion, use of handy props as improvised
weapons, and fast and furious action.
Chan fans shouldn't fret too much, though, because there _are_ two
_comedic_ Chans in "Twin Dragons."  As might be expected, each Jackie
Chans is constantly being mistaken for the "other" Jackie, and neither
one quite realizes what's going on at first.  The funniest scene of
the movie comes in John Ma's hotel suite, when Tammy unknowingly
corners the two Jackie Chans in the bathroom and they have to convince
her that there's only one of them...while taking a bath together.
There is physical comedy, too: being twins, the brothers share sort of
a psychic link.  When John Ma is playing the piano, Boomer's hand
twitches as though he were playing the piano, too.  When Boomer is
racing a speedboat, attempting to escape from Brother Wing's thugs,
John Ma is jerked this way and that (disrupting their dinner in a fine
restaurant) as Boomer tries to keep his balance.
The version of "Twin Dragons" that I saw was dubbed and
pan-and-scanned, bought from Best Buy for under $5.  While I
personally prefer subtitled and letterboxed films, this one was
nonetheless well worth the money.  The voice acting was quite good,
and Cam Clarke, one of my favorite voice actors, did a fine job of
differentiating the two different Jackie Chans.
All in all, this very entertaining film gets a rating of 8 out of 10
from this reviewer.
An interesting side note: "Twin Dragons" was made as a charity project
by the Hong Kong Director's Guild, and features cameo appearances by
many reknowned Hong Kong directors.  Most notably, John Woo is the
priest on the left at the wedding, Tsui Hark and Ringo Lam (the
directors of "Twin Dragons") are two of the card-playing mechanics in
the Mitsubishi testing facility, and Philip Chan (who played the
police superintendent in Woo's "Hard-Boiled," and who, interestingly
enough, also had a role in Van Damme's "Double Impact") is the hotel
manager.  Other Hong Kong directors, who will probably not be
recognized by non-Hong Kong-cinemaphiles on this side of the Pacific,
fill many of the film's other minor roles.
(This review is copyright 1998 by Christopher E. Meadows.  Permission
granted for Usenet distribution and associated archival, including the
Internet Movie Database, but other distribution rights reserved to the
author.)
-- 
Chris Meadows aka  | Co-moderator, rec.toys.transformers.moderated
Robotech_Master    | Homepage: http://www.eyrie.org/~robotech/>
robotech@eyrie.org | PGP: http://www.eyrie.org/~robotech/rm.key.txt>   
robotech@jurai.net | ICQ UIN: 5477383 

Title
Review for Daylight (1996)
In _Daylight_, Sylvester Stallone breaks no new ground, cinematically
speaking, but he covers familiar territory quite well.
Yesterday, as I was going about my business in the university
bookstore, I noticed this stand with these _Daylight_ movie posters on
it.  I had never heard of the movie, so I stopped by to check it out.
It turned out that they were giving away free passes to the movie for
people who had or applied for the credit card they were offering.  So,
I shrugged, thought, "Hey, they probably won't give me the card
anyway, and I could always use a free movie," so I signed up.  All in
all, I don't think I got that bad of a deal, either.
Rob Cohen, who has previously brought us such films as _Dragon: The
Bruce Lee Story_ and, more recently, _Dragonheart_ (gee, I wonder if
he likes dragons for some reason?  You think?), now brings us a very
nicely executed disaster picture, with FX by Industrial Light and
Magic, about the after-effects of an explosion that collapses a busy
tunnel between New York and New Jersey.
Sylvester Stallone plays Kit Latura, who is essentially a carbon copy
of the character he played in _Cliffhanger_: a paramedic on the outs
because he made a mistake that got people killed.  When the crisis
hits, he is in the right place at the right time and takes it upon
himself to go in and get everybody out.  There are other similarities
to _Cliffhanger_, too; perhaps the only real difference is that
_Cliffhanger_ had a villain, where _Daylight_'s bad guy is Mother
Nature.  In fact, had the two movies been made in Hong Kong, this
might have been titled _Cliffhanger II_--it bears the same
relationship to that film that most HK film "sequels" do to their
predecessors.
The first half-hour of _Daylight_ is setup.  Subplots are woven, and
the mechanism of the disaster is assembled.  We meet all the important
people...toxic waste disposal truck drivers; a young, frustrated,
jilted, rejected playwright; a family struggling to stay together; an
older couple and their dog; a truckload of prisoners; an ad agency
executive; a tunnel police officer; Stallone; and others.  We watch
the trucks trundle toward their destination; we watch Stallone and so
many others driving toward the tunnel for their various reasons.  And
then, thirty minutes into the film, _BOOM_.  And it's a big one.
>From there on in, it's Sly Stallone to the rescue.  And rescue he
does, enduring batterings, beatings, falls, repeated immersion in
34-degree water, explosions, mud, rats, and constant setbacks, before
going on to save the day, Sly-style.  Again...there's nothing new
here.
And yet there doesn't need to be.  The fun of _Daylight_ is not in the
story but in the execution.  The special-effects are first-rate,
thanks to Industrial Light and Magic, and the ensemble cast works well
together.  Once the film hits its stride, it carries the viewer right
along to the finish, with very few jars along the way.
This review is copyright 1996 by Christopher E. Meadows. Permission
granted for distribution through rec.arts.movies.reviews and all
associated archival. Permission granted for free redistribution via
cyberspace as long as this message remains attached. All other rights
reserved to the author.
-- 
Chris Meadows aka  | Author, Team M.E.C.H.A., Crapshoot & Co.
robotech@jurai.net | With a World Wide Web homepage located at
robotech@eyrie.org | http://www.jurai.net/~robotech/index.html

Title
Review for Star Wars (1977)
Books could be, and indeed have been written about the Star Wars
trilogy, and rightfully so.  This is a set of movies that shattered all
expectations of what science fiction could be in the late 70s/early 80s,
inspiring literally dozens of clones, from Battlestar Galactica all the
way up to Stargate and Independance Day, and one could argue
revitalizing the whole science fiction genre.  The special effects were
groundbreaking, revolutionary for their day and still eminently
watchable well into twenty years later.  Literally millions of people
have seen the Star Wars trilogy and been touched by it.  And now, George
Lucas brings it back for a new audience to enjoy. 
Much has been and is still being made of the fact that Mr. Lucas has
gone back and revised his trilogy for rerelease now.  Some fans are
angry that he has dared to meddle with what they consider perfection,
while others are thrilled by the idea of seeing yesterday's Star Wars
updated with today's special effects wizardry.  Either way, the Special
Edition release means that Star Wars is back on the big screen, where
it rightfully deserves to be seen.
Can there be anyone in the world who doesn't know what Star Wars is
about?  In a way, Star Wars is so much a part of our cultural heritage
that it feels silly and almost artificial to try to summarize it.  It's
a story about a young man's coming of age, a fight for freedom against
an oppressive empire, a tale of swashbuckling and derring-do the likes
of which haven't been seen on the silver screen in decades, strange new
worlds with strange alien creatures and weird surprises around every
turn, and the yearning within each of us to realize our dreams and make
a difference in the world.  It's high adventure, incredible special
effects, and...well, it's just an _experience_.  Something about this
movie sparked the imagination of a generation...and it's about to do so
again. 
This new release of Star Wars comes as no surprise to many of the film's
devoted fans, who have been trading rumors and bits of information about
it for quite some time now.  Interviews, trailers, leaks from within
Lucasfilm...all of these have been collected, collated, and placed on
webpages for people to see (pages such as
http://www.islandnet.com/~corona/films/details/sw4.html or, my personal
favorite, http://leopard.cs.latrobe.edu.au/~koukoula/).  Pictures of
before and after have been placed side by side...even months before the
movies were released, fans were making comparisons. 
In some cases, the changes were nothing less than phenomenal, and this
can be seen from the comparison shots even before you go into the movie
theater.  The digital matte effects that were little more than a toy in
Forrest Gump are put to excellent use here, unnoticeably sprucing up
scenes that that George Lucas was unsatisfied with in the original.  For
instance, in my personal favorite example, the ancient temple on Yavin
that was formerly a flat stone edifice now has deep, moss-covered
carvings and etchings.  And Mos Eisley Spaceport is now a bustling,
booming city, with more surprises and things going on in the background
than you can notice on the first viewing.  
All the starships and fighters are now computer-animated, getting rid of
glitches and artifacts of the special effects processes used when the
film was originally made--and they look _fantastic_.  Four and a half
minutes of new or missing footage have been added, including a scene
with Jabba the Hutt that had originally been shelved because the state
of special effects in 1977 simply couldn't do it justice. 
However, much of the ten million dollars that was spent on the Star Wars
Special Edition restoration went into restoring the quality of the film
itself.  The negatives, badly damaged by the ravages of time, were
brightened and returned to their original splendor.  The audio tracks
were remixed and reprocessed, with reworked sound effects by effects
maven Ben Burtt, into glorious, booming, theater-shaking full-THX Dolby
digital stereo.  And _that_, more than the added scenes or new special
effects, is where the real value of this new version lies.  It's really
true what they say in the commercials: Star Wars loses _so much_ on the
small screen.  Even letterboxing doesn't make up for the decrease in
size and definition. 
In regard to the Star Wars Special Edition, and to the other two films
of the trilogy which have yet to be released, I'll make this final
recommendation: Go and see it.  Go and see it more than once...it may be
another twenty years before it comes back to the big screen after it's
gone this time.  Take along the youngsters who've never had the
big-screen Star Wars experience--you'll enjoy seeing it through their
eyes as much as they will enjoy it for the first time.  There's magic in
this movie--Special Edition or no, there can be no denying that it's
still Star Wars, and still has the power to thrill and enthrall children
of all ages, from four to four hundred.  Let's all return to that time
long ago, and that galaxy far, far away... 
This review is copyright 1997 by Christopher E. Meadows.  Permission
granted for not-for-profit Usenet distribution via rec.arts.movies
reviews and associated archival; permission granted for inclusion in
Internet Movie Database and associated archival.  All other
distribution, including CD-ROM, requires permission from the author. 
-- 
Chris Meadows aka  | Author, Team M.E.C.H.A., Crapshoot & Co.
Robotech_Master    | on the Superguy Listserv (bit.listserv.superguy)
robotech@jurai.net | With a World Wide Web homepage located at
robotech@eyrie.org | http://www.jurai.net/~robotech/index.html
