Authors
Ivana and Cooper Redwine
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Hamlet (1948)
Starring: Laurence Olivier, Jean Simmons, Basil Sydney, Eileen Herlie,
Felix Aylmer, Terence Morgan, Peter Cushing, Stanley Holloway.
Director: Laurence Olivier.
Screenplay: Alan Dent, Laurence Olivier.
Production Design: Roger Furse.
Costume Design: Roger Furse.
Music: William Walton.
Cinematography: Desmond Dickinson.
Producers: Laurence Olivier, Reginald Beck, Anthony Bushell.
MPAA Rating: Not rated.
Running Time: 155 minutes.
Laurence Olivier's HAMLET is a classic film that is generally considered to
be one of the greatest movies of all time. It has been accorded numerous
honors, including four 1948 Academy Awards: Best Picture, Actor, Art
Direction-Set Direction, and Costume Design. There was a time when almost
every well-educated person in the English-speaking world had seen the film,
and it provides a standard of excellence against which all other film
versions of HAMLET are measured.
Olivier had complete artistic control over every aspect of his version of
HAMLET, including casting, screenplay, sets, costumes, editing, and music,
and of course he directed and played the title role. But Shakespeare
purists have always been unhappy that Olivier took extreme liberties with
the Bard's play. Olivier wanted to make a film that was not just for
culture vultures, but rather he aimed it at the ordinary moviegoer. To this
end, he shortened the drama from 4 hours to 2 hours 35 minutes by
drastically abridging Shakespeare's text, even though this involved the
cutting of significant characters (for example, Fortinbras, Rosencrantz,
and Guildenstern) and the elimination of important story elements (for
example, Denmark's conflict with Norway and the rebellion led by Laertes).
Moreover, Olivier moved some of the Bard's key scenes (notably the "To be
or not to be" soliloquy) to a different place in the story in an effort to
simplify Shakespeare's complex tale. And even for those viewers who are not
Shakespeare purists, it is jarring when Olivier, the omniscient director,
in voice-over intones words not found in Shakespeare: "This is the tragedy
of a man who could not make up his mind." Nevertheless, Olivier was largely
successful in making a movie that is engaging for both the Shakespeare buff
and the ordinary moviegoer.
Whatever can be said of Olivier's treatment of the story, it is difficult
to find serious fault with the uniformly high standard of acting in his
film. The entire cast makes the Shakespearean dialog seem easy and natural.
Basil Sydney is fine as Claudius, Peter Cushing is amusing as Osric, and
Stanley Holloway is witty as the Gravedigger (Olivier cuts Shakespeare's
Second Gravedigger). Ophelia is played adequately by the eighteen-year-old
Jean Simmons, and the obvious youthfulness of the actress helps to make the
character more credible. And of course Olivier will always be remembered
for his subtle, sensitive, and poetic performance in the title role as he
portrays Hamlet's transition from a melancholy, ineffectual dreamer to a
man of action. But while everything in the movie appears seamless on the
screen, it is interesting to realize that when Olivier/Hamlet leaped from a
fifteen-foot height onto Claudius's stand-in, he broke two of the
stand-in's teeth and knocked the man unconscious!
A distinctive feature of Olivier's interpretation of HAMLET is his heavy
reliance on Freudian psychology. It is provocative to contemplate that
while Olivier was around 40 years old when he portrayed Hamlet in his film,
the actress he cast as Hamlet's mother (Eileen Herlie) was only 27.
Olivier's Oedipal slant is strongly evident in the scene where Hamlet sits
with his mother on her bed and they exchange a prolonged kiss on the mouth.
The actions of the actors are reinforced by the folds of the drapery
surrounding the bed, which seductively transform it into a powerful image
with aspects of both womb and orifice. And the significance of the queen's
bed is emphasized by having the camera linger on it at other times in the
film, first near the beginning as the camera glides down the central spiral
staircase, and again near the end as the camera slowly moves up the same
staircase.
Perhaps the single most memorable thing about Olivier's HAMLET is its sense
of brooding intensity, enhanced by the setting in a gloomy, bleak Elsinore
Castle. The self-absorbed Danish royal court seems to live in a
claustrophobic maze with a tangle of corridors and a vertigo-inducing
spiral staircase where it is hard to know which way to turn. With tongues
planted firmly in cheeks, some wags have proposed  the exercise of trying
to sketch a floor plan of Olivier's castle, but we recommend strongly
against this.
While Olivier's HAMLET does not preserve the complexity of Shakespeare's
story, it does maintain the poetic beauty of the Bard's language, and
Olivier wraps everything in a moody black and white chiaroscuro that gives
his film a visual lyricism which is well-matched to that language. So, if
you want to see a unified, poetic vision of HAMLET that focuses on the
personal tragedy of  the Melancholy Dane, Olivier's version can't be beat.
But if you're more interested in a version of HAMLET that adheres closely
to Shakespeare's original play with all its social and political
complexities, you'll probably be happier with Kenneth Branagh's 1996 film,
although the latter version has a few rough edges and loses some of the raw
psychological power of Olivier's version.
