Authors
James Meek
Number of Reviews
3

Title
Review for Priest (1994)
     PRIEST is the second movie I've seen recently ending with "You'll
Never Walk Alone" swelling onto the soundtrack.  In HEAVENLY CREATURES,
the Mario Lanza version plays over the credits as a wonderfully ironic
grace note to a stellar film--the selection fits perfectly.  In PRIEST,
which is merely a very good movie, a rather tepid version of the song
plays out as a banal reflection of the action.  The song's appearance
in PRIEST isn't inappropriate, but neither is it inspired, as it is in
HEAVENLY CREATURES.
     That sort of difference sums up my attitude towards PRIEST.  It's
a very good movie, but not an inspired movie.  The director, Antonia
Bird, and screenwriter Jimmy McGovern give us a film about Father Greg
(Linus Roache), a rigidly traditional young priest assigned to a parish
in Liverpool.  He joins Father Matthew (Tom Wilkinson), a liberal
priest more interested in the spirit of religious law than the
letters.  The two immediately clash, with Father Greg objecting to a
sermon by Father Matthew in which the latter points a heavy finger at
societal institutions.  When he finds out that Father Matthew and the
parish housekeeper, Maria Kerrigan (Cathy Tyson), have been involved in
a long-term sexual and romantic relationship, he writes off Father
Matthew as completely hopeless.
     Father Greg, however, has some secrets of his own: he's gay, and
he cannot keep from breaking his vow of chastity.  He dresses in
leather and bicycles down to a pub to meet a sexual partner.  To his
credit, Father Greg realizes his hypocrisy, but he cannot admit it to
Father Matthew or anyone else.  He cannot bring himself to break the
seal of the confession, however, even when a fourteen-year-old
parishioner confesses that her father "makes me do things."  Father
Greg has her tell her father that "I say it has to stop."  He is wholly
unprepared for the father's response, however: an eloquent,
cold-blooded justification for acting upon his incestuous desires.
     Father Greg spends the film discovering that while he's quite
willing to be a Martyr, to wage Holy War on Sin and Evil, he lives in a
world where he must instead make sacrifices, and do what he can to
struggle against sin and evil.  He tells his lover that in seminary
school, he *knew* the answers to hypothetical problems--if someone
confessed before a service that he'd poisoned the altar wine, Father
Greg would martyr himself for his vow, drinking the wine anyway.  He is
utterly flummoxed, however, when confronted with his own desires, which
seem ludicrous when articulated in terms of absolute good and evil; and
when confronted with a reasoned, unrepentant evil that is utterly
human, though utterly life-destroying.
     PRIEST is crammed full of more plot lines and character
development than nine or ten average summer blockbusters.  It does
Catholicism the (usually unwelcomed) favor of taking its tenets quite
seriously.  Critics who object to the film seem to feel that their
faith is being mocked, that priests shouldn't be portrayed as sinning
human beings.  While Bird and McGovern make no secret of their liberal
bias, however, no viewpoint in the film is presented unchallenged, and
no absolute distinctions are made between good and bad Catholics.  The
filmmakers do not mock those parishioners who cannot forgive Greg his
sins and feel that his presence before them is mockery at best and
blasphemy at worst.  The filmmakers don't agree with their position,
but they do take it seriously.
     The seriousness with which everything is taken is, in fact, its
main fault.  There are very few really lighthearted moments in the
film.  Although it is obvious that Father Greg lives to be a priest, we
never see the joys or satisfactions that the position must offer, at
least in theory.  The profession is not condemned, but neither is it
celebrated, and so Bird and McGovern present to the audience characters
whose dilemmas are never fully believable because you're never sure why
they're dilemmas in the first place.  Father Greg utterly rejects the
idea of leaving the priesthood to free himself to love whom he pleases,
and it's obvious that being a priest means as much (or more) to him as
being gay, but there's never any sense or explanation of what motivated
him to become a priest in the first place.
     This puts the whole movie in the rather awkward position of being
an obvious hypothetical situation arguing the folly--or even the
sin--of mistaking hypothetical situations for real life.  Bird and the
other filmmakers seem to respect Catholicism as the question it, but
don't show any evidence of feeling the paradoxes and dilemmas of faith
in the core of their being.  PRIEST is a very good film, a very worthy
film; ultimately, however, it never makes the final, alchemical leap,
transforming good acting, a good script, and strong direction into a
really powerful, moving motion picture.

Title
Review for Clueless (1995)
     If you're going to cannibalize, cannibalize the classics.
     CLUELESS, Amy Heckerling's latest cinematic postcard from the
sunny lands of adolescence, borrows the skeletons of plot and character
from Jane Austen's classic novel EMMA.  While the sympathetic irony of
the story remains the same, however, Heckerling utilizes movies'
kinetic energy, rather than novels' layered detail, in her portrayal of
the rituals of society's upper crust.  Heckerling made a savvy choice.
CLUELESS is her best movie since FAST TIMES AT RIDGEMONT HIGH, almost
making up for three LOOK WHO'S TALKING movies.
     In CLUELESS, Heckerling eschews the verisimilitude of EMMA, or
even of FAST TIMES.  Her characters inhabit the same pop-culture high
school world as those in HEATHERS.  Where HEATHERS mocked the
black-hearted, back-stabbing, Mr. Hyde faces of adolescence, however,
CLUELESS focuses on the Dr. Jeckyll half of teenage life.  The kids in
CLUELESS form cliques, but their edges blur.  Most people turn out to
have more depth than they reveal on first consideration.  There's a
gratifying casualness about things like homosexuality and ethnicity;
characters are ultimately accepted for the things they do rather than
what they happen to be.
     Alicia Silverstone stars as Cher, and I feel obligated to extend
an apology to her: I was convinced that she couldn't carry a ninety
minute comedy to save her soul.  Sexy poses depend on the talent of the
artist behind the camera; comic, sexy performances require a capable
actress in front of the camera with whom a director can work.
Silverstone may have been able to set adolescent male hormones ablaze
with her blonde vixen performances in Aerosmith videos, but I really
didn't think she could do more than pout pretty and smirk on cue.
     When we first meet Cher, she's high school royalty, a wealthy,
beautiful young woman with social advantages by the fistful.  She and
her friend Dionne manage to romantically pair off two of their
teachers, thereby improving their own grades by improving the teachers'
moods.  Inspired by these good deeds, Cher decides to use her
popularity to help a new girl become one of the school's elite,
attempting to arrange an advantageous match with one of the available
popular males.  This quest, and her own quest to find a suitable
boyfriend, prove more difficult, and Cher slowly learns to empathize
with others--both locally and globally, as the motto goes.
     Silverstone makes a potentially vacuous character charming, smart,
and sexy, delivering a performance that stands (in fashionable satin
shoes) on the shoulders--and in the shadow--of comic giants like Judy
Holliday and Carole Lombard.  Silverstone's real talent lies in the
physicality of her performance.  She's comfortable both performing
slapstick and looking sexy, combining the two smoothly when the scene
demands.  She works her lips around her dialogue with glee, adding
comic fillips to her delivery and raising the certainty that, when she
does kiss someone, it's going to be some kiss.  It is.
     The best part of CLUELESS, however, is the dialogue around which
Silverstone stretches her lips.  Heckerling wisely avoids attempting to
document cutting-edge teen slang, which would have been unavoidably out
of date by the time the movie was released.  Instead, she concocts a
convincing argot containing elements of hip-hop, advertising jargon,
colorful turns of phrase, gleanings from the dictionary and thesaurus,
and other fragments of pop vernacular.  The language works because it's
taken for granted, rather than used as a punchline.  When Cher refers
to Josh, her ex-stepbrother hanging around her father's house, as a
"Kato," it's slipped into the middle of a sentence, not drawing any
particular attention to itself.
     It's a joy to just listen to the characters speak; they use
language as a playground, and an opportunity to demonstrate creativity
and intelligence.  Specific terms occasionally get explained--a "Monet"
is someone who, "like the paintings," looks good from far away, but is
a mess from up close; "jeepin'" is having sex in a car--but the
cumulative effect is a delirious delight.  Characters aren't
necessarily saying much of anything, but they're well spoken.  When
Josh asks Cher if she knows what she's talking about after she refers
to "Ren and Stimpy" as "way existential," she replies, "No--do I sound
like I do?"
     CLUELESS is smarter by half than most "teen comedies," lighter on
its feet and much less self-important than, say, the teen oeuvre of
John Hughes.  Heckerling found the right ingredients to throw in a
blender, frappe, and serve as a refreshing summer confection.  It's
gaudy and pink, but there are real strawberries and cranberry juice in
there to add a little nutritional value.

Title
Review for You Seng (1993)
Cast: Wu Hsin-kuo, Joan Chen, Zhang Fengyi, Michael Lee, Lisa Lu 
Director: Clara Law 
Producer: Teddy Robin Kwan 
Screenplay: Eddie Fong Ling-Ching and Lilian Lee 
Cinematography: Andrew Lesnie 
Music: Tats Lau 
U.S. Distributor: Northern Arts Entertainment 
In Chinese with subtitles 
     With its grand, colorful pageantry and cast of characters unable to 
provoke an emotional response from the audience, TEMPTATION OF A MONK is 
a curious mix of the good, the bad, and the ugly.  Containing ample 
portions of sex and graphic violence, this picture serves up 
exploitation fare for an upscale, art-house audience.  
     The plot, which is occasionally difficult to follow (undoubtedly 
due to East/West cultural differences), tells a story from the early 
years of China's Tang dynasty (circa 626 AD).  General Shi (Wu Hsin-kuo) 
is a fiercely-loyal, greatly-feared battle commander whose prince, one 
of three sons vying for the Emperor's throne, is incompetent.  When an 
offer comes from rival general Huo Da (Zhang Fengyi, from FAREWELL MY 
CONCUBINE) for a bloodless coup if Shi will command his troops to offer 
no resistance, the stage is set for betrayal.  The takeover turns out to 
be bloody and Shi's troops (not to mention his prince) are slaughtered.  
Distraught, the general abandons his chance for glory in the new regime, 
turns his back on a princess who loves him (Joan Chen), and flees to an 
out-of-the-way monastery, where he shaves his head and accepts the 10 
Buddhist prohibitions.   
     There are three exceptionally energetic battle scenes in TEMPTATION 
OF A MONK, but the sequences linking them are by turns slow, confusing, 
and disjointed.  The chief problem seems to be that actor Wu Hsin-kuo 
plays the main character in such a detached fashion that it's difficult 
to see beneath the mask of self-pity.  There's nothing in Shi for the 
audience to connect with, and he comes across as exceptionally shallow.  
The same is true of the villain, Huo Da, and the love interest, Princess 
Scarlet.  The only character with a real personality is the 100-year old 
Abbot of the monastery where Shi seeks refuge.  Played with good cheer 
and a wry wit by Michael Lee, this man has words for the moment and 
wisdom for the centuries. 
     Like many recent Chinese exports, TEMPTATION OF A MONK attempts to 
weave an individual story into a larger, historical backdrop.  However, 
unlike FAREWELL MY CONCUBINE and TO LIVE, Clara Law's feature doesn't 
get the personal story right.  The director does a good job with the 
epic portion, but when it comes to developing Shi's tale, things don't 
always work.  This is supposed to be an examination of how battle can 
convert a warrior into a seeker of peace and truth, but the violent 
climax nullifies much of what TEMPTATION is trying to say.  In the end, 
the film offers evidence that ambitious stories of this sort need a 
strong, identifiable protagonist -- something TEMPTATION OF A MONK too 
obviously lacks. 
- James Berardinelli (jberardinell@delphi.com) 
