Authors
Sri Rajeev
Number of Reviews
2

Title
Review for Mediterraneo (1991)
     MEDITERRANEO is one of those small, surprising and delightful films
- such as the French used to make at one time - that leave a smile on
your face without taxing you overly.  I hate to denigrate it by calling
it a perfect summer movie, but that really is what it is: good, clean
entertainment.  By the way, it did win an Academy Award for Best Foreign
Film, I think in 1991.
     The film is in Italian, set on a small Greek island in the
Mediterranean.  The island is of dubious strategic value, and to the
small troupe of Second World War Italian soldiers (self-described by
the schoolmaster Lieutenant as a bunch of misfits) sent to capture and
hold the island, it appears to be an exercise in futility.  The island
seems completely devoid of human habitation, and since they are pretty
much incommunicado (their transport ship having been shot up and
destroyed by the enemy, and their radio broken by one of the soldiers in
a fit of pique), they seem to have a time of total boredom ahead of
them.  But all of a sudden (and the viewer becomes a willing believer
in this convenient fiction), the inhabitants of the village reappear.
It turns out they had hidden themselves in the caves because their
previous experience with occupying soldiers (German as it happens) had
been none too nice - the Germans had taken away all the able-bodied men.
     Then follows a very pleasant time for the soldiers: they are
accepted by the Greeks as comrades (for some reason they all keep
saying, "One race, one face" - although eventually someone does counter
with "One race, one stomach" after a particularly large meal.)  They
lead a blissful, Lotos-Eater existence for several years.  The
Lieutenant, an amateur artist, is commissioned to repaint the murals in
the church; various of the men find agreeable female companionship.
     Eventually, of course, all this good stuff must come to an end, and
reality strikes in the personages of two rather pompous British naval
ensigns who appear to take the Italians home in the aftermath of the
war.  They are suitably nonplussed by the scruffy Italian soldiers who
have gone native, complete with baggy trousers and vests.
     All in all, a thoroughly enjoyable film; even the (obligatory?)
Turkish villain and the starchy Brits were treated with good humor.  The
blue-green Mediterranean and the dazzlingly whitewashed Greek village
make one long to take a trip!
(Probably rated R for nudity, adult situations)
--
Sri Rajeev, Marketing Manager, Display Products
MTV 15-46, Sun Microsystems, 2550 Garcia Ave, Mt. View, CA 94043
(415)-336-1101  rajeev@travancore.eng.sun.com

Title
Review for Agantuk (1991)
AGANTUK (THE STRANGER or THE VISITOR), Bengali with English subtitles,
Satyajit Ray, 1991.  Shown at the San Francisco International Film
Festival (which was dedicated to Mr. Ray's memory) and to appear at
Seattle and other festivals.
     As Satyajit Ray's last film, AGANTUK would be a sentimental
favorite anyway with admirers of the Indian master's work.  However,
unlike much of Ray's somewhat uneven work in the last few years, this is
indeed a good film, able to stand on its own merits.  It is not a
masterpiece, but it is an exceedingly good film, except for being
perhaps a little preachy.
     The plot is rather simple: a wealthy Calcutta couple's life is
thrown into some turmoil by the unexpected appearance of a man who
claims to be the wife's long-lost uncle.  She has no recollection of the
uncle, who had left home when she was two; and there are few older
people who remember him.  The mysterious man, played by veteran Utpal
Dutt, engages in a game of cat-and-mouse with the couple; he appears
erudite and well-travelled--and claims to be an anthropologist who has
spent many years among tribal/native peoples in many parts of the
world--but is he really a clever imposter eyeing a very substantial
inheritance left to the uncle?
     Some of the plot similarities to THE RETURN OF MARTIN GUERRE (the
French film about the return of a medieval soldier to his home village
where the locals think he's an fraud) are clear: how can the man prove
himself?  But I was also reminded strongly of Ray's own ARANYER DIN RAAT
(DAYS AND NIGHTS IN THE FOREST) both for the tribal motif and for the
verbal pyrotechnics and sense of menace; as well as Kurosawa's recent
work, especially RHAPSODY IN AUGUST and DREAMS, for its concern for the
environment and man's relation to nature.  Ray and Kurosawa were
apparently good friends and perhaps they influenced each other.
     AGANTUK fits in with a sequence of Ray films that is relatively
little-known.  In addition to his brilliant neo-realistic works on rural
and poor Bengali life, including the Apu trilogy and ending with the
1973 ASHANI SANKET (DISTANT THUNDER), he also made a number of films
about urban angst; including his (in my opinion) underrated "Calcutta
Trilogy" consisting of JANA ARANYA (URBAN JUNGLE), SEEMABADDHA (LIMITED
CORPORATION) and PRATIDWANDI (THE ADVERSARY).  These films trace the
rise, in the city that Ray loved, of a commercial middle class without
moral or ethical moorings.  It is likely that Ray, in his last years,
became cynical about the decline of Bengali culture; hence his
world-weary SHAKHA PROSHAKHA (BRANCHES OF THE TREE) (1990) and
GANASHATRU (ENEMY OF THE PEOPLE, adapted from Ibsen) (1989).
     Unlike these, AGANTUK is a light-hearted film, although it touches
upon heavy questions about what civilization is and what modern man can
learn from primitive cultures.  Ray seems to use techniques from his
best-selling detective fiction in Bengali to build up tension about the
identity and motivations of the enigmatic visitor.  Arrayed against his
bullying intellect are the somewhat bemused hosts, bound by tradition to
offer their hospitality.  There is an electrifying debate between Utpal
Dutt and a friend of the family, well played by angry young man
Dhritiman Chatterjee.  "Science" and "rationalism" and Mr. Chatterjee
come off somewhat the worse for wear against Mr. Dutt's "primitives"
and "superstition."  In the end, however, the audience is not
necessarily captivated by the stern and pedantic Mr. Dutt, who blames
his peripatetic life on wanderlust.
     Personally for me, there were some great moments in the film--the
scene where Mr. Dutt is first seen, on board a train that's pulling
into Howrah station in Calcutta--reminded me of how much Ray loved
trains, and how significant they were in the Apu trilogy.  Some of
indoor shots, where the camera seemed to have a mind of its own, gently
caressing priceless antiques, were interesting.  The music, scored by
Ray himself, and the simple but touching folk song, were very appealing.
Even the somewhat cliched dance by the Santhal tribals was not bad.  All
in all, AGANTUK is a fitting end to the career to one of the greatest
geniuses of the cinema.  In his humanistic tradition, Ray has created a
humorous, entertaining and insightful film.
--
Sri Rajeev, Marketing Manager, Display Products
MTV 15-46, Sun Microsystems, 2550 Garcia Ave, Mt. View, CA 94043
(415)-336-1101  rajeev@travancore.eng.sun.com
