Authors
Sharon Badian
Number of Reviews
2

Title
Review for Dirty Dancing (1987)
     I went to see DIRTY DANCING because one of the critics on a NY independent
station loved it.  Not that I always listen to the critics (far from it,
believe me), but he gave it such a glowing review that I couldn't resist.  I
had not seen any of the ads for it.  Which is probably a good thing since it's
being pushed as the next SATURDAY NIGHT FEVER-FLASHDANCE-FOOTLOOSE type movie.
Obviously they hope to draw the teenagers who spend most of the big bucks on
movie tickets.  Well, don't be fooled by this bogus advertising!!  The movie
has more to offer than slick dancing!  And it doesn't fall into the all too
familiar trap of gratuitous female flesh used only to satisfy a bunch of horny
teenage boys.
     This movie is not about anything new; the pain of growing up has been
dealt with in many movies.  But I can't remember another one that does it with
such charm and affection.  Baby (Jennifer Grey) goes to the Catskills* with her
family for a three week vacation.  In three weeks, her world changes forever;
she becomes a woman, an adult.  She's not Daddy's little Baby anymore.  There
is pain and turmoil, but also humor.  It's like real life and maybe, that's why
I liked it so much.
     The title DIRTY DANCING comes from the fact that the help at the hotel
engage in very close dancing at their parties and it is seeing this dancing for
the first time, that starts Baby's transformation.
     The acting is wonderful.  These people seem real.  You feel for them.  And
they can all dance.  It's nice to see actors and actresses dancing instead of
dancers doing the dancing and actors doing the acting.  Both Jennifer Grey and
Patrick Swayze started out as dancers.  It's to their credit that they can act
too.  Together they are like dynamite, dancing or acting.
     And I can't stop without saying something about Patrick Swayze.  I think
all the women in the theater were sighing.  He just takes your breath away.
     So, forget the advertising.  Go see the movie.  It will make you feel
better.
* The Catskills are mountains in NY State where many New York City Jews spent
their summers (my great-grandparents, grandparents, parents and me included).
Though it looks like the Catskills, the movie was actually filmed at a pretty
hotel on a lake in southwestern Virginia, near Blacksburg.

Title
Review for Throw Momma from the Train (1987)
     It appears that here is a movie that is either embraced and loved or
condemned and despised.  There is no in-between.  The critics have loved it.
And most people I have talked to have despised it.  Someone posted a review
here saying how much he hated it.  Two women in the theater restroom after the
movie couldn't say enough bad things about it.
     It would be silly of me to recommend a movie that generates such varying
responses.  I liked it a lot and my husband liked it even more.  But it is a
strange movie, I have to admit that.  It's funny, but not like BEVERLY HILLS
COP so there isn't mass appeal.  We have Owen (Danny DeVito) who hates his
mother and who is a little crazy.  And we have Larry (Billy Crystal) who is a
writer who hates his ex-wife because she stole his novel.  Owen wants his
mother dead; Larry wants his wife dead (or so Owen believes).  Strange things
start happening and Larry gets caught up in a plot that totally throws him off
balance.  The story is about Larry, and the direction helps to throw the
audience off balance the way that Larry is thrown off balance.  There are
interesting segues that confuse.  You don't know where you are sometimes or how
you got there, or how you'll get out.
     There are funny lines scattered throughout the film, but you can't depend
on these for the laughs.  You have to be able to laugh at the absurdity of the
whole situation, and the lunacy of the characters (particularly Owen who is
really off-the-wall).  Anne Ramsey (as Momma) is totally despicable and
hilarious.
     I can't universally recommend this film because it depends too much on 
personal taste.  This movie doesn't have mass appeal in my mind because it is
so strange.  But I liked it all the same.
