Authors
John Haywood
Number of Reviews
2

Title
Review for Vita č bella, La (1997)
     The year before last was a heck of a year if you like good films.
Never mind "Titanic;" I thought it was good, but way over-hyped.  "Good Will
Hunting," "Contact," and "Seven Years in Tibet" were better; on a technical
par with "Titanic," but more interesting.  I thought "Gattaca," a very well
made science-fiction film that questions what impact genetic engineering
will have on our lives, was easily the best film of that year.  Of course, I
didn't
know "Life Is Beautiful" was being shown in Italy.
     Guido Orefice is the type of man who can laugh at anything.  If he
weren't, he might not be able to survive--for he's Jewish and lives in
fascist Italy.  His jolly attitude helps him woo Dora (Nicoletta Braschi)
away from the bureaucrat she's engaged to (the man who denied him a permit
to open a bookstore, no less).  The question ultimately comes down to
whether his happy demeanor is enough to carry him, Dora, and their young son
Joshua
(Giorgio Cantarini) through the horrors of World War II.
     "Life Is Beautiful" is wonderfully written.  When it tries to be funny,
it is hilarious.  In one very pointed scene, Guido, hoping to find someone
who opposes the fascists, quietly asks
another man what his politics are--before the question even registers in the
man's
head, he addresses his children by name: Benito and Adolpho.  Still, not
everything works against Guido; the scene where he finally wins over Dora is
absolutely perfect.  All this comedy works very much in the film's favor.  I
have no qualms about saying "Life
Is Beautiful" is better than "Schindler's List;" and it boils down to the
comedy.  Guido's clownish nature makes it even harder to watch what happens
to him in the concentration camp--but by the same token. it gives him a
defiant air that's very satisfying, and helps relieve the oppressiveness of
the totalitarian state that looms over everyone in the film.
     Just watching the film, you can tell that it was a labor of love for
the actors.  Two stand out in my mind: the first is Giorgio Cantarini, who
plays Joshua.  Though he's a little old
for the very early scenes, he carries off the later scenes beautifully--it's
really hard to believe so young a child can act so effectively.  Roberto
Benigni, however, is the true creative genius who pulls the film together.
In addition to his masterful work co-writing and
directing "Life is Beautiful," he also stars in it; he won my heart within
his first minute on screen.
     If "Life Is Beautiful" has a weakness, it's the translation.  There
were several places where the subtitles seemed a great deal shorter than the
spoken lines--and one where I thought I caught a name that didn't make it
into the subtitle.  Despite this problem, the subtitles are preferable to a
dubbing.  Beyond the traditional arguments regarding the value of hearing
the original actors--which I'd say apply more to "Life Is Beautiful" than
any
other foreign film I've seen--there would be a thorny translation problem
with the fact that some minor characters SPEAK English or German--languages
not understood by the characters they're addressing; it would become
confusing if the other characters spoke English instead of Italian--as would
happen if the film were dubbed.
     The PG-13 rating seems strong for "Life is Beautiful."  The main basis
is the strong thematic content relating to the holocaust.  The worst
violence is all off screen--in a way, it's more jarring than most films'
depictions on screen; the big exception is a scene involving a stack of
corpses.  I didn't catch any nudity or coarse language--though I don't speak
Italian, so the latter may have been lost in translation (but I doubt it).
The real problem for children
is they'll probably will lose patience with the subtitles.  That's a shame,
since all else being equal, I'd say the film would be a good family film:
the film's moving depiction of some of the worst events in history, and the
depiction of Guido and Dora's great--even heroic--love for each other and
their son, both weigh heavily in its favor.
     Still, calling it a family film doesn't do "Life Is Beautiful" justice.
One often thinks of family films as bland.  "Life is Beautiful" will make
you laugh plenty, cry some, and
think.  It's uplifting, charming, and creative.  I honestly can't think of a
word against it.
Title: "Life Is Beautiful"/"La Vita č Bella"
Release date: 1997 (Italy)/1998 (USA)   MPAA rating: PG-13
Overall rating: *****                   Aprox. run time: 116 min.
Director: Roberto Benigni
Writers: Vincenzo Cerami, Roberto Benigni
Stars: Roberto Benigni, Nicoletta Braschi, Giorgio Cantarini
Explanation of ratings:
***** If you had to pay $100 to see it, it'd still be worth it.
**** Buy the video for $20.
*** Probably worth $6.50 for the ticket--worth $1.50 to rent.
** Not even worth the time to see it--let alone the money.
* Don't see it unless someone pays you at least $50 to sit through it.
Visit the Reviews by John website:
http://www.geocities.com/reviewsbyjohn/
http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Mansion/7045/

This service provided through Yahoo! and AT&T e-mail accounts.  The
Yahoo.com and att.net domain names are not meant to imply any form of
support, sponsorship, or official sanction by Yahoo! Inc. or AT&T
Inc.
The views expressed are solely those of the author.
Copyright Š 1999, 2000 by John Haywood. Permission is hereby granted to
forward this message unedited and in its entirety.

Title
Review for Whole Nine Yards, The (2000)
     Somewhere along the line, mobsters became fair game for
comedies.  "Analyze This," about a mafioso in psychotherapy, and "Gun
Shy," a romantic comedy focusing on a police officer pursuing the
mob, both had funny previews.  I haven't seen either movie (in fact,
"Gun Shy" hasn't been released yet), but, like them, "The Whole Nine
Yards" had amusing previews--unfortunately, "The Whole Nine Yards"
isn't as good as its advertising.
     Nicholas "Oz" Oseransky (Matthew Perry) is an unsuccessful
dentist and a henpecked husband.  His wife, Sophie (Rosanna Arquette)
dragged him back to her native Montreal and berates him for not
making enough money.  Then, when he comes home from work one day, he
meets his new neighbor.  He soon realizes his new neighbor is Jimmy
"The Tulip" Tudeski (Bruce Willis), an ex-hitman hiding from mobster
Yanni Gogolack (Kevin Pollack).  Just when Oz starts to build a tense
friendship with Jimmy, his wife puts him on a plane to Chicago so he
can tip off the mob and collect the bounty on Tudeski's head.  Oz
plans to meet with a friend in Chicago, maybe have an affair, and,
above all, avoid any contact with the mob; but when he finds hitman
Frankie Figs (Michael Clarke Duncan) in his hotel room, his plans
soon change.
     "The Whole Nine Yards" doesn't quite know whether it wants to be
a comedy or a crime movie--and fails twice as a result.  It's amusing
when Oz first realizes who his new neighbor is--and instantly goes
from a slight feeling of deja vu to sheer terror.  What's funny for
two minutes begins to get annoying after an hour.  The problem is
that the movie takes all the mob activities perfectly seriously, and
relies on Oz's awkwardness around the criminals as the sole source of
jokes.  We have mob enforcers planning to kill each other, and only
one poor schmuck tripping over himself and drinking himself blind in
the background as a distraction.  This gives the audience a few funny
moments, such as when Oz runs into a glass door, or when Jimmy throws
Oz a beer--and the stunned Oz doesn't even try to catch it.  Most
straight crime-dramas are funnier and much less tedious, than "The
Whole Nine Yards."
     The movie also strains credibility in several places.  For
instance, why does Oz stay with his shrew of a wife?  When she and
her mother are ruining his personal, professional, and financial
lives, how could the disastrous divorce settlement he fears possibly
be worse?  It's not love--putting aside their mutual acrimony, while
he's in Chicago, Oz falls in love with another woman; of course, the
awkward protagonist falling in love with the worst possible woman at
the worst possible time, with no explanation other than the fact that
the woman in question was there and vaguely disliked him (old
romantic comedy technique--if you hate someone, it's true love),
doesn't exactly help the film's credibility either.  Neither does the
fact that his lover--who nearly everyone else in the film has a
reason to kill--is still alive despite her frequent contact with
mobsters.  It might be one thing if the non sequiturs were funny, but
they're not jokes; they're just careless writing.
     The movie isn't a total loss.  There are a few funny moments.
Bruce Willis delivers a strong performance; his character isn't as
complex as Dr. Crowe from "The Sixth Sense" (or even Harry Stamper
from "Armageddon"), but, there's something to an actor who can make a
mob hitman likeable.  Similarly, Michael Clarke Duncan is also
charming (though at this point, I'm not sure what it says when a
movie's only likeable characters are mass murderers).
     While "The Whole Nine Yards" may try to appear kinder and
gentler than your average crime movie, don't let that fool you.
There are several on-screen murders, plenty of strong language, a
fairly strong sex scene, and full frontal nudity.
     Apparently, the expression "the whole nine yards" comes from
World War II machine gunners' ammunition belts being nine yards
long--"the whole nine yards" meant that you shot off all you could
without reloading.  In contrast, while the title phrase may tell of a
lot of ammunition, the movie "The Whole Nine Yards" itself fires
blanks.
Title: "The Whole Nine Yards"
Release date: February 18, 2000    MPAA rating: R
Overall rating: **                 Aprox. run time: 99 min.
Director: Jonathan Lynn
Writers: Mitchell Kapner
Stars: Bruce Willis, Matthew Perry, Natasha Henstridge (as Cynthia)
Explanation of ratings:
***** If you had to pay $100 to see it, it'd still be worth it.
**** Buy the video for $20.
*** Probably worth $6.50 for the ticket--worth $1.50 to rent.
** Not even worth the time to see it--let alone the money.
* Don't see it unless someone pays you at least $50 to sit through it.
Visit the Reviews by John website:
http://www.geocities.com/reviewsbyjohn/
http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Mansion/7045/

This service provided through Yahoo! and AT&T e-mail accounts.  The
Yahoo.com and att.net domain names are not meant to imply any form of
support, sponsorship, or official sanction by Yahoo! Inc. or AT&T
Inc.
The views expressed are solely those of the author.
