Authors
Jacob Stohler
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Jackie Brown (1997)
Caught a special sneak preview last night of Quentin's latest, "Jackie
Brown." What should you expect? A lot of the same, which in this case is
good.
"Jackie Brown" has all the usual Tarantino elements: it's long, it has a
range of characters who all fit together somehow, time shifts in unexpected
ways, there's little romance or sex, violence is random and there are
moments of delicious tension. The difference this time is Elmore Leonard's
complex story about who's scamming who in order to walk away with $500,000
in dirty money, and following the different stories spun by the characters
is quite a challenge. Leonard's story is darker, as characters talk about
growing older rather than about foot massages. This is as much a movie about
life choices and how we screw them up than about the dark pleasures of the
crime underworld.
Pam Grier is, as reported, excellent. She carries the picture without a
hitch and looks great doing it -- it's hard to take your eyes off her and
her crooked smile. And when the '70s music cues on her, it's heaven. Sam L.
Jackson is his usual brash, charismatic self, only this time he's a bit less
lovable than "Pulp Fiction's" Jules. In fact, most of the characters are
harder edged, not having been infused with QT's child-like love of dialog.
DeNiro seems wasted in this respect -- his Louis character is almost
monosyllabic and seems to serve little purpose other than to be Jackson's
sidekick. It would have been interesting (and also a little more predictable
which is probably why QT didn't do it) to have DeNiro and Michael Keaton
switch roles.
But, on the whole, "Jackie Brown" is good for all the right reasons. Like
everything Quentin does, it's both fun and funny.
Interesting sidebar: Just like in "Pulp Fiction," the funniest moment in
this movie seems to be when someone gets shot (I won't spoil the surprise
and say who, but it's the scene in the parking lot).
