Authors
Paul Xavier
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Dressed to Kill (1980)
"Dressed to Kill" - 1980.  Review by Paul Xavier
Starring: Angie Dickinson, Michael Caine, Nancy Allen, and Keith Gordon. 
Rated R for graphic violence, nudity, language and sexual situations.
"Psycho" is a classic.  Many people hold the work of Alfred Hitchcock in 
the highest regard.  "Dressed to Kill", from Brian DePalma, is 
admittedly, a re-working of Hitchcock's classic thriller.  A lot of 
people allege DePalma is a poor man's Hitchcock.  That may be so, but 
there is no denying DePalma can make a good film.  
"Dressed to Kill" first introduces us to Kate Miller (Angie Dickinson), 
a woman who is not happy in her marriage.  Her sex life with her husband 
is unsatisfactory, a fact she discloses to her psychiatrist Dr. Robert 
Elliot (Michael Caine).  She is so unsatisfied from her husband, she 
even asks her psychiatrist if he would sleep with her.  However, he is 
married. 
She then visits an art museum, and sees a mysterious stranger that 
catches her eye.  She obviously catches his eye as well, as they have a 
fling in a cab, and later back at his apartment.  
This is the just the kind of excitement that Kate needed in her life, 
until she finds out that the tall, dark and handsome man has a letter 
from the Department of Health in his drawer stating he has a veneral 
disease.  Flustered, she leaves his apartment while he still sleeps.  
On the way down in the elevator, she notices her wedding ring is gone 
and remembers that she left it upstairs in loverboy's apartment.  Going 
back to retrieve it, as the elevator door to the top floor opens, a tall 
blond woman with a shiny razor proceeds to slash Kate into mincemeat.  
The aftermath of this event is discovered by Liz, a street-smart call 
girl who finds Kate, and the killer, in the elevator, holding the razor. 
 Liz then goes to the police, to report the murder.  Meanwhile, Dr. 
Elliot is getting a call from "Bobbi" on his answering machine.  Bobbi 
is a woman inside a man's body, was a former patient of Dr. Elliot's, 
and is obviously disturbed, as she is the one who slashed Kate in the 
elevator using Elliot's razor.  
All this happens in the first half hour.  During and after this set-up, 
DePalma gives one a movie experience with rich style, which is his 
biggest strength, providing dazzling camera work and some wonderfully 
filmed sequences; the above mentioned elevator sequence and many others. 
Another plus is the wonderful score by Pino Donaggio, completely 
involving the viewer during crucial scenes.  DePalma's direction and the 
music score work together wonderfully.  
Still another plus is Nancy Allen as Liz, who the movie focuses on after 
Kate's fate.  In spite of her not so respectable occupation, Liz is a 
very likable character that one can't help but root for.  
Even if you've seen "Psycho" (and who hasn't?), don't sell "Dressed to 
Kill" short.  In spite of the similarities in both films, "Dressed to 
Kill" easily stands on it's own as an exciting, suspenseful film and 
deserves a place in movie history as a classic just as much as "Psycho".
