Authors
Dartmouth Film Society
Number of Reviews
3

Title
Review for Vera (1987)
Vera:.......................................ANN BEATRIZ NOGUEIRA
Prof. Paolo Trauberg:................................RAUL CORTEZ
Clara:...............................................AIDA LEINER
Orphanage Director:...............................CARLOS KROEBER
Paizao:.............................................CIDA ALMEIDA
Telma:..........................................ADRIANA ABUJAMRA
Helena Trauberg:......................................IMARA REIS
Izelda:...............................................NORMA BLUM
Librarians:..........................................ABRAM FAARC
           ..........................................LIANA DUVAL
     Director Sergio Toledo's first effort, VERA, is a landmark film for
Brazilian cinema, in large measure because of the acting talents of newcomer
Ann Beatriz Nogueira and because of the subject matter of the film itself.
Brazilian cinema is in large measure state supported and state run -- roughly
40% of the tax levied on the producer's profits are fed back into the film
industry by the government; and before a film may be made in Brazil, the
producers must have the official permission of the state run Departamento de
Divertimentos Publicos (Divisao de Censura).  Further, the state requires that
all theatres show newsreels and short subject films of local and regional
interest before every feature film.  Over the years, such state involvement has
not fostered a bristling, busy cinema industry, and it is a measure of the
relative lack of home grown Brazilian celluloid that the government now requires
that all theatres show one full length original Brazilian film for every eight
foreign films.  It was against this backdrop several years ago that director
Sergio Toledo cast Ann Beatriz Nogueira in a film that unlike so much of
Brazilian cinema did not depict the history of Brazil or dramatize the local
folklore.  VERA is groundbreaking not so much for its homosexual content, but
rather for its quality of being a story that could have taken place anywhere,
in any society.
     VERA is the story of an unhappy young woman struggling with her identity
and sexuality.  Reared in a Sao Paolo orphanage, Vera is subject at an early
age to a spartan, if not positively bleak existence.  In the orphanage she
develops her own strong belief in a kind of social Darwinism -- and in the
process of selecting herself as one of those destined to survive comes to the
conclusion that to be feminine is to be vulnerable and weak.  Thus, like many
of the other young girls in the orphanage, she strives to be more masculine,
more aggressive; and in this endeavour, she is vastly more successful than her
peers.  By the time she leaves the orphanage, she is convinced that she is
really a man trapped in a woman's body and she resolves herself to live out her
life in a masculine fashion.
     Following her leaving the orphanage she finds work as a librarian and
begins to make masculine sexual advances towards one of her coworkers, Clara.
It is in the context of Vera's relationship with Clara that VERA, the film,
begins to shine.  Vera, the character, now calling herself by her surname,
Bauer, cannot understand why Clara is upset by her sexual advances -- she,
Bauer, is after all an attractive young man.  Clara meanwhile wrestles with her
own lesbian sexual awakening.  The plot twists and the sexual identities of the
characters become skewed, and all the while director Toledo makes his most
salient social commentary.  As Vera the character begins to bully Clara in the
machismo fashion of a hot-blooded Latino man, Toledo poses the question of
whether aggression and desire for dominance are strictly masculine traits, or
whether both sexes share equally in their desire to subordinate their sexual
partners.  Further Toledo asks what the real difference is between heterosexual
and homosexual love.  From Bauer's point of view, Clara is a woman to be
alternately wooed and forcefully driven into a heterosexual relationship.  From
Clara's point of view, Vera is both the alluring lesbian seductress and the
domineering bull dyke.
     Much of the weight of making the film a success falls on the shoulders of
lead actress Ann Beatriz Nogueira, and she bears this burden admirably, as her
best actress award at the 1987 Berlin film festival will attest.  Carrying
herself as a man and managing to assume a masculine role in a serious and
occasionally black dramatic work light years removed from the likes of
Victor/Victoria and Tootsie, Nogueira earned the praise of one Latin American
critic who suggested that she was "destined to be Brazil's first great
actress."  Vincent Canby of the New York Times seems to concur, saying "Miss
Nogueira is exceptionally good in the title role."
     Sergio Toledo as director meets with less lavish praise, although few
critics would suggest that as a directorial debut VERA is anything less than
outstanding.  Vincent Canby continues his observations on the film by
commenting "Mr.  Toledo is a writer and director of real potential, though he
can't yet bring himself to go directly to the heart of a scene if it means
sacrificing picturesque images or ruthlessly cutting out redundancies, such as
the television images of destructive phallic symbols that punctuate the movie
from start to finish."  Indeed, there are sequences in the film where pictorial
continuity takes a backseat to the exciting camera angle, and more than once
the viewer's attention is drawn from the story in the time it takes to think
"gee, what a neat camera angle," or "wow, what a clever image."  Most critics
would agree that Toledo still has to learn the value of subtlety.
     Perhaps the greatest shortcoming of the film is the ending, which one
critic described as "lame...  not only biologically improbable...  it undercuts
the pointed social comment that the film makes;" however, the ending aside,
VERA is still a milestone for Brazilian cinema.  Following in the footsteps of
countrywoman Fernanda Torres, who won a prize at the 1986 Cannes Film Festival
for her work in the soapsudsy "Love me Forever or Never," Nogueira makes a
strong stamp on the international cinema scene.  Further, under Toledo's
direction she examines topics that are universal and could take place in any
society -- not the Brazil of the historical past that brought such films as
director Carlos Diegues' Quilombo (starring Daniel Filho Joao Nogueira) to the
world's attention in 1984.  For a film made in a heavily state influenced
industry, for a directorial debut, and for one of the first films from Brazil
to win international acclaim, VERA is truly a groundbreaking work.

Title
Review for Merry Christmas, Mr. Lawrence (1983)
Celliers.............................................DAVID BOWIE
Lawrence...............................................TOM CONTI
Yonoi...........................................RYUICHI SAKAMOTO
Hara.....................................................TAKESHI
A Universal Classics release of a Recorded Picture Company Production.
Produced by JEREMY THOMAS. Edited by TOMOYO OSHIMA. Art Direction by
ANDREW SANDERS. Screenplay by NAGISHA OSHIMA and PAUL MAYERSBERG.
Directed by NAGISHA OSHIMA. (122 min.)
     A curious film this, not surprising since it has been brought to life by a
curious partnership of Japanese, New Zealanders, and British, and adapted from
The Seed and the Sower by South African Sir Laurens Van Der Post, himself a POW
of the Japanese in Java.  It is early 1942.  Japanese forces have blitzed
Southeast Asia and have occupied the Dutch East Indies.  They are cruel
captors, the Japanese, loathing and scorning the wretched white prisoners who
failed to die and surrendered instead.
     A brief exchange illuminates.  The senior POW, Major John Lawrence reveals
his creed: "We make plans.  We try to escape.  To fight again.  We get along
with you as best we can.  Confinement is not the end."
     Replies Captain Yonoi: "I've already pledged my life and my death to my
Emperor."  In this and subsequent encounters, East and West are poles apart.
Yet there are odd mutual feelings of respect.
     Front and center Captain Jack Celliers (stunningly played by British
popular rock personality David Bowie).  Yonoi (the man behind the kabuki mask,
Ryuichi Sakamoto) strives to impose his will, verbally with Lawrence,
physically and psychologically with Celliers.
     There are many similarities too.  East and West: their vast differences on
interpretations for discipline, honor, order, and obedience.  The clash damns
the one -- Yonoi dooms the other.  The homo-erotic tensions are apparent.
     Another unique actor, Takeshi, plays the sadistic Sergeant Gengo Hara,
with odd glints of kindness, a sense of humor, and acceptance.  Off the screen
Takeshi is a comic with a wide following in Japan.  As Hara he has the
difficult task of playing a rough-hewn brute and his closing delicate moments
before his execution as a war criminal.  To the compassionate Lawrence, Hara
poses a possibly unanswerable question.  "Why, Mr. Lawrence, why me?  I was
only doing what all other soldiers did."
     This is powerful stuff, and director Oshima has the master's touch.  He
handles theme, scene, and cast with great fidelity.  An aggressive social critic
and militant intellectual, Oshima has attacked the malaise of contemporary
Japanese society through a body of over twenty-one works, qualifying him as the
most influential film-maker of his country's New Wave movement.  He received
the Dartmouth Film Award in Spring of 1986.
     MERRY CHRISTMAS, MR. LAWRENCE, has rightly been called the "thinking
man's THE BRIDGE ON THE RIVER KWAI."  Underlying, graphically depicted, is the
golden thread of sustained emotion, the emphasis on the enormous differences
that split East and West, captors and captives.  The film deftly shows it would
be simplistic to state the Japanese don't know any better and to fail to see
that from their rationale, there is nothing brutal, wrong, or evil in their
behavior.  They would, indeed, expect no different if they were captives.
     To writer/director Oshima as with original bookwriter Van Der Post, there
are, really, no villains, no heroes, just human beings caught in the rough
fabric of one another's culture, its assumptions and attitudes.  In the end,
Oriental and Occidental alike are both victims -- of leaders who believe they
are always right, even divinely so, failing to see that the truth is that no
one can always be right.
     Finally, one is left with the riddle, the meaning of the title, spoken
once and then a second time, both times jokingly by Hara the conqueror, then
Hara the conquered.  First in Java in 1942, while the cruelty is paramount, the
joke is there and it somehow binds.  Next in Java still, but it is 1946; the
war's over, the captor is now the captive, condemned, as a war criminal.
     They share the "Merry Christmas" merriment of the final greeting.  Hara
finds it inexplicably funny, Lawrence only mildly so.  What do they mean, these
four words?  Author Van Der Post elects to call his man Lawrence, but with a
"w" before the "r," not with a "u."  So much with the name, but back to the
title.  Come out and tell me what you think it is all about.  See if we agree.

Title
Review for Lianna (1983)
Lianna............................................LINDA GRIFFITHS
Ruth................................................JANE HALLAREN
Dick..................................................JON DEVRIES
Sandy................................................JO HENDERSON
Theda.....................................JESSICA WIGHT MACDONALD
Spencer.............................................JESSE SOLOMON
Jerry ................................................JOHN SAYLES
Sheila...............................................MAGGIE RENZI
A United Artists release of a Winwood Company Production.  Produced by
JEFFREY NELSON, and MAGGIE RENZI.  Music by MASON DARRING.  Camera by
AUSTIN DE BECHE.  Written, edited, and directed by JOHN SAYLES.
(110 minutes).
     To a degree impossible for most films, LIANNA was shaped by its director,
who also wrote, acted in, and edited the film.  The background of that man,
John Sayles, perhaps explains part of the uniqueness of this film.  Most
importantly, he began his creative career not in film but as a prize-winning
author of short stories and novels.  In the late 1970's he transferred his
talents to witty and skillful screenplays, and in 1980 demonstrated his control
over the entire film-making process through the success of his first film,
RETURN OF THE SECAUCUS 7, which he produced on a budget of only $60,000.
     Three years later, Sayles produced LIANNA on a comparatively generous but
still small budget of $300,000.  In this film, Sayle's title character (Linda
Griffiths) is the uneasily married wife of a junior university professor, whom
she dropped out of college to marry.  At thirty-three, Lianna is beginning to
reevaluate the direction her life is taking.  She is, after all, an unhappy
woman with two children (Spencer and Theda), no job, and a husband who warmly
interacts with not one but several student bodies!  In a move towards
self-fulfillment, Lianna takes a child psychology course with a visiting
professor, Ruth (Jane Halleren).  The two become increasingly close and, with
Ruth's encouragement, eventually have an affair.  When Lianna admits to her
husband that she has had an affair, Dick reacts with indifferent disdain.  But
when she adds that the affair was with a woman, Dick becomes self-righteous and
accusing.  He finds it a convenient excuse to alienate himself and the children
from the wife whom he feels betrayed him sexually.  Lianna's new life, defined
internally by her choice of sexual independence, but externally by damaging
societal judgements, is nearly as painful and complicated as her previous one.
Her women friends are ambivalent or reject her, her adolescent children barely
understand, and these conflicts are only partly reconciled.
     The aspect of the film that drew the most comment from critics was its
style, or lack thereof.  Sayles seems to consider the content of his story as
being essentially independent of the film-making techniques used to tell it, an
attitude perhaps stemming from Sayle's background as an author, rather than as
a director.  Stanley Kaufmann in The New Republic remarked, "The most
disturbing element in Sayle's work is the suspicion that his intelligence and
power of social observation satisfy him, and make cinematic fluency secondary
to him."  But the majority of the reviews, while making such observations,
tempered their criticism by noting that, in an interesting way, this lack of
gloss adds rather than detracts from the film's realism.  David Ansen of
Newsweekwrote: "Sayle's scruffy, anti-style does take some getting used to:
initially, the home-movie veracity seems downright amateurish.  What's more,
Sayles isn't half as dextrous with his camera as he is is with his dialogue.
But eventually the characters simply win you over, and the tale takes priority
over its sometimes clumsy telling."
     Sayles neglects Hollywood's technical values and emphasizes characters,
dialogue, and story (all characteristics of a good novel) in a winning
combination.  While this naturalistic, low-keyed interplay concentrates on
credible personal dynamics, it fails to deliver a dramatic peak.  Some critics
found Sayles' "slice-of-life" tone overly neutral and dull.  However, Richard
Corliss of TIME found that this avoidance of the dramatique created a social
comedy which, like its heroine, continually discovers "resources of wit and
self-confidence."
     Interestingly, the film's treatment of lesbianism met with a favorable
response from main-stream publications, but opposition from magazines on
opposite ends of the political spectrum.  MS magazine complained that the
film glossed over several of the essential qualities of lesbianism: "LIANNA
evades the deeper, more perilous feelings a "real" Lianna would experience and
provoke...  Lianna soars awfully quickly into the light and delight.  Her
overnight passage into gay life is comparatively free from sexual fumbling,
qualms, and guilt."  The conservative New Republic could find no explanation
for her decision to tell her husband, nor for his lack of understanding after
she had "pushed the facts in his face."
     Despite its shortcomings, LIANNA offers valuable insight into an
alternative lifestyle, and shows how that choice affects others.  It is the
unique traits of Sayles as a novelist that allow this "richly detailed network"
to be created, and it is those unique traits that give the film both its
strengths and its weaknesses.
