Authors
MILLER, JIMMY A.
Number of Reviews
2

Title
Review for Dracula (1992)
    This is a review for Francis Ford Coppola's DRACULA.  There are a
few spoilers, so bail out now.
     Hrmm.  This film has some *MAJOR* problems during the first act.  I
honestly felt like getting up and walking out for a while.  Keanu Reeves
was painful to watch as the proper Englishman Jonathan Harker, and the
usually engaging Winona Ryder seemed quite stilted as Mina.  There were
bizarre effects involving shadows, movements, and visuals which seemed
not only out of place but frankly quite stupid.  Many of the visual
effects also seemed so utterly cheesy as to elicit laughter.  The use of
diary-style narration was jarring in the early going, and the movie was
quite slow to develop (let's leave out the bizarre armor they hung on
Vlad Dracul going out to battle the Turks).  The only characters worth
watching at all were Vlad himself and Mina's friend Lucy (played by
Sadie Frost), who were both interesting, engaging, and even sympathetic
(especially as the movie wore on).  
     Then Vlad comes to England, leaving Reeves to the tender mercies of
his vampiric harem (no joke, and I wish I had a bed like that).
Slowly, an entirely different movie begins to appear.  Ryder's Mina
becomes much more real, and the young version of Vlad manages to be both
menacing and seductive.  The other characters, though still lacking much
depth, at least begin to seem real in their words and deeds, and quit
acting like they just memorized their lines ten minutes beforehand.
Lucy, in fact, almost steals the show from Ryder (who in all truth
doesn't have much to do) in her portrayal of the girl being transformed
into a vampire.  Her seductiveness, sudden fears and fits made her real
and sympathetic, and made her eventual death(s) that much more
emotionally engaging.  
     Before Lucy finally fades, however, Antony Hopkins enters as
Abraham Van Helsing, and quite thoroughly takes command of the screen.
His very enjoyable, sometimes campy, sometimes foreboding performance
lifts the entire movie.  Reeve's reappearance after his escape from
Vlad's castle (why he is left alive is not really explained) seems to
take heart from Hopkins, and he actually turns in a credible performance
after this point.  
     The focus now on her character, Ryder does fine, though I honestly
felt something lacking.  This I found disappointing, as I'm a fan of
Ryder, and felt she could have done a better job.  Still, it suffices,
but only barely.
     Things finally start to move at the end, which a chase scene and
fight, plus a wry twist on things when Vlad chooses to be slain rather
than condemn Mina to life of the damned.  Despite all odds, this scene
somehow worked for me.
     The sets and costuming (with some jarring exceptions) were very
nice, and added to the feel of the film.  This movie has its problems,
most of which I'm tempted to plop into Coppola's lap.  Ridley Scott or
Tim Burton could have done much better.  That this movie succeeds at all
would seem to me to be in spite of Coppola, not due to any great vision
of his.  As I noted earlier many of the effects were not only
cheap-looking (and thus failed in that measure to create the mood they
were after) but unnecessary -- the blue fire rings, for example.
Puppet-like movements of figures in the battle scene.  Moving shadows,
etc.  The exceptions to this were the supernatural creatures -- the
vampires, the werewolf (it sure looked like one), and the accompanying
blood.  Those at least were well done.  Much of the acting was wooden
for far too long.  Some of the dissolves (like from Lucy's fang-marks to
the wolf eyes) are just plain stupid.  This movie is over-wrought and
top-heavy.  It only succeeds well in the scenes that contain some
eroticism.  
     I was quite disappointed.  This movie had some real potential but
something was lost somewhere along the way.  You had the feel of
*something* good straining to get through, but no dice.  Unlike BATMAN
RETURNS, which succeeded for me despite obvious flaws in the narrative,
DRACULA could not quite make the same visceral impression.
     I would not pay full price for this movie.  Try a matinee or some
other cut-rate time (and try not to squirm too much for the first thirty
minutes or so), or wait for video and fast-forward to the point where
Reeves is seduced by the female vampires.  You'll be happy you did.

Title
Review for Groundhog Day (1993)
     Basic premise:  Murray is a weatherman who is a less-than-wonderful
human being.  He, Macdowell and Elliot travel to Punxatawney, PA, for
the annual Groundhog Day celebration.  They are unable to leave because
of a blizzard, and Murray awakes the next morning only to discover that
it's *not* the next morning, but Groundhog Day all over again, with the
people around him going through almost the exact same motions they went
through before, seemingly unaware of what has happened to him.
     As Phil continues to relive Groundhog Day, he learns to use his
foreknowledge to his own advantage, allowing him to seduce women, rob
banks, and generally have a good time, without having to worry about the
consequences of his actions.  Gradually this palls on Phil, and he
begins working on Andie Macdowell's Rita.  Rita is most of the things
Phil is not: gentle, kind, and still with playful outlook on life.  Phil
begins a painstaking effort to seduce her, but fails.  
     At this point Phil begins to despair and attempt to kill himself,
only to awaken after each attempt at 6:00 AM, February 2, to the strains
of "I Got You Babe."  Here the film slows down for a moment to really
let us begin to feel Phil's plight, and Murray does an amazing job as a
man who begins to wonder the point of it all, and then seeks to use his
bizarre opportunity to become a better person.
     This is a wonderful charmer of a movie.  It is not Bill Murray
comedy in the tradition of STRIPES or GHOSTBUSTERS, despite its
decidedly off-kilter premise.  Murray's Phil is a variation on the
typical character we have come to associate with him, the wisecracker
who seems to know just a bit more than everyone else, but this time he's
a wisecracker gone sour, though not so over the top evil as we saw him
in SCROOGED.  At first his irritability seems a bit forced, but this
passes soon enough, and Murray delivers wonderfully.
     MacDowell does fine as Rita, making a believable character out of
her even though we only get to see parts of the whole person.  She
creates the gentle soul both we and Murray somehow come to realize holds
the key to his escape.
     I did think Chris Elliot was somewhat wasted as the cameraman.  He
just didn't have much to do, and I think almost anyone could have played
the part.  But this is a minor quibble.  All the supporting cast was
fun, the nerdy insurance salesman in particular.
     But this movie belongs to Murray, who is able to really utilize his
comic skills and keep things from becoming sappy.  The relationship
between he and Macdowell is credible, and Murray's slow transformation
from self-centered jerk is well done.  
     The direction and pacing are excellent.  Given the premise, there
is a tremendous danger of over-repetition, but this is avoided.  We
see only enough to reset the scene, and it is exploited for its comic
and dramatic purposes brilliantly.  Minor characters move in and out of
the action in a believable fashion, helping maintain the sense that
we're in a small town, enhancing the familiarity Phil must feel as he
moves about a place where he eventually knows *to the minute* when
things are going to happen.
     GROUNDHOG DAY is a romantic comedy with, I think, something to say
about people as well.  It is intelligent, charming, and well worth the
full price.  Go see it, again and again and again.
