Authors
Josh Hammonds
Number of Reviews
3

Title
Review for Mortal Kombat: Annihilation (1997)
Mortal Kombat: Annihilation
A rather lengthy movie review by Josh Hammonds
Capsule: Not as bad a sequel as Crow 2 or Batman & Robin, but still horribly
putrid, cheesy and ill-conceived.  This one belongs in Saturday morning
cartoons...
Extended Review:
You know, about halfway through this movie, I realized that if you hacked out
everything except the fight scenes, you'd have a damn fine 35 minutes or so of
flashy, Hong Kong style martial arts.  Beautifully choreographed by Robin
Shou, who also plays Liu Kang, the fight scenes are both mind-blowing and
graceful, acrobatic enough to make Olympic gymnasts weep.  This is what made
the original so fun, but unfortunately for the sequel, we are without the
frenetic directorial style of Paul Anderson.  Instead, they got John R.
Leonetti, the cinematographer for the original Mortal Kombat.  Not a good
choice.  While the fight scenes are brutal and eye-popping, the rest of the
movie looks like standard made for TV fare.  The acting is sub-par, which I
could endure if it were not for A.) the director's style, B.) the special
effects, & C.) the treatment of the story and characters.
A.) Mr. Leonetti should go back to lighting, in my opinion.  I could say
dozens of bad things about him: he way overuses slow-motion, he has no eye for
action, he can't get even mediocre performances out of actors, and so on.  But
by far his worst move was the way he treated jumping.  Apparantly, everybody
can now fly.  Hell, I'm all for the occaisional gravity defying flip kick and
whatnot, but not when it happens every few minutes, and is done so poorly.
Better jumping and acrobatics has been seen in Xena: Warrior Princess.  In
short, they should have gotten Paul Anderson back.  Or at least let Robin Shou
direct...
B.) Unlike the first one, whose SFX were vibrant and somewhat realistic,
MK:A's special effects are bland, fake looking, and overall just plain bad.  I
counted at least half a dozen times that blue-screening was painfully obvious.
Had this movie been made in the 80's, it would have been ground-breaking.  But
in today's industry, it doesn't even look finished.  
C.) Now for the _REALLY_ bad parts.  I admit, I'm an avid fan of the Mortal
Kombat series.  The games are amusing diversions, an easy way to work off
stress and anger.  The first movie was a mindlessly fun thrillride.  This
could have been a really cool movie.  It isn't.  The writers apparantly deemed
it necessary to lower the target audience from teens to preschoolers.  Some of
the plot elements are just plain stupid.  How stupid?  Take, for instance, how
our heroes move around.  They use giants spheres the roll around underground,
supposedly at thousands of miles per hour...oh boy...
Even worse is the treatment of secondary characters.  Blink and you'll miss
'em.  Most characters had more depth in the video games.  If you thought
Batman & Robin was bad about this, you ain't seen nothin' yet.  A good 75% of
the characters are introduced, kick somebody around a bit, then either die or
are forgotten about.  There's no explanation at all for this.  And for the
final blasphemy, the fight that all the fans were waiting rabidly for, the
fight hyped to be the most intricate of the movie, lasted about 3 minutes and
then just sort of...ended.  It almost made me weep.  
To sum it all up, rent it on video, and fast-forward through everything except
the fight scenes.

Title
Review for Big Hit, The (1998)
Capsule: Suprisingly more of a comedy than a straight action flick, which
isn't necessarily a bad thing.  Not exactly Oscar caliber, but one helluva
bullet-riddled good time.  
Extended Review:
You know, I remember when hitmen were evil, murderous scum.  Alas, the times
are a-changin'.  In a recent string of movies, hitmen are suddenly wise-
cracking, fun-loving killers-with-hearts.  This brings us to Hong Kong
director Kirk Wong's first American feature, The Big Hit.  Oddly enough, about
the same time last year a similar film, Grosse Point Blank, was released.
Advertised as a quirky comedy with hints of action, it turned out to have a
suprising dosage of it.  The Big Hit is quite the opposite.  It was hyped as
"the new film from producer John Woo", so one would it expect lots of stylized
killing and action.  However, there's a sore lack of it, which is about the
only thing wrong with The Big Hit.
The film starts out with Mel Smiley and his cohorts doing a job on a white
slaver.  Mel, played by Mark Wahlberg in a dopey, milquetoast role, is a
killing machine; he flips, spins, even breakdances whilst popping caps.
Sadly, he doesn't get a chance to do much of it.  Except for the beginning set
piece and the last 20 twenty minutes or so, the film is in comedy mode.  The
action, at least what there is of it, is prime cut stuff.  Wong, after
numerous Hong Kong features, makes quite a nice U.S. debut.  However, his
pacing is a bit off, with the action sequences only bookending the movie and
not lasting long enough.  They start off electrifying and fresh, but just
kinda stop.  Normally, this would hamper a movie to the point of being
unenjoyable.  Luckily, we have Ben Ramsey's screenplay, a bitingly funny piece
of work.  The only problem is there might be too much humor, one joke makes
you laugh so hard you miss the next few.  Some of best gags include an
Oriental film maker down on his luck and one of Mel's hitmen pals that has
just discovered onanism.  The only problem is how some of the minor characters
are handled, some being there only for a laugh, which sometimes works,
sometimes doesn't.  
Overall, The Big Hit may have it's flaws, but it makes up for them in a
stylishly directed, gut-wrenchingly funny joyride.  Definately one of the
better ways to spend two hours.  

Title
Review for Blackjack (1998) (TV)
Capsule:  Other than a few fleeting seconds of glorious coolness, this
suprisingly boring John Woo actioner simply falls flat.  Avoid it.
After calling Blockbuster from school during lunch to reserve my copy, and
racing there afterwards to pick it up, I could not wait to get home and pop
this baby in the VCR.  Hooooooo boy, was I dissappointed.  While I hesitate to
call it bad, it sure as hell ain't good.
Dolph Lundgren, who manages to keep the same facial expression throughout the
whole movie, plays an Ex-U.S. Marshall turned bodyguard, Jack Devlin.  His
casino-owner friend owes money or something to a loan shark (it's never really
explained what exactly happened in the past to make the loan shark so angry).
The shark threatens the casino-owner's daughter, so he calls in his old bud,
Jack.  Jack takes said daughter back to her house, where kidnappers try to get
her.  Jack dispenses them quickly, but in quite possibly the stupidest plot
contrivance ever, he gets blinded by a flash grenade, which instills him with
a morbid fear of the color white.  Yes, the color white.  Oy...
Anyway, cut to an indeterminate amount of time later.  Jack, at his apartment,
is told that his casino-owner friend has died in an accident, and he is now
the daughter's guardian.  This leads to a bunch of really annoying scenes of
Jack trying to bond with girl, serving to slow-down the movie to a crawl.
This quickly and thankfully takes a back-burner when Jack is agrees to help
out a friend in need by protecting a supermodel from a stalker.  Not just any
stalker, though.  This stalker seems to have access to high-tech surveillance
gear and a buncha inexplicable biker henchmen.  Plus, he's played by a
horrible actor, which only serves to make the character more of a cliched
joke.  The rest of the movie is simply follows Jack protecting the supermodel.
Wacky hijinks ensue.
All this would be totally forgivable if BlackJack were a normal Woo movie.
Unfortunately, it isn't.  The plot is cliched, predictable, and worst of all,
really really slow.  The dialogue is sub-par.  My favorite line has to be "I
have to go after.  He poured milk on me".  Still, one could get over this if
the action was decent.  It isn't.  There are only three gunfights, and only
one of which even resembles Woo's  classic stuff.  The rest are average,
Hollywood-type shoot-outs.  They are even lacking Woo's characteristic
touches, such as slow-mo and stand-offs.  Not even Hard Target was this weak
in the action department.
Overall, BlackJack isn't really even worth a rental.  Maybe if it comes on
Cinemax sometime, and you've already seen Hard Boiled a gazillion times, check
it out.  Otherwise, steer clear of this wreck.
Josh Hammonds, with apologies to John Woo...
