Authors
Foong Ngai Hoe (Y.Yoshi)
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Rajio no jikan (1997)
Drama Behind the Drama
=================
Radio can be visually engaging, since everything happens in the
listeners imagination. So I was told while attending radio production
lectures. So Ushijima, the producer in 'Welcome Back Mr. McDonald' says.
And hes right. Remember those late-night radio dramas; those
soap-operas on the airwaves? Even in this digital age, theres still a
certain charm to this medium.
'Welcome Back Mr McDonald' (McDonald) is a film about what goes on
behind a live radio drama, 'Unmei no Onna' (Woman of Destiny). Miyako
Suzuki, whos otherwise just another Japanese housewife, takes part in a
drama writing competition held by a broadcasting station and wins on her
first ever script. Naturally, shes thrilled that her script will be
heard live on the stations midnight programme, but with the show going
on air soon, the shows star, Nokko, insists on changing the heorines
name  and before one knows it, everyones changing the script --
impromptu -- even as the show is being broadcast.
>From Ritsuko and Torazo, the characters become Mary Jane and Peter
Michael (and then Donald McDonald). From Japan, the locale is switched
to Chicago. And what was a Japanese romance between a pachinko woman and
a fisherman soon becomes an exaggerated melodrama involving a woman
lawyer, a NASA pilot, and whatnot. The final straw for the soft-spoken
housewife comes when Nokko decides to kill off the hero at the end of
the story.
'McDonald' revolves around the drama behind the drama. As the cast and
crew for 'Unmei no Onna' find themselves in deeper trouble with each
script-change, the drama within the studio quickly overshadows whats on
air, as egos clash and tempers flare  all to hliarious effect.
'McDonald' features a solid cast of personalities like Akira Fuse,
Toshiyuki Hosokawa, Jun Inoue, Keiko Toda, and Toshiaki Karasawa, to
name a few. The cast is so comfortable in their respective roles youd
assume they really enjoyed working on the film. And just as well too,
since its the interesting characters in 'McDonald'  rather than the
plot -- that really drive the story. For instance, Miyako, the hapless
housewife/script-writer, has become so emotionally attached to her alter
ego and heroine, Mary Jane (who was Ritsuko), that the idea of an
unhappy ending becomes unbearable.
'McDonald' is a mainstream production. While it does make fun of Japans
obsession with things American, its still a typical laugh-a-minute
comedy. The film doesnt try being too plausible. In fact, some of the
things in the film  like the way they interrupt the transmission with
one commercial after another  isnt something professionals in the
business can get away with. Besides, not many studios do their dramas
live anymore for obvious reasons.
Yet by not resorting to slapstick, and by craftily relating the drama
off air to the live show, youd soon be wooed into believing that yes,
anything CAN happen. The idea isnt fresh, and the plot is a simple
albeit outrageous one, but every character in the show is so endearing,
you just cant think otherwise.
If theres a blemish in 'McDonald', its the films slow start.
'McDonald' really picks up when Nokko begins making her demands, but
until then it's rather unhappening. With so many characters appearing
right at the start, some in the audience might also be be grappling with
whos who for a while. But then, these are things youre likely to
forgive by the end of film.
'McDonald' made me laugh. 'McDonald' made me cry (mostly from laughing
too much, actually); and most of all, this fel-good comedy made me walk
out of the theatre with a stupid grin on my face. And mind you, I dont
do that often.
Whoever said radios dying this day and age? It has never looked any
better on the screen.
