Authors
cgireaper@aol.com
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Frighteners, The (1996)
     Acclaimed director Peter Jackson (HEAVENLY CREATURES, DEAD ALIVE) and
executive producer Robert Zemeckis (director of FORREST GUMP) have teamed
up to bring this breathtaking visual masterpiece to the big screen.  And
in a dazzling mixture of black comedy and pure horror it delivers like no
other film!
     The film is about Frank Bannister (Michael J. Fox), a con man who can
communicate with the spirits of the dearly departed due to a car accident
that altered his perception five years before.  His best friends are
spirits in fact; the worm hole riddled Judge from the 1800's (and his
ghost dog Rustler), an African American "brother" from the 70's called
Cyrus, and a nerdy guy named Stuart.  Frank's buddies haunt houses, the
owners call Frank in to get rid of them, and then Frank collects the cash;
the PERFECT con.  But the little town of Fairwater has a rapidly rising
death count and the victims have all had a tremendous amount of pressure
on their hearts.  Only Frank and his pals can see what is doing the
killing.  It is the Soul Collector.  Frank is determined to stop it, but
how can you destroy Death?
This film is the best!  The plot, which may seem like overkill city
when the film is first viewed, is actually VERY interesting and fun with
plenty of twists.  Michael J. Fox and Trini Alvarado give great lead
performances, and the other cast members are good too; all of the ghosts,
FBI agent Dammers, Patricia, and Johnny Bartlett are all extremely
memorable supporting characters.  The delightfully evil score is composed
by the master, Danny Elfman.  The make-up by Academy Award winner Rick
Baker (ED WOOD, AN AMERICAN WEREWOLF IN LONDON) is top-notch.  The real
standout is the visual effects.  With a record breaking 570 CGI effects
shots this film required the longest predetermined shoot in Universal's
history.  The result: EVERY effect is a jaw dropper!  In fact, the only
bad thing about this film is that when a new effect shows up...you still
haven't gotten over the last amazing visual.  Add to this list the "in
your face, 90mph" direction of Peter Jackson AND you know this film is a
winner!  A thrill-packed, visually stunning, and frequently funny roller
coaster ride...this film is the greatest! 
