Authors
Jean-Denis Rouette
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Crash (1996)
As our century draws to a close, human sexuality has lost much of its original 
purpose. Procreation doesn't physically need it anymore. Sexual energy beacons 
for new outlets, and sexuality itself is ripe for reinterpretation. Enter the 
car as an extension of the human body, and the car crash as a new form of 
intercourse. 
The late twentieth century notions described in CRASH are not alien to David 
Cronenberg. He explored the evolution of human sexuality through technological 
means as early as in his 1969 film STEREO, and has continued to probe with 
films like SCANNERS (1980) and VIDEODROME (1983). Ballard's book is as 
"Cronenbergian" as anything written by the director. Its imagery of twisted 
metal merging with wounded flesh, of engine oil flowing with human semen, 
begged to be captured by Cronenberg's camera. Although the director dismissed 
the novel as "repulsive" at first glance, he later spontaneously decided to 
adapt it to film. His approach, however, betrays a certain uncertainty as to 
how to expand on Ballard's ideas. Unlike the imaginative narrative structure 
he imposed on Burrough's NAKED LUNCH, his CRASH adds almost nothing to what 
was published almost three decades ago.
CRASH does not tell a story. It is very little concerned with its individual 
characters. It describes the world the characters inhabit, and they are merely 
the details of this description. The actors are made to walk through each 
scene, whispering dialogue, in a state described as "narcotized". If 
Cronenberg's strategy of casting gifted actors like Holly Hunter in such 
hollow, unrewarding roles to best communicate the emptiness and alienation of 
his world makes a certain intellectual sense, it also betrays a cynicism and 
moral stance he often denies when talking about the film. If the futuristic 
psychology hinted at in CRASH is undeniably fascinating, it needs more 
development. More thought. As it stands, our glimpse into this world is 
superficial and monotonous. Cronenberg overrates his sex scenes as 
illustrative devices. The idea of defining the characters through their 
physical relationships has merit, but the execution is too timid to work. 
Although I admire his refusal to overuse the car's many offerings of phallic 
symbolism, I question his insistence that ALL of the film's nudity be female. 
Technically, CRASH shows consummate skill and finesse. From a stunning opening 
title sequence (featuring dented metallic type) propelled by Howard Shore's 
screeching guitars, to the endless traffic viewed from Jim Balland's 
condominium balcony, to the desolate hospital halls, empty but for the 
principle players, Cronenberg knows how to communicate through film. His 
editing in the film's first half hour is concise, brutal, and brilliant. His 
"distilled" filmmaking, excluding all superfluous elements in a scene, 
creating a specific film reality, testifies to the uniqueness and solidity of 
his personal vision.
Unfortunately, once the major thematic elements have been introduced, the film 
loses its way. Scenes follow one another without advancing new ideas, and the 
repetition of theme and imagery rapidly becomes tiresome, despite the cold 
beauty of  Peter Suschitzky's photography. The more the film progresses, the 
more it seems redundant and flimsy. Entire scenes (Arquette at the car 
dealership, Hunter and Arquette making out at in the pound) go nowhere. At 
both screenings I attended, many people walked out before the final half hour. 
Cronenberg believes that the boredom many people felt watching the film stems 
from their incapacity (or unwillingness) to deal with the notions about sex 
and death that the film implies. Many of them, I suspect, had already gotten 
the point, and felt they had nothing left to gain from repetition.
By the time the film comes full circle, and sums itself up in its final shot, 
I felt that, contrary to most of Cronenberg's work, CRASH was form over 
content. The director has evolved to such an admirable level of artistic 
skill, that it is particularly disappointing that the distilled images of 
CRASH don't yield more thematic meat.
