Authors
Greg Nowak
Number of Reviews
2

Title
Review for Nephew, The (1998)
Director: Eugene Brady 
Cast: Pierce Brosnan, Sinéad Cusack, Hill Harper, Donal McCann, Aislin
McGuckin
Screenplay: Jacqueline O'Neill, Sean P. Steele
Producers: Pierce Brosnan, Beau St. Clair
Photography: Jack Conroy
Production Design: John DeCuir Jr. 
Runtime:  147 min.
US Distribution:  None - See text
Rated N/A (PG?):  Very short fight, sex alluded to as possibility, drawing
with breast 
Out of 5 stars: ****1/2 (4-1/2)
There was a huge crowd - so many over 100 people could not be admitted - at
a premiere screening of "The Nephew" (first screening with a major general
audience admittance).  This was a movie premiere at the Santa Barbara
International Film Festival.
Pierce Brosnan (007), produced his first movie with Beau St. Clair. It was
a constantly mind-moving and personal movie with lovely scenes of Ireland.
Chad (Hill Harper, Beloved) is a cute 17 year old mixed race (African
American and Irish) nephew, who's Irish mother died. He comes "back to
Ireland", living with the Curmudgeon Uncle, Tony Egan (Donal McCann). He
meets Pierce Brosnan's character, Mr. O'Brady (or just Brady), because he
falls in love with the beautiful daughter. There are many scenes (ah,
character scenes) to laugh at, others pull some tears. 
The three mentioned above were at the premiere in the flesh, with the
director Eugene Brady. After the movie they took questions. The movie was
very good, it not fantastic.  The Nephew has not been "picked up" in North
America but has been in the rest of the world.
The Nephew is generation secrecy of a "Titanic" proportion. Let's hope the
rest of America will be able to see The Nephew.
Contact given in the program guide: 
" Print Source: Irish Dream Source, Inc., tel: (310) 449-3411 "

Title
Review for Without Limits (1998)
        Director: Robert Towne Cast: Billy Crudup as Steve Prefontaine,
Donald Sutherland as Bill Bowerman (aka Nike Shoes co-founder), Monica
Potter as Mary Marckx. Written by Robert Towne and Kenny. Out of 5
stars: ***1/2 (3-1/2)
        There was a huge crowd - at a premiere screening of "Without
Limits" (first screening with a major general audience admittance). This
was a movie premiere at the Santa Barbara International Film Festival. I
must say that I met the director there so this could be a more slanted
review.
        Have you ever been on a European Bullet train. I just got back
from Europe, riding around 5 times to various cities. You get on and
can't believe the speed. You start conversing; being distracted as the
outside rushes by you. Then you turn back to the excitement of speed.
        You look out the window searching for a reference of speed.
Automobiles on the Autobahn that you pass show you how fast you are
going. Steve Prefontaine was so much of a gift or had that gift. The
movie of his life is like that feeling on the train; what's he compared
to. The story inside him needs an artist and Robert Towne paints the
intensity of a runner, "Pre" "Without Limits". Pre is without limits,
except for the honest distractions of the humorously laid-back but
dabbling attitude of his coach, Bowerman and the great allure of Pre's
female attraction.
        Sutherland is at his best (you know his great acting like in
Ordinary People (1980) that won 4 Oscars). and Billy Crudup fine
performance reminds you of those college days of recklessness and long
hair.
        Why should you see this movie? It's a tragedy that takes you
back to the late 70's; why you love to do sports ("Just do It"); and why
you really do what in the rest of your life (testosterone). Also you
escape to green pastures, smelling the newly cut grass and college days
with a coach or teacher you don't like but like now.
(c) Greg Nowak 1998 (only Internet Movie Database, and their links,
publication allowed)
