Authors
Jim Pellman
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Cook the Thief His Wife & Her Lover, The (1989)
SUMMARY: Not an entertainment, but an art film which does not compromise (even
for the sake of "decency") its pure visions of beauty, cuisine, evil, greed,
lust, and revenge.  At times repulsive, it nonetheless is a beautifully
crafted, unique, and thought-provoking film.  * * * *

Rather than accept the X rating, the film's distributor has released it without
a rating, but no one under 18 is admitted.  Even with all these warnings, more
than a few people in the audience walked out at various points.
     I enjoy seeing a movie which makes me think about it for several days
after seeing it.  When this one ended, I wasn't sure if I liked it or not.
Having now thought about it for a few days, and realizing that there are
certain images from it that I will never forget, I want to go see it again.  I
think the first viewing left me numb because it was so unlike anything I had
seen before.
     The Thief is Albert, a London gangster, who is sadistic, greedy,
insensitive, and grotesque.  Michael Gambon (who starred in PBS' "The Singing
Detective") gives a bravura performance.  Albert decides to use gourmet dining
as a way to gain society's acceptance, and show off his wealth.  He acquires an
interest in London's finest French restaurant, and holds court there every
night with his fellow gangsters and entourage of hoodlums.
     The restaurant is run with perfection by the Cook, and its menu and decor
are the ultimate in taste and refinement, with service beyond reproach.  The
depiction of the various areas of the restaurant, in which most of the action
takes place, is one of the striking aspects of the film.  The impossibly
elegant dining room is dominated by a huge 17th Century Dutch painting, and at
various times Albert and his gang seem to imitate poses from the painting.  The
perfectly coiffed and dressed diners (except for Albert and his crowd) and the
fabulous food presentations form beautifully composed still lifes.  The dining
room is surrealistically juxtaposed with the cavernous dungeon-like kitchen,
where hygiene is of little concern, and dozens of workers endlessly prepare
mountains of food.
     A different color is used in each area of the restaurant--red for the
dining room, white for the bathrooms, green for the kitchen, and blue for the
back alley behind the restaurant.  The color of the costumes change as the
characters move from one area to another, so that they are always perfectly
coordinated.  And the camera always moves with the characters from area to
area.
     In this setting, Albert yells at the restaurant staff, abuses and attacks
the other diners, and makes fun of the food.  As his wife walks towards the
bathroom, he yells after her to be sure to wipe her bottom.   His henchman
casually vomits down his shirtfront.  When the girlfriend of one of his
henchmen challenges Albert, he disfigures her with the silverware.  And at the
beginning of the movie, Albert has one of his rivals beat up, forced to eat dog
feces, and urinated on.  Since Albert now owns the restaurant, the Cook can
only stand by and watch.
     The passing of time is indicated by shots of the changing daily menu, and
in the seven days during which the action takes place, Albert's long-suffering
wife Georgina, makes eye contact with a solitary diner, and quickly starts a
passionate affair with him.  They meet and make love in the restrooms, closets,
and prep rooms of the kitchen at every possible opportunity, with the aid of
the Cook.
     Being naturally distrustful and suspicious, it is only a matter of time
before Albert discovers the affair, and the tension of the various near escapes
is almost unbearable.  When Albert does find out, his revenge on the Lover is
horrific.  But Georgina also gets her revenge, and it is just as satisfying for
us in the audience.
     The actress who plays Georgina (Helen Mirren) calls the film a Jacobean
drama (a form of theater from the days of James I that emphasized tragedy
through violent action, spectacle, and revenge).  The director (Peter
Greenaway) refuses to discuss its meaning.
     Being so graphic, it is not easy to sit through.  But as Mirren points
out, this film is no more graphic than the typical teenage slasher movies,
which routinely get R ratings.  What makes this more difficult to watch?  In an
article in the San Francisco Chronicle, Mirren said, "This is a film that
pushes people's buttons.  It gets to areas we're most prudish and prurient and
embarrassed about.  It gets under our skin.  If you don't find it a bit much,
you're a bit much yourself."
     The San Francisco Chronicle review summed it up nicely: "What's more
important [than the graphic nature of the film] is that it is a bracingly
intelligent and often beautiful work--a chilling black comedy that tells its
heartless story in a virtuoso style marked by visual elegance and dark, ironic
wit.  Anyone able to stomach its graphic imagery will find it an unsettling but
unforgettable movie."
-- Jim Pellmann         Internet: jpellmann@rational.com
