Authors
Hanson Yoo
Number of Reviews
5

Title
Review for Air Force One (1997)
Gosh, it feels like I've seen this movie before – and there's a very good
reason.  Air Force One is yet another "Die Hard on a…" movie – but to be fair,
it turns out better than the others because it sticks closer to the original Die
Hard formula than the others.  Does this sound familiar?  A team of terrorists
takes over, one lone unidentified man strikes back at them one by one while his
wife is held captive, and someone dies because the hero won't reveal his
identity to them.  Yes, there are some other wrinkles thrown in for good
measure, but it's basically the old same old with a glossy new paint job.  Yet
it's difficult to say the movie will fail to please because the formula is so
robust.
Harrison Ford is the President of the United States and Gary Oldman is the
terrorist, and they duke it out on the Presidential plane.  That's really all
you need to know, since the supporting characters are props for the plot, which
is straight from Die Hard.  For those who haven't seen Die Hard, rent it.  It's
a superior film.     
The biggest problem with Air Force One is its lack of any real originality – you
know what's going to happen because the plot never deviates from its
predecessors.  Without this element of suspense, the movie just doesn't deliver
real thrills.  One good thing the movie has going for it is some semblance of
restraint – in any other movie of it's ilk, the one-liners would have been
flying.  When Ford hits the first terrorist with a chair, you can almost hear
him say, "Have a seat."  But he doesn't.  However, the temptation is apparently
too great – he eventually tells Gary Oldman to, "Get off my plane," during their
final fight on the plane's rear exit with the kind of teeth gritted earnestness
that is Harrison Ford's forte.  I can forgive them this one transgression, I
suppose.
There are also elements that just don't work.  Oldman's ultra-nationalistic
terrorist philosophy falls flat.  Preach on brother, but do it in a different
movie.  It's given lip service without any substance, with only one line having
any real impact (he explains that Americans tolerated the killing of thousands
of Iraqis just to, "save a nickel on a gallon of gasoline."  Great line).  But
all in all the political angle is just a coat of varnish – it makes everything
shinier, but it's ultimately transparent.  
Another problematic element is the first daughter – there's simply no reason for
her to be held captive other than to have a child in peril and to mimic the
structure of the real First Family.  I find the prior distasteful.  Ford's
character cares enough about his wife to need a daughter in peril as well.  
Even the things that should work aren't executed well.  The charm of Die Hard
was watching Willis scheme and plan.  He takes notes; he pieces things together.
But Ford simply hides, punches out people, takes their weapons, hides again, and
then shoots them.  There seemed to be no real intelligence applied to his
character.   
And finally, the biggest gaffe is the motive of the Secret Service Agent that
betrays the President.  Why was that of all things left on the cutting room
floor?  The plot is really hollow without it.  
The only saving grace in the movie is Ford's character – he's eminently
Presidential, and the way the good guys to a one sacrifice their lives without
hesitation to save his illustrate how important the President of the United
States really is.  It's a refreshing view of the office that has been lost in
the movies (compare with the previously released Murder at 1600, Nixon, and
Absolute Power), and lost in real life.    
I wish I could have enjoyed Air Force One as much as many others did and many
other will, but I found it too derivative to be anything more than a trifle.

Title
Review for Shall We Dansu? (1996)
Being that it is a foreign language film with no known names with a select
number theaters showing it, "Shall We Dance" won't be seen by that many people.
And that's a shame - this is a funny, enchanting, and goofy movie full of
laughs, surprises, and wonderful dance sequences.
The surprising thing about "Shall We Dance" is the universal appeal of the
story.  A US version is in the works, and it's no wonder - it's not really all
that culture specific.  Although there is a narrated set-up that adds some extra
resonance to the proceedings (about the view the Japanese culture has about
ballroom dancing), the movie is so rich in character and appeal that this added
layer isn't at all necessary to understand or enjoy the film.  The only
important unexplained Japanese-specific reference that may leave some a bit
puzzled is that 1000 yen is roughly $10 (when you see the film - and you should
see this film - you'll know why).
A middle aged company man realizes that achieving all the goals he set for
himself in life (a house, a child, and good marriage) still doesn't translate
into a fulfilled life.  After glimpsing a melancholy beauty looking out from a
dance studio window while on the train home from work, Sugiyana (Koji Yakusho)
decides after some trepidation to take up ballroom dance lessons in order to
meet the woman who has stirred something in himself.  After finding the weekly
fees for private lessons from the elegant and beautiful Mai (Tamiyo Kusakari)
too rich for his blood, Sugiyama opts for groups lessons simply to be near her.
We then meet the players in this gem of a movie, who all have their own reasons
for joining the class.  Later on, we meet Aoki at the dance studio (Naoto
Takenaka), a co-worker and all out weirdo and one of the laugh riot highlights
of the film.  The story, laughs, and touching scenes evolve as the movie goes
along.
It's a pleasure to watch such a wonderful film that is propelled almost solely
by the characters and performances.  It's difficult to explain the charms of the
film without revealing too much - the movie abounds with little revelations that
subtly shape the characters, and in the end, each one is that much fuller and
more understood by the time you leave the theater.  It's one of those movies
that only the French seem to make anymore - no big plot, no special effects, no
gunplay, no tragic consequences, no forced examinations of the nature of love,
and no insights into the nature of evil.  Just a warm, funny, endearing film
that will charm the pants off of you.  When was the last time you left a theater
feeling all warm and fuzzy inside?  "Shall We Dance" will do that to you without
any treacly aftertaste.

Title
Review for Conspiracy Theory (1997)
Yet another Donner/Silver/Gibson team-up with Julia Roberts thrown into the mix,
Conspiracy Theory really does little to go beyond the formula of the Lethal
Weapon series - the set-up, the funny middle, and the sagging, auto-pilot,
guns-a-blazing ending.  The difference?  Gibson is partnered with a woman and
there aren't any big explosions.  My theory is that anteing up for both Gibson
and Roberts didn't leave enough budget left over to blow things up.
The story sets up a bit slowly - Gibson is Jerry Fletcher, a cabbie with a mind
grounded solidly in conspiracy theories.  Julia Roberts is Alice Sutton, a
Justice Department lawyer and the object of Jerry's affections.  Jerry seems to
have made a habit of gaining entry to the Justice Department offices to meet
with Alice and apprising her of his latest conspiracy theories (you know, it's
impossible to recap the plot without constantly mentioning the title.  Do you
think it's all a… nah).  She humors him, although grudgingly, because he saved
her from a mugging six months prior.  Alice has an obsession of her own - she's
still investigating the murder of her father, even though the case is officially
closed.  And Alice hasn't ridden her precious horses since her father's death.
Will Alice find out who really murdered her father?  Will this all tie in with
Jerry?  Will she ever ride again?  Take a wild guess.
There are some nice touches besides the kooky conspiracy theories (there's that
title again).  Jerry never enters his apartment the same way twice in a row, and
he leaves toothpicks in strategic places to ensure that his apartment hasn't
been entered without his knowledge.  His refrigerator and it's contents are all
locked up to ensure nothing is tampered with.  And metal lines all his walls
(although we later find out that it's not just to block out CIA mind control
transmissions).  In short, Jerry's not only sees conspiracies around him, but
he's also one paranoid puppy.  Of course, Alice doesn't believe a word of it
until...
Well, you'll have to see the movie to find out.  But it's not really all that
clever nor is it original.  Pretty soon, the movies runs rampant with shadow ops
baddies (including Patrick Stewart) and doubts about who's telling the truth and
who's in on the conspiracy (not that the film leaves any doubts).  Sure, the
second act is well made - it's both funny and interesting with a couple of very
good performances from Gibson and especially Roberts (who hasn't been this
fetching since Pretty Woman).  Stewart seems to waver between a passable
American accent to full Jean Luc-Picard mode.  Note to Patrick - you're supposed
to be sinister.  Go with the English accent.  Who cares about plausibility in a
film like this?
About the time the duo hits Connecticut, the movies loses all it's charm and
steam.  Right about then you can see the ending coming from a mile away because
you've seen it about a hundred times before.  It's as if the filmmakers reached
for a box of "Instant Action Movie Ending" and just added water without even
bothering to stir (which may be another reason why there weren't any
explosions).  Not that the movie was great up until that point, but at least it
was entertaining.  The last act is so generically blah that there's hardly a
reason to watch it - most of the audience can connect the dots at this point.
As if the ending isn't perfunctory enough, stick around for the credits -
there's yet another seemingly obligatory hip-hop remake of an older song (this
time it's the Frankie Valli standby, Can't Take My Eyes Off Of You).  And like
My Best Friend's Wedding, people singing the song in unison are used for cheap
laughs.  
Conspiracy Theory is another one of those "starts interesting, ends formulaic"
Hollywood movies that coasts more on the charms of it's stars than anything
else.  In other words, yet another summer action flick.    

Title
Review for Batman & Robin (1997)
This is the worst movie I've seen since the "so bad I walked out on it"
"Jingle All The Way".  It is crap on toast made of crap baked in a an
oven fueled by crap.  It is crap through and through.
Nothing works in this film, as to be expected from Joel Schumacher, who
has made only one watchable film in his entire career (that being
"Cousins").  Here's a man who admits he's a medicore director, a rather
charmingly self-effacing statement.  But truth be told, he is much
worse than mediocre.
Not all scorn should be heaped on Schumacher though -- Akiva Goldsman
should not be allowed to write ever again.  There is no plot anywhere,
and the "dialogue" is unrelentingly shallow, preposterous, and boring.
They set up Mr. Freeze as a tragic figure trying to cure his
cryogenically frozen wife, then completely sabotage his character by
giving him the lamest one-liners.  It turns him into a stock maniacal
villain who thoroughly enjoys his villainy instead of a brooding
scientist who has spent much of his life to bringing his wife from the
brink of death.  But that's par for course -- nothing in this film
makes any sense, including half of Arnold Schwarzenegger's lines.  As
Mr. Freeze, Arnold is given way too much dialogue to spit out at once.
This is the same problem he had in "Jingle All the Way", and it seems
that his Austrian accent is getting thicker and more unintelligible as
the days pass.  Personally, I think that he has more pull with the
directors and doesn't retake scenes to make him understandable.
Compare his dialogue in the Terminator series to the load of nonsense
that streams forth in "Batman & Robin".  Apparently, James Cameron
knows how to get a competent performance out of Arnold.
Uma Thurman is not as bad, but nothing resembling good either.  Her
Poison Ivy vamps around terribly, chewing up scenery left and right.
And her Pamela Isley scenes are marred by sub-SNL standard "acting", as
if she's reading off cue cards and is about to laugh at any given
moment.  Given the "script", it's a wonder it didn't happen more
frequently.
There is no redeeming feature in this film -- not George Clooney as
Batman, Chris O'Donnell as Robin, nor Alicia Silverstone as Batgirl.
Michael Gough is eerily sickly looking as Alfred, as if the conceit of
his illness was prompted by his cadaverous appearance.  In fact, there
was something unsettling about his appearance, which seems to have been
accomplished without any make-up tricks, looking as if it were scenes
from a documentary about a dying man.  Unfortunately, every scene about
Alfred's sickness is bungled with such incompetence that there is
absolutely no emotional resonance -- they just go through the motions,
losing whatever impact the scenes were supposed to impart.
The movie is rife with poorly choreographed fights scenes that never
give any sense of a big battle -- you know there's a bunch of people,
but instead of a melee, Schumacher decided to focus on a foot or a
fist.  There's never a moment of awe, wonder, or mayhem.  The only
interesting part of the battles scenes are the freezing effects, which
are impressive (and probably expensive).  Even then, the fights are so
full of camp and stupidity that they become unwatchable.  The hockey
team from hell?  Not even the TV series got that stupid (at least not
on the grand scale of stupidity that "Batman & Robin" showcases).
Frustrating too are the various supporting characters that walk on and
off with nothing to say or do.  Blink, and you'll miss Elle MacPherson
as Julie Madison, Vivica Fox as a "why is she even in the film" vamp in
Freeze's lair (with all of two lines), and Pat Hingle as the most
ineffectual Commissioner Gordan the Batman series ever had.  And in
what almost seems like an effort to save on costs, Vendela Kirsebom has
no lines as Mrs. Fries -- she isn't even filmed well enough to look
good (trust me, she's quite attractive outside of this dreck).
And as if the film weren't bad enough to limp along with bad direction,
bad dialogue, bad performances, and bad fight scenes, there are
inconsistencies and illogic galore.  I know it's nit-picky to ask where
the hundreds of feet of cable are stored in the batarangs, why the
character's arms aren't ripped out of their sockets when they
accomplish a one-armed batarang save after falling hundreds of feet
(while holding on to another person no less), or where the moisture
comes from when Freeze's weapon creates tons if ice.  That's all
traditional comic book stuff.  But why does Batman spring a trap for
Freeze at a public charity event that endanger the lives of hundreds of
by-standers? Why is there a big switch clearly marked, "Heat" in Mr.
Freeze's lair?  Why do countless bumbling police officers even try to
take on Mr. Freeze hand to hand?  Why does Alfred encourage Silverstone
to become Batgirl and even go so far as to have a suit made for her?
Why do Batman & Robin take 10 minutes to bicker before leaving the
Batcave in response to an emergency?  And since it established early on
that Ivy is using pheromones, why don't they wear masks to filter it
out?  I could go on and on.
"Batman & Robin" is a braindead, pointless, garish, loud film that
should still reign as the "worst film of the year" by the time 1998
rolls along.  Note to Warner Bros. -- if you're going to make another
Batman film, please replace Schumacher with nearly anyone.  Because it
could actually get worse than this.  What Schumacher does not
understand is that "comic book" doesn't automatically equal unbearable
idiocy.  The true equation seems to be Schumacher + Batman = unbearable
idiocy.

Title
Review for Mimic (1997)
Frankly, I can't say that I saw all of Mimic firsthand.  About the point Charles
Dutton's character guides two chaps from the CDC through some closed off subway
tunnels and utters, "How long does this go on?" I thought to myself, "How long
indeed?" and left the theater. 
My friends who stayed for the credits tell me the ending was nothing original
nor interesting, which is exactly what I thought of the first half.  Although I
didn't actually see the entire film, I didn't see the point in sitting through
another 50 minutes of chase scenes in dark tunnels when I've seen it all before.
Mimic is as rote a film as you can get – it's the kind of film that goes
straight to video starring William Katt and Tanya Roberts or Andrew Stevens and
Shannon Tweed with lots of nudity.  Instead, we get Mira Sorvino and Jeremy
Northam, but without the attendant nude scenes.  So there's basically nothing
interesting to watch.
The threadbare plot – a scientist tries to play God and unleashes a predatory
species of giant cockroach.  People die, there's a cat and mouse chase, and an
explosion at the end.  Talk about the dregs of the summer movies.  
Beyond the dialog and clumsy set-up, Mimic is one of those films that is so
unsuccessful in its execution that you notice little things to pick apart like
the editing, which is the worst I've seen since Crocodile Dundee II.  But
instead of lingering on nothing for two seconds (in Crocodile Dundee II, the
characters would leave the scenes and the camera would stay fixed on a hallway
for no reason), the scenes are edited so harshly that the last words of their
dialog are practically cut-off (which in retrospect may have been a good thing).
I was also uncomfortable with the filmmakers resorting to both children being
killed on-screen by the bugs and the child in peril plotline.  Considering the
film starts out with an epidemic killing off children in Manhattan, I wonder
what director and co-screenwriter Guillermo Del Toro has against youngsters.    
The performances are nothing short of unremarkable.  What in the world is an
Academy Award winning actress like Mira Sorvino doing in crap like this (and why
is she doing it so poorly)?  Getting films of this low caliber green-lighted is
simply an abuse of privilege, and a sure way of get bumped off the Hot List.
Although Jeremy Northam pulls off a flawless American accent, the role is so
stultifyingly boring that he disappears into the background.  And Charles Dutton
tries to add some spice to his crusty transit cop role, but between this
annoyingly colorful cop role and his annoyingly colorful shoeshine attendant
role in the terrible Nick Of Time, it might be suggested that Dutton turn down a
role every now and then (and the volume down a notch or two).    
Mimic is the kind of film that has no character development, no good dialog, and
has "no-brainer" tattooed all over it.  It's not offensively stupid like Batman
And Robin, but it's close.
