Authors
Andrew Hall
Number of Reviews
8

Title
Review for Raising Cain (1992)
     After several years trying his hand at various types of films,
Brian De Palma is back in suspense business.
     RAISING CAIN, De Palma's first suspense film in several years,
opened at theaters last weekend.  The film stars John Lithgow as 
Carter, a crazed psychologist, and Lolita Davidovich (recently the
psychologist in BASIC INSTINCT) as his wife.  De Palma also wrote the
screenplay.  
     The film is full of suspense, but the first half of the film is
muddled.  Characters are introduced without much explanation.  Who are
they?  It takes a while to figure that out.
     Although we don't see the film through the eyes of any one
character, reality in RAISING CAIN is often distorted, perhaps to show
the state of the characters.  Much of the film is a swirling of dreams,
flashbacks, and character delusions.  Sometimes (perhaps De Palma's
intention), we have trouble figuring out what's real and what's not,
even after the fact.  
     The plot is unpredictable, and there are some great twists (of
course, sometimes it's hard to follow).  De Palma plays with the
audience quite a lot, too; several times, he plants information to make
you expect something and then does the opposite or does nothing.  For
example, I expected the "wrong man" theme but it fizzled out.
     De Palma once again pays homage to the Alfred Hitchcock; RAISING
CAIN strongly parallels Hitchcock's PSYCHO.  Though Carter isn't
"mother", his character is similarly disturbed (forgive the vagueness;
I'm trying not to spoil it for you).  One scene in the film is DIRECTLY
lifted from PSYCHO--Hitchcock fans will know it instantly.  I was
thrilled--I almost cheered when I saw it.
     And De Palma continues to use some of his own trademarks.  Look for
the *long* take in the middle of the film--through several floors of a
police station, through elevators, etc--that must have been technically
challenging (are you *sure* there wasn't a cut in there somewhere?)  I
liked the slow-motion climax less (similar to the "baby carriage scene"
in THE UNTOUCHABLES)--I think it could have been done better in full
motion.  
     Lithgow is pretty good as Carter--the character has many, many
dimensions (you'll see) and Lithgow plays them all well, sometimes
comically.  
     Although the movie started kind of slow and I found several plot
holes, the suspense sucked me in once it got moving.  Several scenes
sent chills up my spine.  
     There was also a refreshing refrain from excessive on-screen blood
and gore; most of the extreme violence takes place off-screen (unlike
recent slasher/thrillers like BASIC INSTINCT).  Thank you, Mr. De
Palma.  
     The ending is incredible--I loved it!  You may not, but I think it
was the best ending I've seen in a long time.
     If you like straightforward, typical suspense thrillers (UNLAWFUL
ENTRY), avoid RAISING CAIN.  If you like good suspense films that are
a little off-beat, go see RAISING CAIN.  It's not a masterpiece,
perhaps, but worth seeing.  

Title
Review for Hexed (1993)
     Whew!  What a weak selection of movies there was this weekend.
After suffering through BODY OF EVIDENCE last week, I decided to take a
break from "erotic" thrillers for a while - maybe forever.  And
LORENZO's OIL seemed like too much of a tear-jerker (plus, I had just
seen Nick Nolte in CAPE FEAR on video).  So I opted instead for what
threatened to be a stupid comedy.
     Nonetheless, since I expected little, I was pleasantly surprised by
Alan Spencer's new film, HEXED.  The film stars Arye Gross, Claudia
Cristian, and Adrienne Shelly.  Norman Fell (Mr. Roper on THREE'S
COMPANY) has a bit role as a hotel manager.  Spencer also wrote the
script.
     The story concerns Matthew (Gross), a career hotel clerk who
escapes his dull life by pretending to be glamorous, successful men.
Instead of dating his cute co-worker Gloria (Shelly), Matthew would
rather dazzle other women with his BS.  Yet his co-workers constantly
remind him of his meager life.
     When they mock him for claiming to know European supermodel Hexina
(Cristian), a guest at the hotel, Matthew is determined to prove he does
by impersonating a man Hexina is supposed to meet.  He succeeds beyond
his wildest dreams, and he takes Hexina back to his place, where she
turns out to be a wildwoman.  Unfortunately, she's perhaps a bit too
wild, and she soon embroils Matthew in a blackmail-murder plot.
     As a whole, the movie doesn't quite jell.  The pieces are better
than the sum of the parts.  But there are lots of great lines, silly
gags, and slapstick falls.  Spencer pokes fun at everything from models
to police to horror films.  I liked the right-wing detective and cop who
gives fashion tips.  Another cute bit was the nod to Hitchcock's
VERTIGO, which also appeared in the trailer.
     A few of the jokes of questionable taste.  For example, there's the
mocking of the Rodney King beating.  I found it darkly funny, but some
people might be offended.  And people *die* in this "comedy," so the
comedy is a little black at times.
     Perhaps the funniest part of the film was the sex scene between
Hexina and Matthew.  This is one of the goofiest love scenes I've ever
seen (right up there with Leslie Nielson and Priscilla Presley in THE
NAKED GUN).  The audience was just dying.
     Cristian does a hilarious send-up of a glamorous model gone mad,
but Gross can't quite carry the film as the comic lead.  Still, Alan
Spencer shows promise as a filmmaker (his first film, I believe).  I
hope he gets the chance to make more films, though, because HEXED
probably won't make any money.  I doubt it will be at the box office
long.
     At least HEXED fulfills the basic rule of a comedy:  it makes you
laugh.  So if you're tired of Madonna and Nick Nolte and you're in the
mood for a little silliness, go for it.  Just don't expect the comic
masterpiece of the decade.

Title
Review for Last Days of Disco, The (1998)
The trailer showing in mainstream theaters for "The Last Days of
Disco" likens it to a Hollywood relationship film set in the disco
era, nostalgic in the spirit of "Boogie Nights" without the porn.  But
Whit Stillman's films are dialogue and character heavy and plot thin,
more appropriate for the art house crowd than for mainstream audiences.
Mainstream moviegoers seeing the trailer for "The Last Days of Disco" in
are probably going to be expecting something else.
The story, such as it is, follows the disco exploits of a bunch of white
ivy league graduates working in Manhattan in the early 80's.  The
focus is on co-workers Alice (Chloe Sevigny) and Charlotte (Kate 
Beckinsale from "Cold Comfort Farm"), who go to the discos together.
Alice and Charlotte get involved with men, talk, sleep with some of
them, and talk some more, as disco is slowly dying around them.  Some
complications set in at their favorite disco, and relationship
entanglements naturally occur among the young people.
The dialogue is above-average and occasionally funny.  The numerous
men are fairly colorful characters, but Stillman gives the women
slightly more attention.  Alice and Charlotte are well-drawn female
characters - a rarity in American film.  Alice is the complex "nice
girl" we identify with and root for;  Charlotte is the self-absorbed
bitch whose flimsy know-it-all philosophies we laugh at. 
The film does kind of drag slightly in parts.  It's hard to keep a
film moving with so many characters.  Other filmmakers might have
focused more attention on Alice, making the film "her story", but here
she is just one of the main characters, and we don't get to know her
quite as well as we want to.  The dialogue is occasionally clever -
the scene with people discussing the philosophical meaning of the
Disney film "The Lady and the Tramp" is almost classic - but it's not
clever often enough, and the film isn't as funny as it begs to be. 
Of course, the disco angle *does* add some nostalgia to the film, so
if anything see it if you like the period music.  If you've never heard
of Whit Stillman, you might rent "Barcelona" first to see if this kind
of dialogue-heavy film appeals to you.
(for more information see
http://us.imdb.com/Title?Last+Days+of+Disco,+The+(1998) )

Title
Review for Life During Wartime (1997)
Don't be deceived by the title; this is not another film about America
in World War II.  "Life During Wartime" is set in modern-day Los
Angeles and has nothing to do with warfare. 
Tommy (David Arquette of "Dream with the Fishes") is a young,
likeable, up-and-coming salesman of home security systems.  Things are
going well for him; he's got a new job and a new girlfriend, Gale
(Kate Capshaw, aka. Mrs. Spielberg).  His boss, Heinrich (Stanley
Tucci of "Big Night"), likes Tommy enough to put him in the company's
new TV commercial.  But Heinrich's company is struggling; reduced crime
hasn't helped *everyone*.  Heinrich, it turns out, has a few dark
secrets that could make Tommy's life a living hell.
Evan Dunsky's sometimes hilarious debut film "Life During Wartime" has
a dark side to it, but the film isn't all black comedy.  Some of the
sexually-oriented humor is outrageously funny - the packed house at
our theater was in hysterics several times.  Only later in the film
does it get darker.   And the film avoids being stagey even though it
is based on a play (by Keith Reddin).
"Life During Wartime", made on a low budget, is still playing the
festival circuit; it's debut was Toronto in the fall and also showed
at Sundance before I saw it here last week at the Portland
International Film Festival.  The film has been picked up by one of
the Sony distributors and should be opening in limited release 
later this year.
"Life During Wartime" is not a perfect film by any means.  David
Arquette is so cute that you just want to strangle him.  And the film
does wane towards the end; the ending itself is kind of an
unsatisfying whimper.  But there are enough hearty laughs earlier
to make it very worthwhile.  If you aren't put off by dark humor or
sexually-explicit dialogue, check it out.  It may show up at your
local art house instead of the suburban multiplexes, but  "Life
During Wartime" isn't really an art film.  Mainstream adult audiences
should enjoy it too.
For more information, see
http://us.imdb.com/M/title-exact?title=Life+During+Wartime 

Title
Review for Peter's Friends (1992)
     After someone dies, a group of old college friends reunites after
many years to deal with the problems of their adult lives.
     No, but Kenneth Branagh's new film PETER'S FRIENDS is sort of a
British BIG CHILL.  Branagh (DEAD AGAIN, HENRY V) also stars, along with
Emma Thompson, Rita Rudner, and Stephen Fry.
     After the death of Peter's (Fry) father, the friends reunite at his
father's mansion in rural England to spend New Years together.
Promiscuous Sarah arrives with her latest love, Brian, who happens to
have a wife and child.  Neurotic Maggie (Thompson), an author and reader
of self-help books, has a secret crush on one of the friends.  Andrew
(Branagh), a writer who has left England for Hollywood, finds that his
American television star wife Carol (Rudner) is driving him nuts.  Roger
and Maggie, a husband-and-wife jingle-writing team, find their marriage
endangered after the loss of their son.
     Coming to Peter's house seems to allow everyone a chance to come to
terms with life, in one way or another.  Everyone, it seems, has a major
crisis or a resolution of one except Peter, who appears mysteriously
immune to such problems.  But Peter drops his own sobering bombshell on
his friends at the end of the film.
     The characters in PETER'S FRIENDS are wonderful; we get to know
them quickly.  Many of the scattered laughs in the film come from
laughing at the characters.  I liked the women best of all.   Rudner, a
wonderful stand-up comedienne who also co-wrote the script, is
delightful here as the vain appearance freak.  Thopmson is also
endearing as the hopeless neurotic who, with Rudner's help, suddenly
blooms.
     My biggest complaint with PETER'S FRIENDS was the ending, which
comes too soon after Peter's revelation.  I felt as though I were
waiting for something else to happen.
     This is a good film, especially if you like films with real
characters.  Perhaps the British element will put a few people off.  But
I hope PETER'S FRIENDS gets distributed more widely than it has been in
Phoenix (only one theater).  It is certainly better than many of the
comedies coming out of Hollywood these days.
     Though PETER'S FRIENDS is not laugh-a-minute - there are periods of
intense drama between the laughs - I recommend seeing it.

Title
Review for Body of Evidence (1993)
    I never would have thought it possible:  Madonna has made Sharon
Stone look like Meryl Streep.
    Not to put down Stone by comparison, but Madonna is just awful Uli
Edel's new film BODY OF EVIDENCE, which looks - even from the previews -
like a cheap copy of BASIC INSTINCT.  The new film also stars Willem
Dafoe, Joe Mantegna, and Anne Archer.
     An rich old man with heart trouble has been murdered, and his
blonde bimbo girlfriend Rebecca (Madonna) is quickly arrested and tried
for his murder.  Frank (Dafoe) steps in as defense attorney; Bob
(Mantegna) is the prosecutor.  
     The prosecution thinks Rebecca is the murderer because she was
suddenly written into her lover's will just before he died and also
because they had kinky sex - yes, handcuffs were involved, so naturally,
she's guilty.  To complicate things, Dafoe gets - well, more involved
with his client than he should.
     Was Rebecca a golddigger who killed her lover for his money?  Or
was it his secretary (Archer)?  By the end of the movie, I hardly cared.
     The beginning of the film is extremely rushed.  We are introduced
to Rebecca and Frank, but we don't learn much about them.  Perhaps we're
supposed to have seen the previews and have seen BASIC INSTINCT to guess
what they're all about?  Once we get to trial, things slow down, but
it's too late.  We never seem to find out what motivates these
characters.
     Now, BASIC INSTINCT wasn't the thriller of the decade, but the
characters seemed somewhat convincing and at least interesting.  Rebecca
and Frank are just dull and lifeless.  Archer and Mantegna are decent,
but they don't have much to do.
     Dafoe sleepwalks his way through this one.  Perhaps he shouldn't be
blamed since the story is so bad.  Why in the hell would Frank get
involved with Rebecca?  Now, had we seen that he was unhappy in his
marriage or something, we might understand, but he seems perfectly happy
to me.  Then he just suddenly goes after Rebecca.  Why?  She's not
*that* great looking, Frank!
     Ah, though, there is plenty of steamy sex in BODY OF EVIDENCE, just
as there was in BASIC INSTINCT.  If that's the reason you'd want to see
this film, well, maybe you won't be as disappointed as I was.
     Otherwise, I wouldn't recommend this film to anyone.  Still, the
ending was unpredictable and pleasing, especially if you're not crazy
about Madonna.  Oh, well, it could have been worse.  At least she didn't
sing.  

Title
Review for Hoffa (1992)
     Picture the life of controversial Teamsters leader Jimmy Hoffa
through the eyes of Louie DePalma from TV's TAXI and you have HOFFA,
Danny DeVito's new film starring himself and Jack Nicholson.
     DeVito tells us Hoffa's story through the eyes of Bobby (DeVito),
Hoffa's right-hand man, who watches with admiration the labor leader's
rise from union agitator to president of the Teamsters.  They are close;
Bobby even goes to jail with Hoffa.
     While Jack Nicholson is absolutely amazing as Hoffa (if you've ever
seen newsreel footage of Jimmy Hoffa, you'd swear Nicholson *was*
Hoffa), DeVito has miscast himself terribly as Bobby.  Unfortunately,
DeVito has not established that he can play any character other than
himself, a character too familiar to moviegoers.  In a historical drama,
with Nicholson so convincing, DeVito as himself just stands out and
ruins the effect.  Nicholson's performance is diminished.
     Aside from his own miscasting, DeVito's Bobby is also far too big a
role in the film.  We see *every* shot of Hoffa through Bobby's eyes; in
fact, there are some scenes with Bobby *without* Hoffa.  Actually, if you
didn't know who Hoffa was (my non-American companion didn't), you might
have guessed that this was a film about Hoffa *and* Bobby.
     Sadly, this storytelling device just doesn't work in HOFFA.  A more
traditional "omniscient director" approach probably would have worked
much better.  Nicholson is so good, why not just let him run with it?
     Another plot device that is even worse is the flashback.  The
*whole movie* is a flashback from just before Hoffa disappears, the
"present" time of the film.  Unfortunately, DeVito keeps cutting back
from the "present" (which has it's own little subplot)  to Hoffa's life
as it unfolds.  These cuts disrupt the entire flow of the film.  DeVito
used this same approach in THE WAR OF THE ROSES, a comedy, where it
seemed to work better.  Again, the more traditional approach of just
letting the drama unfold from start to finish might have helped.  Or,
just making Hoffa's life one big flashback (with no disruptive subplot)
could have worked better, too.
     So what really happened to Jimmy Hoffa when he disappeared in 1975?
We still don't know, but DeVito gives us his best guess at the end of
the film.  Since we don't know, I would have preferred to have the film
end without this speculation.
     Some have complained that DeVito's film is far too sympathetic to
Jimmy Hoffa.  Hogwash!  These are the probably the same people who
condemned Oliver Stone for not making JFK a documentary.  A director
should be able to say whatever he wants in a film.  It's JUST a movie
for crying out loud!  It's entertainment.  We don't have to go see it.
     Despite it's flaws, HOFFA is certainly worth seeing just for
Nicholson's performance (although it helps to know a little about Hoffa
first).  And there are some neat camera moves and edits in the film that
make it hardly dull.  Still, Nicholson's acting could have been the
thread of a masterpiece instead of a disappointment.

Title
Review for Scent of a Woman (1992)
     In this new drama, a real departure for director Martin Brest
(BEVERLY HILLS COP, MIDNIGHT RUN), Al Pacino stars as Frank Slade, a
retired Air Force Lieutenant Colonel who happens to be blind.  Chris
O'Donnell co-stars as Charlie Simms, a poor kid on scholarship at a
well-to-do prep school.
     Unable to afford plane fare home for Thanksgiving, Charlie takes a
job over the holiday weekend taking care of Frank, who refuses to go
away with his daughter's family for the holiday.  Charlie is put off by
his first meeting with Frank, who has become an obnoxious, bitter,
boozing old man, but Frank's mother sweet-talks Charlie into taking the
job anyway.
     As soon as Frank's daughter leaves for the holiday, Frank reveals
that he has the whole weekend planned; a reluctant Charlie agrees to
accompany him in his travels.  Over the course of the weekend, Charlie
learns of Frank's unhappiness, and man and boy bond, in a way.
     This film is a journey for both characters:  for Frank, it is the
search for a reason to go on; for Charlie, it is the search for a father
figure.
     SCENT OF A WOMAN is mostly a drama, but there are a few good comic
bits here and there, mostly resulting from Frank's obnoxious behavior.
It doesn't resemble at all anything from MIDNIGHT RUN or BEVERLY HILLS
COP (which I liked), so just don't expect that.
     O'Donnell is convincing as the awkward, naive teenager who tries to
guide Frank.  But Pacino--well, what'd you expect?--gives a gritty,
realistic performance in probably the most challenging role of the year.
Don't bother to nominate Pacino for the Best Actor Oscar, just go ahead
and give it to him now (no need to disappoint the other nominees).
     Pacino manages to be obnoxious one second while being charming the
next.  And you really believe that he *is* blind.  I wonder:  did he
wear some kind of contact lenses to hinder his sight?
     But the film isn't without flaws.  My biggest complaint was the
ending, which (without ruining it for you) was just too sappy, too
resolute.  I also thought Pacino's speech was preachy and melodramatic,
thrown in for good measure, when it wasn't really necessary.  (The
speech reminded me of the ending to AND JUSTICE FOR ALL, where the
speech really *made* the film in that case).
     And Frank is sometimes unbelievable in the things he can do,
seemingly amazing for a blind person.  The dancing--*maybe*--but the
car, no way!
     Further, the film was a little long--a bit over two hours--but I
hardly noticed.
     All in all, SCENT OF A WOMAN is a pretty good film, a sometimes
intense drama with another great performance from Pacino.  I found it
very engaging.  See it.
