Authors
David Sidwell
Number of Reviews
5

Title
Review for Dead Heart (1996)
This has been an extraordinary year for Australian films. "Shine" has just
scooped the pool at the Australian Film Institute awards, picking up Best
Film, Best Actor, Best Director etc. To that we can add the gritty "Life"
(the anguish, courage and friendship of a group of male prisoners in the
HIV-positive section of a jail) and "Love and Other Catastrophes" (a low
budget gem about straight and gay love on and near a university campus). 
I can't recall a year in which such a rich and varied celluloid library was
unleashed from Australia.  "Shine" was one bookend.  Stand by for the other
one: "Dead Heart".
>From the opening credits the theme of division is established. The cast
credits have clear and distinct lines separating their first and last names.
Bryan | Brown.  
In a desert settlement, hundreds of kilometres from the nearest town, there
is an uneasy calm between the local Aboriginals and the handful of white
settlers who live nearby. The local police officer has the task of enforcing
"white man's justice" to the Aboriginals. These are people with a proud
40,000 year heritage behind them. Naturally, this includes their own system
of justice; key to which is "payback".  An eye for an eye. Revenge. Usually
extracted by the spearing through of the recipient's thigh.
Brown, as the officer, manages quite well to keep the balance. He admits
that he has to 'bend the rules' a bit, including actively encouraging at
least one brutal "payback".  (Be warned that this scene, near the start, is
not for the squeamish).
The local priest - an Aboriginal, but in the "white fellas" church - has a
foot on either side of the line. He is, figuratively and literally, in both
camps.  Ernie Dingo brings a great deal of understanding to this role as the
man in the middle. He is part churchman and part politician.
However the tension, like the heat, flies and dust, is always there. Whilst
her husband - the local teacher - is in church, white lady Kate (Milliken)
and her Aborginal friend Tony, (Pedersen) have gone off into the hills. He
takes her to a sacred site, even today strictly men-only. She appears to not
know this. Tony tells her that this is a special place, an initiation place.
He then makes love to her, surrounded by ancient rock art. 
The community finds out about this sacrilegious act and it's payback time.
The fuse is lit and the brittle inter-racial peace is shattered.  Everyone
is affected in the fall out. 
To say more is to give away the details of this finely crafted film. Suffice
to say it's a rewarding experience. Bryan Brown, acting and co-producing, is
the pivotal character. His officer is real, human and therefore flawed.
Brown comments that he expects audiences to feel warmth towards the man,
then suddenly feel angry about him. 
It wasn't long ago that I visited Central Australia - Ayers Rock (Uluru) and
Alice Springs -  for the first time. The wide-screen cinematography shows
the Dead Heart of Australia in a way that captures it's vicious beauty, but
never deteriorates into a moving slide show, in which the gorgeous
background dominates those pesky actors in the foreground. 
The cultural clash has provided the thesis for many a film; from the Western
to The Birdcage. At least three excellent Australian films have covered the
Aboriginal people and the line between them and we Anglo-Saxon 'invaders':
"Jedda", "The Chant of Jimmie Blacksmith" and "The Last Wave".
In a year when the race 'debate' has reared up in Australia, it is
nourishing to see such an intelligent, non-judgemental film as "Dead Heart".
The Aboriginal priest best sums this up. He is asked to say if he is a
"black fella or white fella".
 (Melbourne   Australia)
   dsidwell@connexus.apana.org.au http://connexus.apana.org.au/~dsidwell

Title
Review for Chopper (2000)

Cast: Eric Bana, Simon Lyndon, Vince Colosimo, Kate Beahan, David Field,
Dan Wyllie, Bill Young, Kenny Graham
We here in Australia were founded - partially at least - as a big prison.
>From 1788 England dumped its poor, tired and huddled convicts down here. No
statue with an engraved welcome waiting for them, just a hostile, dry and
hot open air continent/prison.
To me, this explains two characteristics that people find puzzling about
the Australian psyche:
1) Our dry, dark "gallows" humour.
2) Our fascination with Bad Boys - the darker elements of our otherwise
shiny, happy society
A classic example of the former is in "Breaker Morant." As Morant is about
to be executed - by an English firing squad -  the Aussie yells out to the
gunmen "shoot straight you bastards, don't make a mess of it".
One of our major folk heroes is a Bad Boy. Mr Edward "Ned" Kelly.
Bushranger, circa 1880. Our favourite song is probably Waltzing Matilda.
It's about a sheep thief, who eludes the law by drowning himself.
And so to "Chopper". Not to compare him to Mr Kelly, nor to imply he is
anything like a folk hero, but to put him - and this movie - into the
broader context of the Australian mind-set. Well, that's the theory anyway.
Mark Brandon "Chopper" Read is real. Very much alive and living in
Tasmania. To say he has lead a colourful life is to not understand the word
colour. He started out in the 1970's as a streetfighter, moved on to
standover man and underworld executioner.  In 1991, whilst still in prison,
he wrote his memoirs. The book "Chopper: From the Inside" was a phenomenal
success. Part confession, part bragging and all wrapped up in Read's
disarming, chatty and funny style. He even wrote poetry about some of his
victims.
He became one of our bestselling authors and has written many a sequel
book. And now we have the movie.
So how to make a film about a bloke who claims to have killed 19 people
(but never an 'innocent member of the public') and yet makes jokes and
writes poems about such things?  Should it be judgemental or just feed us
the data and let us decide?
It's a mercy that debut writer/director Andrew Dominik went for the latter.
To be fair, it's not 'data' in the true sense; the film starts with a
disclaimer implying that some liberty was taken with the facts per se.
However the result is still stunning. 
"Chopper" is a snappy, stylish mixture of extreme violence and wicked
humour.  Using unusual colours and playing with the film speed, Dominik
transports us into the complex and intriguing world of
Chopper.Brutal.Funny.Com. 
He even uses poetry in one memorable scene, with all characters giving
their rhyming lines to camera with the film strangely sped up. The result
is all surreal and jerky; like a coloured-up version of an ultra-violent
Charlie Chaplin.  Oh, they are waxing lyrical about their roles in the same
murder. The victim is in there too. You don't know if you should laugh or
be appalled.
In the lead role Eric Bana is mesmerising. Best known here for his TV comic
skills, Bana's electric performance dominates and carries the film. Bana is
hardly ever off the frame.  "Chopper" is a complex role, which Bana
captures with great aplomb. He stabs someone and then we see the shock and
concern - for the victim - build up in his eyes. The two dimensional pulp
fiction character suddenly spawns an unexpected third dimension. 
You may recall the disarming style of "Muriel's Wedding" - nearly every
time there was a blissfully happy event, it ended in tragedy or despair.
"Chopper" has the reverse; probably reflecting Read's own style. Episodes
start off fairly friendly, but you know that it's going to end in mayhem.
Chopper is rated R here and is not for the feint hearted.
Everything works - the writing, direction and postproduction. Bana and his
excellent support cast bring it all together. The film doesn't take sides
in a complex and dangerous playing field. Walking that fine line and still
being an adventurous and entertaining movie is just one of its many triumphs.

Title
Review for Kiss or Kill (1997)
Rated MA in Australia (Medium Level Violence, Adult Themes, Medium Level
Coarse Lanuage)
Cast: Frances O'Connor, Matt Day, Chris Haywood, Barry Otto, Andrew S.
Gilbert, Barry Langrishe and Max Cullen.
She sleep walks; unconsciously and subconsciously re-enacting an horrific
event she witnessed as a child. 
But no. Think about it. It must be him. He's got the knife. He's got the
short fuse and has blown up a few times already. 
These are just some of the virtual deductions that you find yourself
contemplating as you sit there in that darkened picture house, trying to
untangle KISS OR KILL.
She is Nikki (O'Connor). He is Al (Day).  They are lovers on the run in the
outback. It's just the two of them. Yet, people they meet - literally in
the middle of nowhere - have a nasty tendency to be murdered. Is it him or
her doing it? This Nullabor Plain has thousands of miles of nothing ;
except fear, suspicion and radioactive dirt.
KISS OR KILL is a very good piece of filmmaking. The use of jump-cut edits
adds to the sense of things going wrong. Time is compressed. We see the
start (cut) middle (cut) then end of a scene. What would have taken 30
seconds in real-life takes only 10 or 15 on the screen. In this movie this
technique works; it serves to increase the feelings of urgency and tension.
Day and O'Connor are hot property and the click between them is so loud as
to be deafening. Improvisation played a role during the making of the film.
 As Nikki and Al start to suspect each other of doing the killings, this
technique kicks in particularly well; their interactions have a real edge
to them. Uncertainly, shock and confusion rule.
With these two representing the current New Wave of young Australian
cinema, Bill Bennett has assembled a virtual who's who of the previous
'generation' of actors as supports. Chris Haywood, Barry Otto and Max
Cullen mostly hover admirably in the background but add in valuable little
pieces to the puzzle.
If you like modern, well crafted, intelligent, thriller.roadmovie.romance
films, you are in for an exciting drive.
        Work:  http://www.midcomp.com.au
   (AS/400 & Other Midrange Software & Services)

Title
Review for Boys, The (1997/I)
Producers: Robert Connolly, Douglas Cummins, John Maynard, David Wenham        
Writers: Gordon Graham  (play),  Stephen Sewell
This is a disturbing and riveting movie. It opens with Brett Sprague
(Wenham) being released from jail and is picked up by one of his brothers,
Stevie (Hayes).  It's not long before we find out that Brett  is  the
alpha-male of this little pack. 
Almost immediately we leap forward in time 18 hours. Hints abound that
something bad, very bad, has happened. Police radios crackle.  Brett and
his two brothers have been arrested.  A brief glimpse of something
unspeakable.
Then, just as quickly,  we fade back to the 'present' as Brett arrives home
to the domestic non-bliss of his mother's house. The characters are
introduced: Brett's other brother Glenn (Polson), Brett's girlfriend,
Michelle (Collette). His mum Sandra (Curren, the wonderful Betty in
"Bliss"). Stevie's little girl lost (and pregnant and unloved) 'girlfriend'
Nola. Tensions are building up inside the house.  Brett seems to have a
tranquil venom about him - calm on the surface, but the snake is in their.
What is disturbing is that we - as viewers - know from almost the opening
credits that something terrible is going to happen. We are shown the
aftermath in assorted flash-forwards: Brett burning clothes in the back
yard, Brett and brothers in jail etc. 
These hints are interleaved with the story of the day of Brett's return
home. We see a family in trouble. The brothers just laze around, drinking
beer and seeing who is the biggest loser. Nola talks about escaping this
slow motion prison. Michelle taunts Brett. Brett taunts and accuses
everybody.  And poor Mum tries to hold it all together by cooking up a nice
Welcome Home dinner.
The intensity builds up as we flip back between the 'now' and even further
forward in time (sentencing, trial). But the audience is never told -
during these future bites - who the victim was or even what the crime was.
Is it the poor, sweet mother? The moping Nola?  The defiant Michelle?  The
man who put Brett in jail in the first place?  The 'now' story leaves
enough threads open so that it could be any of them. It is inevitable, this
evil. And there is nothing we can do but sit there in the dark cinema and
wait for it.
Wenham is outstanding in the lead role. His Brett has a quiet, brewing
evilness such that he dominates nearly every scene he is in.  Most of the
film takes place inside the house, indeed the film is based upon a play.
There is virtually no music on the soundtrack. 
The performance of David Wenham alone makes this film worth seeing. Add in
very good supporting roles, direction, editing, production and scriptand
the mix is distressing and challenging. At a running time of a crisp 82
minutes, your time won't be wasted. 4.5 out of 5.
(The film seems to have had a 2nd wind here. Wenham is enjoying the lead
role in a hugely successful TV series "Sea Change", which started on TV
after "The Boys" had been released.  I first saw "The Boys" about 2 months
ago. I saw it again today and there were a lot more people in the audience
this time around.  In " Sea Change" Wenham shows his versatility by playing
 very much an anti-Brett role: the romantic lead - a gentle, kind, good
bloke. Hopefully both will hit your shores soon)
dsidwell@connexus.apana.org.au   or   dsidwell@myemail.com.au
http://connexus.apana.org.au/~dsidwell

Title
Review for Shine (1996)
Starring: Geoffrey Rush, Noah Taylor, Lynn Redgrave, John Gielgud
We share the descent into darkness of a talented boy pianist. Years later we
see his subsequent resurfacing; in the mid 80's a damaged man walks out of a
rainstorm and back into the world. 
The movie charts the causes of his mental breakdown. 
Based on the life story of David Helfgott, this Australian film is a rich
exploration of the pressures drilling in upon a child-genius, compounded by
the looming shadow of a domineering father.
In the 1950's Helfgott emerged as a child prodigy. The film traces his
relationship with his father, whose encouragement comes at the cost of
demanding David have no life beyond that of the black and white keys.  
David is offered places in the USA, but his father refuses to let him leave
Australia. The effect this has upon Helfgott is cleverly told via a single
reverse tracked shot; David is sobbing on the front doorway of his music
teacher's house. He is well lit via the external house lights. His teacher
isn't home. We pull back and see that the dark front room's window has it's
curtains open. There, in a pool of blackness, is a Grand Piano. David's fall
over the dark cliff has begun.
Instead of being told in a linear mode, SHINE jumps around in time, ala
"Pulp Fiction". This narrative device works well; we see David as a boy,
teenager in London and mental-patient in various snippets. The film then
neatly loops back for its uplifting conclusion. Adult-Helfgott's return to
the light is told in linear fashion.  
The lead role is played by 3 different actors, with the teenage-David
(Taylor) and adult-David (Rush) standing out. Whilst Rush is known for his
TV work in Australia, I think this is his first major cinema work. His
David, whilst clearly damaged - he keeps quoting his "daddy" in a babbling
word torrent, cuddles strangers and grabs women on the breasts - is both
touching and funny. 
Taylor's teenage-David is the more sympathy producing role. We 
are mute witness to his gradual breakdown as the pressures just keep on
building. His father wants him to play the very demanding Rachmaninov's 3rd,
whilst his teacher wants to start him with a simple Mozart.
Technically this is a beautiful film and a lot of thought has gone in to the
production. I particularly like the use of slow motion and sound effects.
One scene has adult-Helfgott happily babbling in a car in the rain. The
sound of the windshield wipers fades up over his voice. With a clever
subtlety, the wiper sound appears to morph into a rhythmic thumping, but of
the same beat. The image dissolves and we realise the thumping is the slow
motion applause of a crowd. But it's US being clapped. WE are young-David
walking up to the stage for our first public show. 
The music, as you would expect from a film of this subject matter, is
critical. And it works very well. The 'miming' of the actors piano playing
is faultless (apparently Rush didn't mime; he really did play)
Helfgott's life is certainly not without it's sympathetic people. Indeed his
return to the 'normal' world is accelerated by his chance meetings with two
very special women. 
His ultimately uplifting story is a magic piece of theatre craft. It shows
that with the 'help of God' we can all find our way back home.
Footnote: the real David Helfgott is still playing. He has just started a
series of recitals here in Australia.  
David Sidwell
   (Melbourne, Australia)    
    e-mail:        dsidwell@connexus.apana.org.au
    WWW:          http://connexus.apana.org.au/~dsidwell
