Authors
Maria Vitale
Number of Reviews
3

Title
Review for Blue Sky (1994)
     The year is 1962 and the military is conducting nuclear testings.
Involved in these tests is Hank Marshall (Jones), an army colonel who
is critical of the above-ground tests that are being done.  He urges
below-ground tests which no one will consider at the time until it is
learned that the Soviets have conducted underground tests of their
own.
     Marshall is also troubled by a turbulent marriage to Carly (Lange)
who is topless on the base's beach in full view of the entire
personnel.  Hank's reaction is one of amusement.  He's been here before
and he deals with it in the only way he knows how.  The problem is
Carly is a manic-depressive and when she isn't flirting with any man
who happens to be near her, she's fantasizing about a fictious world
where she'd rather be.  Typical of the mental illness, she also is
promiscuous and foul-tempered.  The mood swings are quick and violent
and the torment she puts her husband and their two daughters is
considerable.
     From Hank's reports which state his opposition to the
Army's methods of testing, he is transferred from Hawaii to Alabama.
Carly patterns herself after movie stars and tries to become Marilyn
Monroe, bleach-blond and all.  The new home in Alabama is pretty
run-down and depressing and sets Carly off on a violent tantrum.  After
meeting his new commanding officer (Booth), Hank sees an all too
familiar pattern begin to repeat.  Carly openly flirts with the CO.
Hank tries to deal with the situation, but his only resort is to carry
her off and throw her into a nearby pool.  Arguments ensue.  The family
becomes even more alienated.
     The CO is very interested in pursuing an encounter with Carly and
sends Hank off to observe an underground test which causes the
irradiation of two local ranchers, much to the vocal objections of
Hank, who spots them but is unable to cancel the detonation of the
bomb.
     Back at home, the two girls try to hold things together but they
wonder why their father can't deal with their mother's problems.  One
daughter says, "He's blind and she's crazy." The other answers,
"They're perfect for each other." It reaches the breaking point when
the older girl (Locane) and a boy, the CO's son (O'Donnell) see her
mother and the CO making love in an abandoned shed.  She forces her
mother to tell Hank and get it all out into the open.
     Hank returns home and finds his wife in the middle of a musical
put on by the military wives, including the CO's wife (Snodgress).  He
confronts the c.o. but not about Carly.  He is upset over the coverup
surrounding the accident during the testing.  A fight breaks out
between the two when the CO accuses Hank of not being able to satisfy
his wife.  Hank is arrested.  What follows is manipulation and revenge
on the part of the CO.  He convinces Carly to commit Hank to a hospital
for observation.  Instead, they fill him with so many drugs that he can
barely cope.  He foams at the mouth and cannot even finish sewing a
leather wallet as presents for his daughters.
     Carly is determined to free her husband from the clutches of the
Army and succeeds in doing so only by being the strong one in the
family for the first time.  The film has an upbeat ending with hope
that the family has found a way to deal with its problems.
     The performances are solid throughout.  Jones is sympathetic and
loving and is most effective in those quiet moments when he tries to
deal with his wife's rage.  He comforts her and offers protection.
Lange gives a strong and spirited portrayal of a woman on the edge who
draws up the courage to try and put things right for her family.  Amy
Locane is very good as she fights to keep her family together while
struggling with her own doubts as to whether she even should.
     BLUE SKY is based on the story of the Stagner family.  The
screenplay was written by Rama Laurie Stagner (with Arlene Sarner and
Jerry Leichtling).  The film marks the final work of Tony Richardson
who died shortly after its completion in 1991.  He had made such
classics as LOOK BACK IN ANGER (1958) and TOM JONES (1963).  Orion
Pictures underwent bankruptcy and caused the film to sit on a shelf for
three years.  The film joins an alread promising fall line-up of films
and is well worth catching for the performances alone.

Title
Review for Cobb (1994)
     What follows is not intended to be a indictment against Warner
Bros. and their decision to drop all support for this film, nor is it
meant to try to explain why such a decision was ever made.  Such an
effort would be fruitless.  It is instead a personal plea to all who
love to watch talented people do what they do best.
     Ty Cobb was the greatest ball player who ever played the game of
baseball.  That is undeniable, based on the stats.  Those are just
numbers though and to look at the man behind them is to take a long
hard look at something much less admirable.
     Tyrus Raymond Cobb, while a hero to many a boy as the finest
scientific hitter and the greatest base-stealer of all time, was also
reknown for his racism, misogyny, foul-mouth and viciousness on and off
the field.
     To portray the "Georgia Peach" on film without suppressing the
truth and yet produce an engrossing film is no mean feat.  Ron Shelton's
unflinching look at Ty Cobb does its subject justice by not
sugar-coating his many shortcomings but it allows for a glimpse at a
man tormented with his own personal failings.  These were not financial
failings, for in business, Cobb was a genius amassing a fortune in
investments with fledgling companies such as Coca-Cola and General
Motors.  His inner demons, however, would not let him rest.  He was
plagued by memories of his father's death, his mother's infidelity and
his own cruel deeds throughout his life.  He was dying from a variety of
diseases, not the least of which was cancer, but that didn't prevent
him from doing whatever he pleased, whenever he pleased.
     Into this story comes Al Stump, one of the highest paid and most
popular sportswriters of the time.  He receives a phone call from Cobb
informing him that he has been chosen to tell the tale of the greatest
sports figure who's ever lived.  What the film fails to mention is that
18 other writers had also been graced with Cobb's call only to either
quit or be fired when they failed to yield to Cobb's demand that the
book, the autobiography be limited to the game and nothing more.  No
mention of his family, nor of his many notorious antics with other ball
players such as sharpening his spikes for his much-feared spikes-high
slides or his trash-talking of catchers and pitchers or his many brawls
with spectators.
     The film's focus is on Cobb as he is approaching death and his own
mortality.  Portraying Cobb, in all his gruff and vileness is Tommy Lee
Jones in a tour-de-force performance.  His anger at the world and most
especially himself is quite evident but so is his great fear of death
which he fights tooth and nail to the end.  Shelton's script brings an
insight into the man through humor and through fury that Jones deftly
manages to balance and to exude.  That doesn't even begin to describe
the talents involved in the making of this film though.
     Jones, as Cobb, spews all the venom he has spent a lifetime
gathering up inside himself and explodes on the screen with a vitality
that is his trademark.  The range is remarkable as he can
good-naturedly tell a joke one moment and just as easily pull out a
pistol and threaten a man's life the next.  This erratic behaviour
might be unsettling were it not for the fact that it also grabs your
attention and does not ease up for a second.  An memorable moment
occurs when Cobb insists on visiting Cooperstown, the Baseball Hall of
Fame, after hours just to look at his own exhibit.  He is trying to set
down for posterity's sake a vision of his life, in terms of a game, so
as to be forever seen as one of America's greatest heroes.  And yet as
he looks at his life on display, he ends up crying for he knows that
it's all a lie.  A lie which he is fighting to maintain.  An image.  A
very misleading image.
     Another moving scene is near Cobb's death when he begins to cough
violently and blood appears.  He knows that his fight will soon end and
terrified, he begins to pray for his life.  He soon takes up the fight
again, unwilling to die quietly, he calls and checks himself into a
hospital.  Jones all the while nevers eases up on his hold on the
audience.  He is fascinating to watch as he moves across the screen and
embodies Cobb.  You can feel his fear as well as his rage and you can
see his disappointment with life and those around him as well as
himself.
     Another standout in the film is comedian and writer, Robert Wuhl
giving what is clearly his best performance to date.  His Stump shows
his contempt for Cobb even while accompanying him and attending to him
as his personal nurse and friend.  There is a mutual need, a parasitic
relationship between the two.  Cobb needs for his life to be viewed
only in terms of his athleticism and Stump cannot pass up the
opportunity to write a book about the most hated and loved man in
baseball.  But there is also a feeling of sadness which Stump cannot
unravel.  He's heard the tales that others including Cobb has related
but he still can't get a handle on the man behind the myth.
     Shelton's script is intelligent and has plenty of odd-ball moments
such as a car ride through a snow storm in Lake Tahoe where Cobb wrecks
his car and nearly kills himself but it doesn't phase him for a
second.  Dead drunk and filled with all sorts of medication for his
illnesses, he still insists on driving Stump's car.  When denied the
keys, he pulls out his ever handy Luger and threatens to shoot.  Stump
challenges him by saying that he needs him to finish the book.  Cobb
points out that he's killed a man.  It doesn't impress Stump a bit.
And so, of course, Cobb does in fact get the keys and drives just as
madly as before.  He always gets his way.
     The script also presents a wonderful opportunity to see what good
films can be made with some effort and good writing.  It could have
been a baseball movie with just the sports scenes expected to entertain
the audience.  Instead it allowed its cast to bring out emotional and
forceful portrayals of very real human beings filled with flaws.  This
study of human nature and more pointedly, of these two men, Ty Cobb and
Al Stump, has a beauty all its own with grace and strength.  It is
glorious in its handling of a very difficult subject and yet it manages
to be both accessible as a character study and as a tale worth
telling.
     In the end it is sad to know that this is a film worthy of the
highest praise and grandest awards, contains some of the greatest
performances yet by Messrs. Jones and Wuhl and some very fine writing
and direction by Mr. Shelton, yet it will be seen by so few people.
Pity.  This is filmmaking and acting at its very finest.
     I'd like to recommend this film to anyone who is still able to
catch it wherever it is still available.

Title
Review for Batman Forever (1995)
            -----------------------------------------------------
     Never have I seen so much Day-Glo colors, iridescent neon lights
and campy behaviour in my life! That aside this was the most
anticipated and over-hyped summer movie in recent memory.  And while
much has been made of the new cast, director, Robin, batsuits, nipples,
etc. my main concern was would I be able to hold down my lunch while
watching this extravaganza? In a word ...  YES!
     Joel Schumacher, director of such diverse films as THE LOST BOYS,
FALLING DOWN, DYING YOUNG and last year's CLIENT, manages not only to
create a world totally different in feel and style from his
predecessor, Tim Burton, but he brings a sense of fun and silliness not
usually associated with The Dark Knight You can't help but smile at the
humor, the costumes and yes, even the horrid makeup which were able to
transform even actor Tommy Lee Jones to a level of excess not before
seen on the screen.
     Confession time: I have never been a fan of comics, whether it was
Batman, Superman ... what have you.  The genre certainly has its loyal
fans and in deference to them I will say that I can sympathize with
their outrage for the departure from Tim Burton's vision of the Bat of
old.  Frankly I always found it too dark and ominous to be enjoyable.
So?  What did I think of its latest incarnation?  Here goes:
     I had a blast!! The cast blended well together.  They seemed like a
bunch of kids let loose on a playground at recess who had been told
that school was out for the day.  Just give a bunch of talented people
enough money to make some dreams come true, lots of crazy outfits and
makeup galore and put it in the hands of someone like Schumacher and
watch what happens!
     As for the cast: Val Kilmer, the new Batman! While yes I did like
Michael Keaton, Kilmer is a refreshing change.  He's just as sexy,
certainly good-looking and those buns!! Warner couldn't resist filling
the screen with them for a not-so-brief view in his new Batsuit. :)
Can't say I blame them!
     I do have one gripe with WB.  Well ... considerably more than just
one but this is neither the time nor the forum for that.  WB did all
they could to keep the production closely under wraps for fear of too
much information getting out and possibly ruining the suspense and
anticipation, not to mention its vast merchandizing schemes in
connection with the movie.  Well maybe they ought to have re-examined
the trailers and movie clips they release since they nearly covered the
entire film with them and left little to be discovered by sitting in
the movie theater.
     But what they did leave out was just as exciting and dazzling as
the rest and more than kept my group of fellow movie-goers
entertained.  Jim Carrey's Riddler was sure to be as Over-The-Top as he
could make it but it was fabulous to watch.  As was Tommy Lee Jones'
Two-Face.  I'd heard much of their supposed competition for Top Dog (no
Red Dog pun intended) but I really saw none of it on the screen.  Each
found a way to bring pure hokum to their roles.
     I'd always been against comic book adaptations to the big screen
because I'd thought the cross-over did not work.  Certainly I'd never
seen anything worthy of the effort ... until now.  BF is as good as it
gets.  You find yourself anxiously wanting to turn the page to see what
comes next.  I know I did whenever Nicole Kidman (Dr. Chase Meridian)
was alone with Batman/Bruce.  I'm all for romance but I found myself
giggling along with the rest of the audience the three times they
kissed.
     Overall impressions: Kilmer's got the job for as long as he wants
it.  Chris O'Donnell's Robin is here to stay too.  The rumors abound
about the sure-to-follow sequel.  Will Carrey's Riddler escape from
Arkham Asylum? Yeah, I'd say so... and unless he demands $50 million I
can't see Warner refusing him anything.  Does Two-Face survive? Given
his final shot, outstretched hand catching his favorite dual-sided
good/evil coin as he sinks beneath the water, head (good) side up --
yeah, I think we'll see TLJ come back again.  Schumacher?? Are you
kidding? The man has created a blockbuster by seeking inspiration from
such films as Tron and Raiders of the Lost Ark, among other films,
finished the movie ahead of schedule and under the budget!! Of course
he'll be back!
     The story?  Well, no one ever said that revenge wasn't a good story
now did they? Duality is omnipresent as well.  Everyone has two sides to
them and each is explored throughout the film.  The music is fine
although I found myself thinking of John Williams from time to time and
I couldn't help shaking the feeling that the main theme sounded a heck
of a lot like "Begin the Beguine."  The sets are spectacular and large!
The largest I've seen in quite a while.  You'd think the actors would
get lost in such a setting but Schumacher brings them out and makes
Entertainment the catch-phrase for the viewers.  You leave the theater
feeling that you not only got your money's worth but that you'll gladly
go into debt to see this one several times.
     Well ... this hasn't been a typical review by any means but then
again this was no ordinary movie.  To have seen the highly controversial
Batsuits with their nipples and the brand-spanking new Batmobile,
Batwing which conveniently transforms into a new Batsub, Batboat and
assorted new gadgets, even E. Nygma's RES Box which is nothing more
than a souped-up blender, I must say that it was all great fun.
     Jim Carrey continues to prove that he does indeed have a lot of
talent and under the careful guidance and I presume restraint of
Schumacher, brought to life The Riddler with all of his insanity,
god-complexes and all.  Tommy Lee Jones' turn as former DA Harvey Dent
was loud, gravel-voiced and as campy as his makeup but it worked.  It
played perfectly opposite Carrey's antics and bag of tricks.  Filling
out the rest of the screen and essentially acting as window dressing
were Two-Face's girlfriends, Drew Barrymore and Debi Mazar as Sugar and
Spice, yin and yang to Harvey's dual personalities.  Michael Gough, the
only hold-over from the Tim Burton days, was as irresistible as ever
as Alfred.
     Not much left to be said except that I plan on seeing this one
again for sure! Recommendation: Not to be missed on the big screen by
anyone who loves action, Batman, romance, and just plain good ol' fun.
