Authors
Froilan Vispo
Number of Reviews
7

Title
Review for Pillow Book, The (1996)
Someone had made a post days ago seeking info on a Peter Greenaway, who
I do not know, and yesterday there was an enthusiastic post on THE
PILLOW BOOK by Peter Greenaway (DROWNING BY NUMBERS, THE COOK, THE
THIEF, HIS WIFE AND HER LOVER, PROSPERO'S BOOKS) which I had seen last
September, so here's my contribution on Greenaway and his latest film.
THE PILLOW BOOK is about a young Japanese fashion model, Nagito (Vivian
Wu), with a predilection for writing on skin.  Attention-getting
premise, to be sure, with lots of erotic and symbolic potential.  The
film brings together two intimacies: the knowledge of the lover's skin
with the revelations of the personal diary, for the knowledge of
another's thoughts is intimacy itself.
The film takes its title from a diary of random observations, organized
under headings similar to "Annoying Things" or "Things We Love," which
were recounted and written at the bedside by its author, a Japanese
lady of the court.  Nagito will write her own pillow book, and the film
follows the painful completion of hers.
Our protagonist's father was himself a writer on skin as well as an
author, often writing on Nagito's skin when she was a child with a
calligraphy brush, chanting the same phrase again and again, something
like "...and He made her out of clay, and He took up His brush, and
painted in her eyes, her breasts, and her sex.  And then He painted in
her name,  so that she will not forget." (It has been awhile since I've
seen this film, so any corrections/reminders, such as our protagonist's
name, as well as opinions, are invited.)
Nagito grows up and makes a bad marriage.  Then, like her father, she
also attempts to write, at the same time struggling (as all artists
must, it seems) to make a living, until she is discovered (as all
supermodels are, it seems) and becomes a fashion model whose dalliances
are much sought after by papparazzi.
Like her father, Nagito makes another mistake - she gets into the
publisher's bed, in a way (and here lies another twist that will remain
unrevealed).  You see, she had met this publisher's translator and
lover, Jerome (Ewan MacGregor), earlier and had judged his sexual
potential to be poor based on his calligraphic ability.  But Jerome
becomes her means of getting her own books noticed.  How?  By bedding
him and writing her manuscript on the Jerome's skin for his
publisher/lover to read and eventually, obsess, over.
One more mistake - she falls for the Jerome and the rest of the film
sees her struggle to complete her contractual obligation to her
publisher for the possession of the most-prized pillow book of all (see
details after the SPOILER warning below) - one that truly combines
thought and touch and remembrance of past love.
I very much wanted to like this movie but it failed on several points.
If you like Greenaway's usual lush art direction, there's much to watch
here.  Too much, in fact.  At several points smaller screens are inlaid
along the edges of the main one, each filled with its own images, so
either you twist your neck making glances or your eyes are drawn to the
peripheries concentrating on nothing.  Either way you are left with
nothing but fragments.  Showing far more than can be possibly observed
becomes a poor excuse for seeing any movie again, and the interest
wasn't there to warrant a second viewing of TPB.
There is Nagito's own writing.  If her writing wasn't up to publication
standards the first time around, how does it become more worthy of
publication or obsession when written on the publisher's lover's skin?
It's too gimmicky and backfires on our protagonist, and I would be
willing to forgive on this point if we were given adequate proof of our
Nagito's skills, but we are given little, and the hints offered weren't
exactly enthralling.
The story becomes a tiring game of one-upsmanship at the end, a movie
revolving around a gimmick.  In DROWNING BY NUMBERS the story
progresses along with the counting of numbers one to one hundred,
sometimes appearing where unexpected.  Here, again and again,
love-poems written on bodies are offered, and with each new one we are
asked to  play a guessing-game with Greenaway playing the braggart who
offers us no choice but to endure this display of cleverness.
This is not the first time I came out of a Greenaway film
disappointed.  I recall being infuriated by THE COOK, THE THIEF..., all
that pomp and ceremony adorning a bad joke masquerading as a plot.
What disappoints more is that with his undeniable intelligence, with
all his daring and virtuoso art direction, the narrative and
characterizations end up neglected, and sadly this is true for TPB.
Surprisingly, for a film with so much erotic potential, there was very
little of it, if any at all, in the actual movie.  With so little to
relate to, we end up playing the role of the uncaring voyeur.
Greenaway cares enough to make us pay attention, but makes no effort to
make us care.
I was willing to be seduced, was almost awed into submission by the
visual glory of it all, but ended the film discovering that I had
played the role of the unsatisfied lover who is all too aware of "what
might have been, what might have been." No, I didn't rush up and out of
the theatre after a film to work away with my paintbrushes with glee.
Instead, months later, I type away at my keyboard venting my
frustration with Greenaway's flashes of genius.  If only he could keep
it up for an entire movie....
Jerome dies and a grieving Nagito is inspired to write her masterwork
on the dead Jerome's skin.  The publisher, by now obsessed over
Nagito's writings, then has Jerome's body stolen and flayed for
possession of the script-laden skin.
Like THE COOK..., the dead male lover becomes the object of obsession
and literally the book - in TC... the lover dies by ingestion of book
leaves while in TPB the skin is adorned by love poems.

Title
Review for Ridicule (1996)
RIDICULE does very admirably with such a dangerous premise: being a
film about a world where wit is the most-prized talent, and the absence
of a skillful comeuppance condemns one to the outskirts.  Indeed, the
film opens with a man who has returned to France to exact revenge upon
the now-helpless wit whose one wisecrack had caused him to flee, and
although his revenge is wordless, it is certainly a base one and a
fitting beginning to this film, underscoring the importance of the game
to its players and the lengths they will go to in order to have the
final word.
The setting is the court of Louis XVI and Marie Antoinette, and the air
strains with the expectation of daggers with each utterance.  Here,
adept repartee, or lack thereof, passed on through the ranks of the
courtiers, fashions one's reputation, so regret is expressed for days
on end for those witty remarks thought of too late and notes are made
of witticisms which are then classified into categories for later
reference and practice.
Baron Ponceludon de Malavoy (Charles Berling) rides off to this royal
court with his sincere hope that his king will hear him and dispense
funds for the baron's project to drain the swamps of his homeland in
the outskirts and hence save his subjects from disease.  Ponceludon is
oblivious to the rules, however, and finds himself under the care of
the Marquis de Bellegarde (Jean Rochefort) who mistakes his sincerity
for pointed humour, and is soon advising the baron on how he may devise
his rise through the ranks.  The upwardly-mobile Ponceludon soon finds
himself between the woman he loves, Mathilde (Judith Godreche), the
marquis's daughter, who, like the baron, sacrifices something of
herself when she chooses to marry for money to finance her studies in
underwater diving, and the woman who will most advance his own cause,
the Madame de Blayac (Fanny Ardant), who is well-connected to the king
and well-rehearsed in the machinations of the court.
RIDICULE's script is certainly the first among its many strengths:
well-honed, intelligent and engaging - comeuppances come aplenty and
unexpectedly.  The character's aspirations and successes become our
own, we become glad that the failures of others are not ours, and with
their stumbles of those who have gained our sympathy recognize the
cruelty of the game.
The game is a double-edged sword, however.  When deaf and mute students
learning sign language are presented to an audience of courtiers, the
latter's initial agreement to ridicule the students' gestures and
inability to use words becomes an awareness of their own exclusion from
the richness of signs and from this exclusive community, and the
revelation of the transparency of words.  In this world where words are
mightier than swords and many are willing to dance along the sharp edge
of the blade, this recognition of the emptiness of what they value is
sharp rebuke indeed.  Too few films dare to assume an intelligent
audience, and RIDICULE is one of these too infrequent pleasures.

Title
Review for Evita (1996)
EVITA begins with the announcement in a movie theatre of Eva Peron's
death and is quickly followed by a most sublime scene of Argentinian
sorrow, that of couples dancing a lifeless tango set to their secret
grief.  The sight impresses, as does the rest of EVITA's visuals. 
Unfortunately, EVITA doesn't go much further than the surface.  With its
emphasis on the illustration of celebrity, as opposed to an explanation,
using displays of grandeur and admiring masses of humanity, the
mythology of Eva will remain an anonymous one after watching EVITA, I'm
afraid.  Then again, one should probably not assign such weighty baggage
to a movie based on a Broadway musical.  
The musical is the source of most of EVITA's weaknesses.  It alludes,
but does not convince, on Eva's allure, likely because this Eva is a
sanitized version.  Madonna's own fearlessness and determination could
have conveniently filled this rather glaring void, but she keeps herself
in check - oddly the same reason why her Eva convinces - and regrettably
holds too much back, revealing only flashes of her perverse appeal. 
Madonna gives her best performance yet, acting very capably and singing
at her best, but this Evita comes short of undeniable appeal and
charisma.   
The musical assigns Eva's determination and her championi-ng of the
lower class descamisados to her own illegitimacy and consequent
exclusion from her middle class father.  Her ticket to Buenos Aires, the
South American Big Apple, comes from a teenage liaison with a marginal
celebrity, and thus begins a succession of upwardly mobile trysts that
eventually lands her Juan Peron.  Jonathan Pryce's Juan plays the
necessary cipher to Evita's myth and little else, a man so emasculated
by the musical one is left wondering how he managed to rise to the top
of the military ranks.  Nevertheless, Pryce plays the thankless role
with note-perfect grace.
Much more macho is Antonio Banderas as the omnipresent Che, our
narrative middle man and Brechtian commentator who goes through at least
as many costume changes as Madonna.  Banderas' range of voice and facial
expressions are limited, all knitted brow and curled lip, but he sings
and swaggers with malevolent gusto as he peppers sarcastic asides on
Evita's life.  In the end Che also succumbs, unexplainably, to her
absent appeal, almost dutifully, as if being a witness to her presence
was all it took to be a follower.  Perhaps that is how it was, but EVITA
leaves me unconvinced.
In spite of its faults, Alan Parker will impress with the movie he has
made.  Expect to be entertained.  EVITA describes itself well with the
following line: "She didn't say much, but she said it loud."  It is lush
and grand and the expert attention to details obvious.  The music is
entertaining and appropriately overproduced to complement Parker's
accompanying visual spectacles.  In spite of the overproduction, the
lyrics come across clearly, move the film quickly and, since threadbare
on fact, are undemanding and should be unproblematic for those
unfamiliar with EVITA.  Together, the visuals and the engaging music
make EVITA easily entertaining.
Parker isn't blameless, however.  I grant that the lack of substance may
have forced his hand, necessitating his use of glorious explosions,
banner headlines and sudden riots to illustrate Argentina's problems. 
However, his choice of montage is questionable when a single scene would
have been more appropriate to the accompanying song and more effective. 
"You Must Love Me," EVITA's one new song, is the most obvious example
here.  In the preceding scene, Juan has just informed Eva that she is
dying, and their exchange, sung live with no music, is among the most
effective scenes in EVITA, a stark contrast of barebones drama against
the constant exhibition.  This would have packed even more emotional
punch had Madonna then continued to sing "You Must Love Me," but instead
Parker plays the song as background to another montage of an obviously
ill Eva surrounded by worried caretakers, the by now too familiar device
of people reacting to an illusive Eva.  The song urges us to love her,
but Parker here wastes his easiest opportunity to make us care.  With
such little effort, you are left indifferrent, neither loving nor hating
her.  
If anything, EVITA confirms the existence of that dubious sect of the
cult of celebrity that requires its icons to have lived splendidly and
that they leave a beautiful corpse.  It will earn few converts.  EVITA
entertains and awes with all its fuss but you may leave the movie
theatre wondering why the fuss happened in the first place.      

Title
Review for Margaret's Museum (1995)

From bigfoot.comDELETE THIS!vispo@govonca3.gov.on.ca Tue Feb 18 10:13:53 EST 1997
Article: 5242 of rec.arts.movies.reviews
Path: nntphub.cb.lucent.com!not-for-mail
From: bigfoot.comDELETE THIS!"vispo"@govonca3.gov.on.ca (Froilan Vispo)
Newsgroups: rec.arts.movies.reviews
Subject: REVIEW: MARGARET'S MUSEUM (1995)
Followup-To: rec.arts.movies.current-films
Date: 18 Feb 1997 13:54:45 GMT
Organization: Aspiring Dilettantes
Lines: 49
Sender: eleeper@lucent.com (Evelyn C. Leeper)
Approved: eleeper@lucent.com
Message-ID: 
Reply-To: bigfoot.comDELETE THIS!"vispo"@govonca3.gov.on.ca (Froilan Vispo)
NNTP-Posting-Host: mtvoyager.mt.lucent.com
Summary: r.a.m.r. #06922
Keywords: author=Vispo
Originator: ecl@mtvoyager
Xref: nntphub.cb.lucent.com rec.arts.movies.reviews:5242
Status: O
X-Status: 
Treasure to be found in MARGARET'S MUSEUM 
Those familiar with Helena Bonham Carter from Merchant-Ivory films may
be mildly surprised by her transformation from her previous prim and
corseted roles to the drably dressed but earthy lead in MARGARET'S
MUSEUM, a romance set in a 1940s Nova Scotia coal mining town.  The
gothic conclusion offers a shock seemingly disparate from the gentle
melodrama, but consider it an emphatic reclamation of love lost and
proclamation thereof. 
Bonham Carter does admirably as Margaret, a self-described "snot-nosed
whore" whose candid working-class humour conceals the loss of her father
and older brother from a coal pit accident.  Margaret's mother, played
by Kate Nelligan in the film's best performance, is instead soured by
their deaths and she makes the social rounds at the frequent funerals
more out of self-interest than actual grief.
Death is a frequent visitor to Glace Bay's coal mines, and each time an
accident occurs the town, alerted by sirens, gathers at the mine
expecting familiar victims.  The residents seem resigned to a fate
linked with the mines, by far the town's largest employer, but Margaret
has had enough and is defiant in her wish for a rosier future for
herself and her younger brother, whose own blossoming romance is
stiffly-handled and is the film's minor flaw.
Margaret meets Neil (Clive Russell), a gentle giant of an Irishman
skilled with the bagpipe and many things Gaelic.  His disdain for
working in the coal mines echoes hers and he is set head and shoulders
above the miners to Margaret.  Theirs is a down to earth romance,
refreshingly blunt and uninhibited.  When the reality of their meagre
finances hits home, Neil is forced to reconsider his aversion to the
mines, and Margaret becomes reluctant about the return to a life where
death is an everyday unrelenting threat. 
And what will you find in Margaret's museum?  Expect to find evidence of
lives lost to the coal mines.  Most importantly is that those lives have
been reclaimed from the mines and returned to those who continue to love
them.
Review completed February 12, 1997.
Address e-mail for Froilan Vispo to: vispo@bigfoot.com

Title
Review for Cérémonie, La (1995)
The Lelievre family watches a television broadcast of  Mozart's opera
DON GIOVANNI where Leporello serenades a servant-girl, imploring her to
come to the window.  Those watching the opera feel safe in the knowledge
that although the scene is a deception (not wanting to be recognized,
Don Giovanni has hidden himself in some bushes and has ordered his
servant  Leporello to lip-synch to his song), it is a comic one and the
intentions of Don Giovanni are amorous in nature.  Unknown to the
Lelievres, their new housekeeper had received a beckoning from a
stranger and even allowed her inside their home.  
There is no deception to LA CEREMONIE.  In fact, its
narrative - that of a stranger introduced into the home - rings familiar
but its unfolding unnerves nevertheless.  
Much of the success of LA CEREMONIE can be attributed to the faultless
acting of all involved, especially Sandrine Bonnaire who plays Sophie,
the new housekeeper hired by the wealthy Lelievres to tend their grand
country home.  Bonnaire's performance lulls like anaesthesia, assuring
us that the foibles are trivial and that the disquiet in our minds is
undeserved.
Initially, Sophie proves quite capable although strangely quiet and
complacent.  Some household duties exhibit that this exterior calm is a
shaky one, however, but Sophie is boundlessly resourceful in her
determination to keep her shortcoming a secret from the Lelievres.  As
we learn more about what lies underneath Sophie's calm facade - her easy
frustration, her steel resolve and its resulting resourcefulness - the
overall impression becomes less reassuring indeed.  
After Sophie allows Jeanne (Isabelle Huppert), the village postal clerk,
into the Lelievre home, through the window even, the two quickly
establish a friendship.  Their initial antics seem harmless enough,
bordering on childish play and slumber party mischief.  Like Sophie,
Jeanne also has her own secrets judging by the rumours swirling about
her.  As Sophie's relationship with the Lelievres deteriorates, both
women find themselves isolated from everyone else in the village except
each other.  It is a perfect and disturbing fit: Jeanne rambles on
contemptuously against everyone else, complete with gossip involving
each of the Lelievres, while Sophie plays the blank but impressionable
slate who willingly assists Jeanne's minor conspiracies against her
employers.  Or is Sophie the willing co-conspirator with devices of her
own? 
What does the title refer to, "the ceremony?"  The word, with all its
nuances, is an apt one, but the most disturbing dictionary definition is
this: an action performed only formally with no deep significance.  I
will take refuge in the faint hope that the nonchalant senselessness of
it all was supposed to mean something, to be symbolic.  What is certain
is that LA CEREMONIE allows few refuges.
Address e-mail for Froilan Vispo to vispo@bigfoot.com

Title
Review for Swingers (1996)
You don't want to be like Mike.  Mike has been doing badly.
Embarrassingly bad.  He broke up a six-year relationship six months ago
to move from N.Y. to L.A. and he's still not over her.  As a result,
his jokes fall flat when he tries to impress, and he's a comedian.
Well, an unemployed comedian, one of Hollywood's little fish, and it
has gotten so bad he's asked for an application at Starbuck's.
Actually, the Starbuck's thing gets even worse.  And worse.
You won't fail to like Mike, however, played endearingly by Jon
Favreau.  SWINGERS revolves around Mike's half-hearted and awkward
efforts to get back in the social swing of things.  To this end he is
enthusiastically assisted by his equally underachieving twentysomething
actor friends, such as Trent (Vince Vaughn with the film's most
animated performance), who has the gift of gab bordering on the
disturbing side of motivational speaking, gun-toting Sue (Patrick van
Horn), and Rob (Ron Livingston), who once played Hamlet but now longs
to work as Goofy in Disneyland, but doesn't succeed because of his lack
of "theme park experience."  Together they talk about women - how to
make eye contact, which involves avoiding it, and when to call so as
never to appear desperate, two days being "industry standard." After
talking the talk, they walk the walk, strutting like the cool swingers
they aspire to be, always to laughable effect.
To get Mike out of his funk, his friends persistently convince him to
get outside, whether it be to a quickie night trip to a seedy Vegas
casino or a cutthroat Hollywood party with the beautiful people or a
50s swing lounge.  Everywhere they encourage Mike to look for a
replacement "honey" and then keep vigil over his progress, or lack of
it.  Like dotty doting parents, Mike never leaves their company without
being the recipient of their confidence cheerleading ("You're money,
Mike, and the honeys know it.") or equipped with their eccentric dating
philosophies, such as an analogy of flirting with the bear and the
bunny.  With the unwavering support of friends like these, maybe Mike's
not doing too badly after all.
Favreau also doubled as the film's screenwriter, and he proves he has
the gift for creating engaging characters and witty banter that goes
beyond today's bon mot.  There is a reassuring honesty to the
friendships, even when it hits its low points and the friends
commiserate.  When Mike gets the gumption to look for love, you will
join his cheerleading section as well.
SWINGERS is light, unassuming fare, sweet candy you will want to bust
your gut with - laughing - again and again.

Title
Review for Crucible, The (1996)
Forgive the fevered criticism but the fervor of THE CRUCIBLE infects.
Set in 1692 at Salem, Massachusetts, THE CRUCIBLE opens with a group of
teenage girls passionately singing and dancing around a boiling cauldron
in the middle of a forest under the glow of a full moon.  They beckon
the names of men as the targets of their love spells.  
Then one of the girls lets her hair down and sheds her clothes.  Not to
be outdone in her quest to regain the attention of John Proctor (Daniel
Day Lewis), Abigail (Winona Ryder) suddenly seizes a chicken, beats it
against the ground and smears her face and lips with the fresh blood. 
Taking even adolescent hormone surges into account, surely this
chicken-bashing bit is a bit excessive, especially for prim Puritan
sensibilities?  Surely to the Puritan eye this is as close to a coven of
witches as it gets?  
THE CRUCIBLE errs from the beginning and Arthur Miller's name should be
summoned for blame here for the addition of the above scene to his
screen adaptation of his play.  This is far from a harmless event, a bad
start to an already shaky morality tale.  
The play describes the film's opening scene during tense exchanges that
makes one wonder about the veracity of both accusation and reply, and
this adds to the play's charged atmosphere.   
In the film, the opening scene becomes an unintentional Pandora's box. 
Not only is credulity stretched but Abigail's obsession is unfortunately
spotlighted.  It positions THE CRUCIBLE more as a cautionary fable about
obsessive and malevolent women than against witch hunts; it will bring
back the memory of a rabbit boiling away in a pot.
Not surprisingly, the nighttime forest frenzy does not go unnoticed and
when two girls fail to wake the following morning, witches are invoked
by those eager to blame.  When the girls are questioned, their
confession of guilt is accompanied with an announcement of their return
to God and they are thereafter converted to immaculate witnesses, led
lustfully by Abigail.  With alarming synchronicity our
hormonally-advantaged girls zealously gesture and point accusing fingers
at innocents, constant reminders that Abigail's passion sets all this
into inexorable motion.  Abigail seizes on this opportunity to rid
herself of her rival for John Proctor's love, his wife Elizabeth (Joan
Allen), by including her among those accused of witchcraft.  
Appropriately narrow-waisted and equipped with a distractingly white
smile (watch his teeth deteriorate much too quickly to a murky yellow),
Day Lewis plays the dashing moral hero with an over-earnestness that
longs to be watched.  Director Nicholas Hytner is guilty of encouraging
Day Lewis' foaming-mouth fervour with shots where we stare up at Proctor
as if he was mounted on a pedestal for our admiration.  Otherwise,
Hytner's direction is unremarkable. 
Ryder's performance as Abigail is as consistent as her mood swings.  Her
fits of frenzy are energetic enough but the quieter moments are less
successful.  Abigail supposedly revels in her newfound power, but Ryder
fails at being convincingly haughty although there is much haughtiness
to spare here.  Paul Scofield is fine as the overzealous Judge Danforth,
but the incessant moral posturings of all the characters along with the
recurrent histrionics of the young girls pricks at the nerves. 
Probably because she is the only refuge of restraint amidst all the
huffing and puffing, Allen's Elizabeth comes out as the most sympathetic
character.  A scene near the end featuring a private conversation
between the imprisoned Elizabeth and John is undeniably powerful because
for once we are given a reprieve from the moral bantering and the human
consequences are revealed.  Unfortunately, when John's audience again
increases to more than one his urge to pontificate returns and the human
urgency of his situation is lost.  
It is clear that Miller meant well but I do wish he did it with more
delicacy and fewer diversions.  His screenplay is an imperfect creature
with the distractions coming out as loud as the message.  The result is
a clumsy muddle - I felt like the chicken from the opening scene, head
ceaselessly banged with piousness too heavy-handed to be wholly
believable.  When the gallows beckoned, it was sweet release indeed.  
Far from bewitching, THE CRUCIBLE tests the patience.  
Review completed January 28, 1997.
Address e-mail for Froilan Vispo to: vispo@bigfoot.com
