Authors
Clark Goble
Number of Reviews
2

Title
Review for Desperado (1995)
     Despite the hype that DESPERADO has received in the media and on
the net I still went in with some trepidation.  After all, the main
people praising Rodriguez were fans of the Hong Kong school of
directing: lots of bodies and guns that never run out of ammunition.
     The movie actually surprised me.  The first half was excellent.
The best description I could give is to say it is Clint Eastwood's
spaghetti westerns as done by Quentin Tarantino.  The first half of the
film is craftily put together with an excellent eye for both humor and
suspense.  The bar fight that opens the film is an excellent "dream
like sequence" that sets the stage for what was to follow.  The main
bar room brawl in the first half of the film is one of the best done
sequences of this sort since the original RAIDERS OF THE LOST ARK.
     Unfortunately, as good as the first half of the movie is, it does
not begin to make up for the second half.  Rodriguez seems to have run
out of plot and by then all of the cameos are dead.  What we are left
with is a typical action movie without a plot.  The twists in the movie
end up being silly and the action sequences seem more like the A-Team
trapped in a guitar factory.  Only the A-Team gunfights seem a little
more realistic.  It is one thing to be over the top but quite an other
to go completely overboard.
     I really hope we get to see more of Rodriguez direction: he has
great talent.  Unfortunately, what we have as a first product is an
other example of the paucity of good scripts in Hollywood.
/// Clark Goble /// cgoble@fiber.net ///

Title
Review for Broken Arrow (1996)
I should have known better.  I keep hearing about how great John Woo is. 
So I went and saw this wretched Van Damme movie directed by him.  It had
one or two interesting scenes, but far, far too much slow-mo, little plot,
terrible dialog, and you never really cared about the characters.  And
beyond that you always never were involved in the movie at all.  Through
the whole thing you felt like - so what?
But everyone talks about Woo.  So I went and rented his "classics" from
his Hong Kong days.  There was some interesting stunts, such as sliding
down a bannister while shooting a gun, but nothing really outstanding. 
And the stunts were so frequently over the top to such a degree that they
made James Bond seem like hard biting realism!  I mean this one guy single
handedly wipes out a mafia group by RAPELLING down from the ceiling with a
shotgun and a machine gun.  Give me a break.  Some of the stunts were
redeeming enough that I didn't fall asleep in the movies though.
Then, knowing far better, I went to see Broken Arrow, Woo's latest
American attempt at making a decent film.  I can sum up this movie in one
word.  Boring.  Two words if said with emphasis: BOOOOOR-ING.   The dialog
is so cheesy, so cliched that I can't believe someone actually penned it. 
About the only amazing thing is that Travolta actually takes his dialog
and makes it work.  Of course Travolta is basically reprising the same
role he's been doing since Pulp Fiction, but it at least was one redeeming
feature to the film.  Actually the special effects of the stealth fighter
were pretty good also.  And the scenery of the desert was great, but then
I go camping there all the time.
Which brings me to my next point.  No it isn't the poor cinematography,
cheesy sets, or unbelievable jumping and rolling over rocks.  It is the
park ranger.  Now personally I'd be in heaven if a park ranger like that
ever looked me up.  But the acting job by the actress portraying the
cliched love interest is simply a bit much.  Or little rather.  Who cast
this woman?  And how can she roll through the dirt, jump around cars, and
never have a hair out of place nor get her uniform dirty?  And her first
act upon meeting Slater is a little strange.  I won't give it away as a
spoiler, lest someone actually see this turkey and be offended.  (Although
they ought to be offended by the film and not the spoiler)
All in all you can probably get much more excitment if you just drive down
south to Moab, the San Raphael Swell or even Zion's and look around. 
You'll undoubtedly see about as much action and be far more interested in
what you see than if you go into the theatre to see this piece of crap.
People always complain about how Tarantino, Rodriguez and others borrow
from Woo.  Well at least they usually do something interesting with the
style.  Well actually Rodriguez has still to make a movie with an involved
plot or characters, but Tarantino has Reservoir Dogs, Pulp Fiction, and
the scripts for True Romance and Natural Born Killers.  Although the
latter shows that even a good script can be made into a horrid movie.
But enough - just avoid this movie like the plague.  You'll be much happier.
/// Clark Goble /// cgoble@fiber.net ///
