Authors
Victor-charles Scafati
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for FernGully: The Last Rainforest (1992)
     What an animation renaissance we are experiencing!  With *multiple*
prime-time animated series on the networks, the revival of after-school
animated programming, Ted Turner and his announced 24-hour cartoon
cable channel,  Bluth's ROCKET-DOODLE around the corner, and Disney's
BEAUTY AND THE BEAST, arguably the all-around finest animated motion
picture of all time, animation buffs are having the times of their
lives.  Now they can throw the soon-to-be-released FERN GULLY onto the
pile of quality entertainment.
     I've just returned from a pre-screening of FERN GULLY, and was
astonished at the quality of this film.  It is a superb blend of a good
plot (which doesn't "drown" in its attempt to deliver a message),
quality character animation, lovely backgrounds, and solid voice talent.
     The character animation seems to draw on a variety of influences.
The fairy characters are reminiscent of Ralph Bakshi's work, while the
other animals are far closer to Don Bluth's style.  At times the
characters take on a bit of the "jobbed out overseas" look, but not to
the point of fault.
     The stunning backgrounds never become tiring to the eye, largely do
to the magnificent job the color stylist did in choosing his hues.
There is an apparent color *progression* throughout the film the leaves
the viewer always aware of where the action is taking place, be it in
the canopy of the rain forest, or in Fern Gully, or elsewhere.  Seldom
is this much care taken in the color *style* of a movie.
     The voice talent cast does a perfect job.  Tim Curry plays the evil
antagonist, Robin Williams practically steals the show with his comic
bat character, and Cheech Marin and Tommy Chong turn in predictably
amusing performances.  The other lesser-known performers rise to the
occasion and round out the fine cast.
     Sadly, the music leaves *much* to be desired, but I almost always
say that (unless it's an Ashman-Menken score).  The music is weak, and
the songs are teeny-bopperish.  I don't know *why* animated music
generally has such a poor history (with exceptions, I know), but in my
opinion FERN GULLY will be added to the list of entirely forgettable
animated movie scores.
     I should add that FERN GULLY is a "Politically Correct" theme
movie, but the message is delivered with a degree of subtlety.  Rather
than being obnoxious, it's the sort of movie that parents will be glad
to have their children watch and be influenced by.  By all means, go
see it!
