Authors
Eric Y. Yap
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Yao a yao yao dao waipo qiao (1995)
    After tackling the foibles of modern Chinese bureaucracy and the
experiences of ordinary lives toiling under Communist rule, director
Zhang Yimou returns to the pre-Communist era in his latest release,
"Shanghai Triad".  Set in the 1930's, the movie traces a week in the
life of one of the notorious Shanghai triads or gangs, as seen through
the eyes of a 14 year-old boy, Tang Shuisheng (Wang Xiaoxiao).  The
Shanghai gangs have long been a favorite topic of Hong Kong film makers
as they present a complete package of the important elements one would
expect in a Hong Kong action flick: gangsters, glamorous women, and
revenge.  Zhang's understated version does not seek to compete with his
high-octane counterparts which are replete with bloody violence, sex,
and stunts galore.  The film's focus is not on the gangs themselves,
but the system the represent:  notably, the original Chinese title of
the movie contains neither "Shanghai" nor "Triad" but is instead the
title of a simple children's song.  "Shanghai Triad" returns to
familiar themes sounded by Zhang's earlier works, such as the loss of
innocence, and entrapment in a system from which there is no escape.
    The movie unfolds through the eyes of Shuisheng, a simple country
boy who comes to Shanghai with the simple ambition of earning enough
money to open a tofu store back home.  His Sixth Uncle (Liu Xuejian)
who has arranged his placement with the triad, soon impresses upon him
that there are a hundred country bumpkins who are dying to take his
place.  Shuisheng has great opportunities in front of him, and if he
would only put in his time, he could "become somebody", presumably like
Sixth Uncle himself.  Yet while Sixth Uncle is a know-it-all, and
almost arrogant in front of Shuisheng, he is transformed into a totally
subservient, cowering lackey before the Boss of the gang (Li Baotian). 
Sixth Uncle will do anything and everything for the Boss, from
chauffering the Boss and his women around, to delivering contraband, to
acting as a bodyguard.  Between these two extreme postures of arrogance
and subservience, however, is a man ruing opportunities lost, one who
wonders how he has come to be trapped in a stagnant position with no
chance of ever advancing.
    Shuisheng's assignment with the triad is to serve Xiao Jinbao (Gong
Li), a glamorous singer in a club who doubles as mistress to the Boss. 
Xiao Jinbao initially appears haughty, petulent, and prone to excesses.
She derides Shuisheng's rural origins, and ridicules his ignorance. 
But as the movie progresses, and as the protective layers slowly peel
off, it is revealed that she too comes from the same humble origins,
knows the same rural songs, and finds solace in the company of simple
country folk.  
    Xiao Jinbao exudes the frustrations of country-turned-city-girl who
has come to depend on the material luxuries afforded by her
relationship with the Boss.  While addicted to the wealth and comfort,
she longs to break free from her appointed role as mistress and is
wiling to take surprising risks to reach her dream.  As the film
unfolds, and Xiao Jinbao gets in touch with her former simple country
roots, her warm, generous side, as well as the emptiness and loneliness
of her current existence begin to shine through.  This poses an
important but perhaps unanswerable question, especially in light of
Zhang Yimou's other works set in the pre-Communist era:  would a woman
like Xiao Jinbao have felt any less trapped had she remained in the
tradition-bound countryside, or has she escaped one trap only to walk
straight into the jaws of another?  Towards the end of the film, we get
a haunting glimpse of how Xiao Jinbao's entanglement with the triad
probably began, when an innocent and unsuspecting 9 year-old girl is
initiated into the gang, starting a new life in Xiao Jinbao's footsteps
along a materially rich yet spiritually empty path.
    On its surface, "Shanghai Triad" is about life in the gangs, but
with its downplaying of violence, there are no compelling villians. 
The Boss could pass as another rich, shrewd, successful businessman,
living in an opulent mansion, striking deals over games of mahjong,
knowing how to entertain and how to enjoy the company of women. 
Violence to him is simply a means to an end, a business necessity.  The
triad's most compelling characteristic isn't evil, or its lawlessness,
but rather its function as a System with a rigid code of behavior and a
million pairs of prying eyes and ears to enforce it.  Because this
strict code of behavior and of ethical obligation so pervades the
triad, the worst imaginable behavior is to breach that trust:  to steal
your compatriot's woman, to conspire with someone outside the
fraternity, to attempt to leave the gang.  As in any totalitarian
regime, these infractions never go unnoticed, nor unpunished.
    This snapshot of life within the triad suggests that Shuisheng's
turbulent first seven days are no more significant than any other seven
days.  The Boss suppresses dissent, the turf wars continue, and more
blood is shed, but the System barely skips a beat.  New Bosses will
emerge, even more powerful, even more power-hungry.  And the children,
Shuisheng and the little girl, will end up as another subservient Sixth
Uncle and another frustrated Xiao Jinbao -- and prove equally
expendable.  They cannot escape the fate of their predecessors, and as
in any other System, there will always be someone to take their place
when they fall.  "Shanghai Triad" may use brighter colors, more music
and dance, and the backdrop of urban, bustling Shanghai, but ultimately
it echoes the themes of Zhang Yimou's earlier works: we are trapped in
a society which values the system more than the individual, and we are
trapped also by the forces of history, which keep recurring in an
endless vicious cycle.
