Authors
Ife Hsu
Number of Reviews
4

Title
Review for Independence Day (1996)
Twentieth Century Fox Release (1996)
Running Time: Approx. 2:20 hr
Starring: Will Smith, Bill Pullman, Jeff Goldblum, Robert
Loggia, Margaret Colin..
Director: Roland Emmerich
The idea of alien invasion brings endless plot possibilities.
Just describing the far advanced alien technology that permits
billions of light-year traveling might have filled up an entire
script.  But the makers of Independency Day (ID4) chosed to
focus on the lives of three characters: An US Marine fighter
pilot with aspirations of space-traveling (Will Smith), the
American President dealing with negative poll results (Bill
Pullman), and a MIT grad/expert in complex-system hacking (Jeff
Goldblum). 
ID4 covers a three day period (July 2nd thru 4th) observing the
alien arrival, its destructive colonization tactics, and the
world-wide military convergence that fights back the outer space
intruders.  Implausible and repeated coincidences bring the
three main characters together along with the people they care for. 
In the first two days, ID4 never looses grip to its grand
entrance. Many faces are introduced and quickly disposed with
minimal care. A single strike was all it took to annihilate New
York, Washington, and Los Angeles. So, as expected, the
counter-measures by the US military force proved meaningless and
ineffective. 
But in the final day, Smith, Pullman, and Goldblum are converged
to devise and execute a survival plan for Earth. At this stage,
ID4 loosely introduces a X-File-type government conspiracy and
covert operation. It narrows its premise to focus on this group
while sketches of the aliens and their technology are quickly
shown to satisfy audience's curiosity. 
The final strike is again built in total disbelief. World-wide
forces are joined together via primitive communication
mechanism; alien spacecraft can be intuitively piloted; alien's
defensive air force is no longer as agile and efficient; all
other areas in the planet have equivalent fire-power that can
prevail against the invaders.
Clearly, ID4 is not to be taken seriously. It is a feel-good
movie (despite millions of casualties) that is heavily grounded
on special-effects. There is simply not enough time to explain
much, and ID4 does not have the intention to do so anyway.  

Title
Review for Indiana Jones and the Last Crusade (1989)
Paramount Release (1991)
Running Time: 2:05hr approx.
Starring: Harrison Ford, Sean Connery, Allyson Doody, River Phoenix.
Director: Steven Spielberg
It is always refreshing to watch [again] summer movies from
previous years and compare them with current movie flicks. This
is especially true given the emphasis placed on special effects
that seem to carry 1996 summer films. 
Indiana Jones and The Last Crusade is the third movie in the
adventurous trilogy of Dr. Henry Jones, Jr. [Harrison Ford]. In
this entry, Indiana Jones attempts to rescue his father [Sean
Connery] and battles old nemesis in the journey for the Holy
Grail.  The journey is engaging, entertaining, and filled with
obstacles. 
Even at the most dangerous barriers, this movie is light-hearted
and humorous. It contrasts heavily with the previous Indiana
Jones movie - The Temple of Doom, a dark and horrific tale drawn
on black magic and revengeful characters.  Some of the best
sequences in fact revolve around the chemistry of Ford and
Connery who find themselves at odd circumstances that call for a
level of personal interaction they are not accustomed to.  
Yes, this movie also had numerous special effects. But unlike
current movies, they are not designed to overshadow the
characters or undermine the storyline. Special effects are
utilized to enforce visualization, thus demonstrating how
drazzling some of Indiana Jones' stunts really are.  
Characterization is what makes Indiana Jones movies entertaining
and enjoyable.  Even removing the somewhat outdated special
effects, there remains a movie that can still be recommended.  

Title
Review for Mission: Impossible (1996)
(Paramount Release 1996)
Starring: Tom Cruise, Jon Voight, Jean Reno, Emmanuelle Beart (sp), etc.
Director: Brian DePalma
Running Time: 1:55h
Overview: Motion feature based on TV series about a covert team
assigned to ultra-secret missions revolving espionage, theft,
security bleaks, etc.  Movie version focus on the demise of this
team as it faces an unknown double-crossing agent who aims for
personal gain/objectives. It is a cat-and-mouse chase as  agents
of the covert team try to capture invisible enemy while battling
own agency who has diswowed their membership.
Brian DePalma's Mission Impossible is desperately trying to
replace Twister as the summer blockbuster for 1996. Given recent
string of disasters (Bonfire of Vanities, Raising Caan, etc.),
DePalma tries his best to strenghten a somewhat predictable plot
with hair-raising special effects and a variety of technical
gadgets. But above all, this is Tom Cruise's show.  As an actor,
Cruise has proven that he can carry a movie, but he is also a
co-producer. Finally, Paramount's marketing ploy has made this
film as anticipated as Jurassic Park or possibly Batman (1989). 
There are really three 'Mission Impossible' shows: Setup,
Comeback, Survival-of-Fittest.   
In the Setup, the team is assigned to gather irrefutable proof
for the capture of an international spy trying to steal a secret
list containing names of field agents.  Without revealing the
outcome, I will only say that this Mission Impossible has other
predictments involving the Agency itself. 
Comeback is the attempt from the agents to find a solution to
the problems caused in the Setup. The solution requires another
Mission Impossible.  This sequence brings the best suspense
moments in the movie. Suffice to say that Cruise does stretch
his acting and body in this sequence.
As a conclusion, Survival-of-Fittest proves once again that
plausibility is not a given in Hollywood. The infamous train
sequence is truly awesome and eye-catching, and totally
unbelievable.  As Cruise goes to capture his invisible enemy, he
defies the laws of Physics and Human Conditioning.   
Two sad notes: The female protagonist (newcomer Emmanuelle Beart
(sp)) shows very limited acting range. Her role was already
small compared to Cruise, but she was easily dismissed even in
key moments.  The plot is rather predictable. Like its TV
counterpart, clues are given out during the movie, but it took
no genius to determine the identity of the secret agent as well
as the Setup sequence. It is sad to say that the expression
given by Ms. Beart revealed all the mistery at that time.    
Despite plot weaknings and uneven acting, I do recommend this
movie as a lighthearted summer diversion as it should be. 

Title
Review for Courage Under Fire (1996)
Twentieth Century Fox (1996)
Running Time: 1:50hr
Starring: Denzel Washington, Meg Ryan, Lou Diamond Phillips,
Matt Damon, Scott Glenn, Michael Moriarty.
Director: Edward Zwick.
Edward Zwick's  Courage Under Fire is not really about the Gulf
War. It is an inspiring, thoughtful, and honest movie about the
search for truth, and ultimate redemption. Washington plays
Colonel Nathaniel Serling, a decorated officer who wrongly
ordered shooting of own troops at the Gulf War.  While
struggling with guilty and remorse, he is given an assignment to
investigate the story behind the death of Karen Walden (Meg Ryan). 
Walden is the first woman to be nomindated for the congressional
Medal of Honor. She is to receive the posthumous award for
having led a mission to rescue other US soldiers surrounded by
Iraqi troops. 
Withstand all the pressure (White House, Pentagon, Newscasters)
to produce a report commending Walden, Serling finds
inconsistencies behind the stories told by surviving members of
the rescue mission and refuses another situation where only
authorized truth is revealed. 
Washington, Ryan give riveting performances. Washington's
Serling immerses into alcoholism, denial, and isolation to
combat his remorse.  Walden's story is a way to cleanse his soul
marked by the lies forged onto his fatal misdoing at the Gulf
War.  Ryan divergely plays four Karen Waldens that come to life
only through those who remembers her (parents, fellow soldiers),
and shows vulnerability, strength, and charisma. Courage Under
Fire also features excellent supporting cast especially Lou
Diamond Phillips and Matt Damon. 
Zwick has shown an excellent eye for cinematography (note
previous efforts Glory, Legends of the Fall). All battle scenes
are well choreographed and fairly accurate. The horrors of war
are not focused with gore and violence much reduced from other
war-related movies (i.e. Platoon). Despite some emotional
manipulation of the audience at the end, Courage Under Fire
still ranks easily as the best movie of this summer and will
likely contend for Academy Awards.  
