Authors
Scott Schnackenberg
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Dying Young (1991)
     I have not seen HUDSON HAWK, but it is hard to imagine a summer
movie that is any worse than this one.  Schumacher has shown little
ability to create three dimensional characters in his ensemble films
(ST. ELMO'S FIRE, FLATLINERS), and he has no more success here with
what is essentially a two-character drama.
     Roberts plays Hilary, a street smart (the film expects us to know
this because her best friend happens to be black) working class woman.
She is hired by rich, educated Victor (Scott) to take care of him during
his chemotherapy treatments for leukemia.  His motives for hiring her
are less than pure -- he is looking for a pretty woman to take care of
him rather than a skilled nurse.  Of course the interviewed nurses we
are shown are all old and decidedly unattractive.  Why couldn't Hilary
have been a spunky and beautiful lower class nurse who happened to catch
Victor's fancy?  The reason becomes clear later the film when the idiot
plot (which I won't spoil) gains what semblance of plausibility it has
from Hilary's medical ignorance.
     The clash in class roots and values between Hilary and Victor is
rendered schematically with sledgehammer subtlety.  On their first date
he makes her uncomfortable in a high class restaurant, she makes him
squirm in a gritty dance club.  When they watch Jeopardy he knows all
about history and literature, but she knows her sitcoms.  This is paint
by numbers characterization at its worst.
     Roberts certainly has star quality on camera, and she is not a bad
actress.  To the detriment of the movie, however, some scenes are shot
more to show off her physical assets than to advance the story or give
depth to the characters.  When she shows up for her interview in a short
tight skirt, for example, much of the scene seems to be shot from about
knee level.
     Scott plays Victor with quiet intensity.  With his soft deep voice
and penchant for covering his head with bandanas and hats he reminded
me of Michael Stipe from the rock group R.E.M..  A crucial flaw of the
movie is that the audience never sees a compelling reason for Hilary to
fall in love with Victor (unless she is awfully enthralled by his
knowledge of impressionist painters ... yeah, right).  We can feel sorry
for him, but his character is not particularly sympathetic.  In the
latter stages of the film, in fact, he is utterly cruel to Hilary and
their friend Gordon (D'Onofrio, whose underdeveloped role as the third
point in the triangle was evidently left on the cutting room floor).
     Ultimately this movie aims pretty low, and still misses its target
by a wide margin.  My wife, who gave it lots of critical slack due to
her morbid fondness for flicks that combine a love story with a terminal
disease, left the theater dry-eyed and disappointed.

