Authors
Nick Durutta
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Everyone Says I Love You (1996)
Say what you will about Woody Allen's movies these days--and I would be 
the first to admit that they don't compare to his 1970s heyday--he still 
has the capacity for invention and surprise.
His latest, "Everyone Says I Love You," is a perfect case in point, 
resurrecting a nearly-defunct form of cinema--the musical--and giving it 
a fresh, invigorating spin.  Most recent attempts at movie musicals have 
failed dismally, mostly because modern audiences are not willing to 
suspend disbelief long enough to accept characters bursting into 
spontaneous song.  "Everyone" addresses that by staging its musical 
numbers with a self-conscious wink at the audience, as if to say, "Yes, 
this is corny and kinda dumb, but we KNOW it's corny and kinda dumb, so 
play along!"
It's also fortunate that Allen does not try to inject original songs 
into the story, but relies on semi-standards from the 30s and 40s.  The 
only judgment call that occasionally misfires is having actors not known 
for their singing abilities use their own voices (including Allen 
himself).  Hearing Julia Roberts and Drew Barrymore warble is 
particularly painful; but others in the cast--Goldie Hawn, Edward Norton 
and Alan Alda--are surprisingly good. 
Apart from the music, "Everyone" is standard Woody Allen.  It concerns a 
group of upper-class New Yorkers wrestling with relationships and 
assorted neuroses.  Woody is an expatriate writer living in Paris and 
keeping up a strangely close relationship with his ex-wife (Hawn) and 
her current husband(Alda).  While on a vacation in Venice with his 
daughter, Allen meets Roberts and pursues a romance with her.
Meanwhile, back in New York, Alda and Hawn's daughter Barrymore is about 
to marry a junior lawyer (Norton) only to get her affections diverted by 
a just-released convicted murderer (Tim Roth).  Although you get a 
good helping on Allen one-liners, that's pretty much what there is in 
the way of plot, which would be rather pale minus the musical numbers.
But the musical interludes are handled wonderfully.  A song-and-dance 
number in Harry Winston's Fifth Avenue jewelry emporium is almost 
overpowering in its exuberance.  And a finale scene of Allen and Hawn 
dancing on a deserted moonlit quay in Paris is almost transcendent -- 
literally (Hawn does some very unusual spins and leaps).
When all is said and done, it's as light as a parfait.  There's 
relatively little of Allen's moralizing and whining.  But that's 
certainly okay.  The musical genre works just as well today as it did in 
the Golden Age of 50 years ago -- particularly when it's done so 
knowingly right.
