Authors
Alex Brenner
Number of Reviews
4

Title
Review for Heat (1995)
Directed by Michael Mann
Robert De Niro  Al Pacino  Val Kilmer  Tom Sizemore  Ashley Judd
   Before I proceed, two pre scripta.  Firstly, I am aware that there has
been recently posted another review of Heat, which was largely negative. 
That the tone of this critique is vastly different should not be taken as
a criticism of that article, which contains a few valid points.  Secondly,
this is not a review, nor could it be.  I have not seen the film for a few
months, and thus I am not concerned with minutiae of detail and plot. 
This is, rather, a criticism, and therefore assumes that the reader
possess a ready familiarity with the 'text.'
   'Heat' is often billed as a cerebral action movie, its major selling
points being the unification of De Niro and Pacino, and direction from
Michael Mann, who achieved a notable success in 1991 with the
action-fuelled 'Last of the Mohicans.'  However, the film fails on that
front, and it would be a mistake to judge it on the same basis as pulp
like 'Independence Day.'  It is unquestionably the work of an auteur, and
it attempts to convey what are, for a mainstream film, astonishing depths
of meaning and significance.  Its slow, contemplative pace is more
reminiscent of art European cinema than the Hollywood blockbuster
tradition to which it undoubtedly alludes.
   It would be easy to dismiss the plot as perfunctory.  After all, there
exists no great innovation in its formulaic telling of lawmaker and
breaker mano-a-mano; its use of close encounters and near misses as plot
devices is not going to win praise.  But then, the plot need not be any
more than perfunctory:  its place is to support exploration of the two
protagonists and associated 
themes.  Indeed, the extent of the focus is interesting, for it persists
to the point where the subsidiaries almost become like a chorus.  The
eloquent commentaries delivered by some of the lesser participants are
clearly fulfilling the need for a cementing of imagery.  It is a thing
which can be hard to do on film; Scorsese uses voice-over, for instance,
to explain motivations and desires that might otherwise have to be
tediously run through with action.  Mann is not so explicit, but there is
certainly something of this here.  
   It would almost certainly be a misinterpretation to state that Mann
cast De Niro and Pacino for their box-office pulling power.  It is far
more likely that he wished to aid a vertical coherence in resolution of
theme.  Permit me to explain.  De Niro and Pacino's characters are
disconnected from their peers, and isolated in general - indeed, this
maybe is one criticism that could fairly be levelled at Mann: that these
ideas are somewhat overstressed.  Time and again, we see Pacino failing to
communicate with his family and colleagues, both in a literal and a
figurative sense.  We are told often enough that his marriages have
failed, and then, of course, his daughter tries to kill himself. 
Similarly, De Niro is always picked out from a crowd; we see his face,
focus razor-sharp, over a blur of city lights.  So we see that De Niro is
set apart from society, suggested by plot, dialogue, and images.  However,
this stressing is ultimately not too intrusive.  The two are both unusally
able: Pacino is a great cop, De Niro a great crook, and yet both are poor
at communication, despite their intelligence and instinctive powers of
understanding and empathy.  Beginning to recognise a pattern here?  Mann's
use of De Niro and Pacino enhances his exposition no end, as they are
fundamentally reprising the roles they play in real life.  Thus do we see
themes repeated and enhanced at different levels of the work.  Where there
exists a unity of vision between a poster and subtext, there exists a
coherent, intelligent vision, or so Mann would have us believe.  Of
course, one might take this further, and suggest that Mann is cheekily
making a statement concerning the greatness of his work.  When De Niro and
Pacino finally come together, in the film, in life, the sparks fly.
   If one is concerned momentarily with these themes of seperateness and
isolation, one might be inclined to see the film as a paean to such a
condition.  There is no doubt that Mann reserves a certain reverence for
his two heroes, particularly De Niro.  His portrayal of their genius
speaks of an admiration for men such as these, whose wit, loneliness,
empathetic skills, and inability to relate spring from the same source:
their observation and perception of people, the world, and the ways in
which they work.  There is of course, in this, a certain arrogance, which
is explied at a number of points, like when De Niro casually seduces a
girl, or Pacino at a crimescene, talking down to his lesser
contemporaries.  These men feel a certain aloofness, because they see
repeatedly evinced their superiority over other people, hence, again,
their failure to possess a circle of friends, a condition stemming from
the lack of any desire to associate closely with thos they consider to be
their inferiors.  Strongly implied in all this is a realisation of Mann's
persona, the auteur, in De Niro and Pacino.  I daresay that it would be
relatively difficult to seperate those elements in the heroes which are
Mann's invention and those which are autocharacteristic.  There is nothing
wrong with this, indeed, it is a positive boon.  It is quite clear that
Mann has invested in 'Heat' a good deal of personal anguish; perhaps the
film was conceived as some kind of therapy!  Certainly, there is in 'Heat'
much to suggest a working through of the isolated, intellectual
personality, its implications and weaknesses.
   It is thus a moment of great emotional significance when these two
meet.  Again, the 'cafe' scence was billed as the first scene shared by De
Niro and Pacino, the meeting of two great forces, a comment which may just
as well be applied within the film as without.  Here we see for the first
time a recognition (seeded in the scene where Pacino photographs De Niro
in open space from a crane) of equality, of another person who might be
considered equal.  This resolution might seem akin to the old saw 'Two
sides of the same coin,' and indeed it is.  However, by saying more than
just 'the crook and the cop are two sides of the same coin,' Mann invites
a more plangent evocation of the joys of companionship.  'The crook and
the cop are both sides of the same coin, which is an unusual coin,
possessing several odd relationships with other coins' might be more
appropriate.  Because Mann portrays wonderfully the desolation and pain
that lie at the heart of Pacino and De Niro's worlds, it is altogether
wonderful to see the two united.  It is a testament to 'Heat's' tragic
stature that this scene is agonising rather than sentimental, for one may
choose to see the film also as a story of unrequited love.  After all, the
cafe scene bore strong sexual resonances for this viewer at least.  And if
not sexual, then at least something concerned with love.  For what is love
if is not the apotheosis of your being in another person?  Something along
this line occurs between De Niro and Pacino: Pacino recognises that De
Niro knows him already far better than his wife or child ever will, and De
Niro sees that Pacino understands his motivations and character better
than his henchmen or his picked-up floozie ever will.  The cafe scene
links directly to the final shot, the two holding hands in recognition of
the profundity of their communion, of both the acknowledged inevitability
of the loss, and its sickening futility.  People have complained of 'Heat'
being predictable.  Well, Neil McAuley might say the same: in the cafe
scene there is also an implicit recognition that one of them will be
'taken down' by the other, one consigned to the darkness of death, the
other once more to that of loneliness.  
   This is really the core of the film: an exploration of this mentality,
with all it has to say about the operation of human relationships; it is
an attempt to aestheticise the coldness of self-aware existence, and the
profound satisfaction to be derived from an unqualified respect, and
subsequently, friendship.  Of course, the tragic course of the film never
permits that friendship to blossom, but the hint of their mutual respect
is enough to reveal the concept.  By emoting with such acuity and clarity,
Mann makes a bee-line for the soul, so to speak.  'Heat' is enormously
affecting, because it is accurate: therefore, the enormous pain
experienced by Pacino at the end, a pain, it should be said, tinged with a
funereal, longing, respect, or even love, is also experienced by the
sympathetic viewer.  Its resolution is in some ways a happy one, as the
viewer comes, with Pacino, to recognise the contribution that De Niro made
to Pacino's life, to lend hope, and that Pacino's life will ultimately be
the better for it.  So the film is plangent and mournful, yet, like all
properly resolved tragedy, somehow heartwarming.
   All this would, of course, be for very little, were it not for 'Heat's'
technical brilliance.  That its ideas should be so excellently realised
owes much to the synergy between the various cinematic elements at work. 
Obviously, the main artistic impetus is Mann, the quality of whose
direction can be judged from my earlier comments, but whose script is also
very good.  The cinematography is excellent, ceaslessy portraying a sharp,
blue, cold world, where the surfaces repel all dust.  The lighting
observes superbly the rhythms of the characters, and there is a fine
score.  Special mention must of course go to De Niro, who provides a
performance of subtlety, power, realism and absolute control.  It is his
finest screen moment since 'The King of Comedy,' and stands utterly
unashamed in the company of Vito Corleone, Travis Bickle and Jake
LaMotta.  One thing is for certain: there is no facet of De Niro's
portrayal of Neil McAuley which does not vastly outshine Nicolas Cage's in
'Leaving Las Vegas,' which was in itself, of course, a remarkably fine
performance.  The real blot on the landscape is Pacino, but enough has
been made of the weakness of his performance by reviewers.  It is only
fair to say that he suffers by comparison: he won an Oscar for a
performance, in 'Scent of a Woman,' which was a good bit worse than his
showing here.  However, in comparison to the wonders worked elsewhere, he
does let the side down a trifle.  Is it possible that he thought he was
still on Broadway trying to reach row X?  (It seems that all great films
have an actor who underperforms; 'Taxi Driver' had (that dreadful woman
whose name currently escapes me), 'Bladerunner' had Sean Young.  Make of
this what you will.  )
   That last sentence implied that I consider 'Heat' to be a great film,
and any inference made to that effect would be correct.  It is unusual,
when one goes to see many films, to have one leap out and hit one in the
face with its sheer brilliance, but that is what 'Heat' did.  In my time
as a regular cinemagoer - not, admittedly, all that long - only 'Se7en'
and 'Schindler's List' performed this feat to the same extent as 'Heat.' 
This is not to say that these are the only films that I consider superb,
but they are the only such that I saw first on the big screen.  Of these
elite three, I would say that perhaps 'Se7en' lacks the timelessness or
extreme depth that constitute a genuinely great film.  'Heat,' on the
other hand, does not lack these, which in my opinion leaves it in level
contention with 'Schindler's List' and 'GoodFellas' for best film of the
decade, thus far.

Title
Review for Independence Day (1996)
Dir: Roland Emmerich
Will Smith  Bill Pullman  Jeff Goldblum  Harvey Fierstein  Harry Connick Jr.
   At the risk of labouring an already overstressed point, I felt that it
would be worth adding my tu'penny ha'penny worth to the debate surrounding
this vastly popular film.  It seems to be the case now that every year the
moviegoing public selects one or two films and makes them massively
successful, and they are, largely without exception poor, if not downright
dire.  Last year we had the tedious, contrived 'Batman Forever,' the year
before that the characteristically vapid 'Lion King' and the pernicious
and subversive 'Forrest Gump,' and then before that, 'Jurassic Park.'  It
is saying something about a given group of films when dramatically the
most successful of their number is that saccharine and manipulative
dinosaur epic.  And, unsurprisingly, given that it was moulded by the same
hands which gave us the terrible 'Stargate,' 'Independence Day' is not
going to change any of that.  Before I launch into my list of objections,
firstly let me state that this is not a bad film in the class of 'Benji:
The Hunted' or 'Spy Hard.'  It possesses certain moments which a viewer
can enjoy, and as a whole it is not what one might categorise as
offensively bad.
   However, much has been made of the many ludicrous moments in the script
which betray the creator's uninterest in really suspending disbelief.  My
personal favourites include the bizarre idea that one could upload a virus
into an alien computer, the outrageous fluke of the First Lady a)surviving
and b)being found, and the notion that the fire that consumed a whole city
might somehow become channelled into a tunnel, which might vaguely be
considered reasonable if it were not for the clear portrayal of someone
surviving by hiding in a little side door.  Preposterous: whoever allowed
these into the final script needs to have his powers of discrimination
substantially upgraded.
   Still, one might be prepared to forgive this of the film.  After all,
amidst a hostile invasion by belligerent super-aliens, one might need a
little light relief.  The film does not let the critic off so lightly,
however: there are deeper problems with the film than that.  'Independence
Day' is extremely derivative.  Every five minutes I found myself being
reminded of other films, usually bad ones: 'Apollo 13,' 'Star Trek
6/Generations,' and, God forbid, 'Stargate.'  Upon consideration, it seems
that Emmerich is seeking to broaden the appeal of the film by nodding at
certain genre conventions.  Unfortunately, these nods inevitably lack
conviction, and thus the film assumes a patchy 'jack-of-all-trades and
master of none' aspect.  An example: as the film nears its climax, Jeff
Goldblum's character suddenly becomes very concerned about the
environment.  This is a difficult subject to handle without coming across
as glib or manipulative, but here it is such a momentary consideration
that it really opens a window on the director's technique.  Imagine: 'Gee,
the punters like environmental issues ... how can we squeeze it in?  Ah-ha
... ' (n.b. this goes some way also towards illustrating the difference
between a film like this and 'Mission: Impossible.'  For all the latter's
faults, it is undoubtedly the work of a man who knows his trade, whereas
'Independence Day' is in the main never more than workmanlike; where
'Independence Day' is derivative, 'Mission: Impossible' is allusive). 
Another example might be found in the use of homosexuality.  Not only does
fighter jock Will Smith have a boyfriend, which seems at odds with
Airforce regulations, but Harvey Fierstein is also allowed to be his
rampant, camp self.  Again, one gets the sense that, rather than there
being any honesty on Emmerich's part, he instead is winking
conspiratorially at Tarantino fans and those who feel that there should be
a more full representation of homosexuality on film - without actually
sympathising with their causes.  It all appears to be terribly cynical to
me.
   These are still gripes, momentary complaints rather than criticisms
about the work as a whole.  These are yet to come: there is little
question that the film is generally jaundiced.  With the exception of the
effects sequences, moer of which later, the film is subject to a terrible
defocussing of dramatic intensity.  Where the film should grip, it bores. 
There are several possible reasons for this.  Firstly, Emmerich makes
great play of giving his characters lengthy introductions, showing us
their private and public personae, giving us a little slice of their
lives, and so on.  Despite this, the protagonists are still merely
caricatures: the cocky fighter jock, the wholesome president, the
eccentric Jeff Goldblum intellectual from 'The Fly' and 'Jurassic Park.' 
Thus the audience instinctively becomes disinvolved in their condition;
there is no desire to empathise and thus to become infused with the
tensions and emotions of the characters.  We simply observe their actions,
always very aware that we are watching a film.  Secondly, the film has
little sense of pace: it ambles along, quite content to deliver an effects
shot every so often, while the rest of the time is spent delivering
shallow moralistic melodrama.  The real problem that denies the film any
power or impact is that is simply not awe-inspiring enough.  Any film
which takes something unusual or remarkable as its centrepiece should
retain a sense of wonder from start to finish.  Even those films whose
central themes are invested elsewhere should probably aim to found their
drama on a viewer's enthrallment with event and setting as something
significant.  Take 'Twelve Monkeys,' a film whose ending is set in a very
mundane location, and yet that setting is invested with so much before it,
and is so removed from the ordinary by events that have previously
occurred, that the viewer is absorbed into the whole situation.  Film is
inevitably concerned with an aesthetic projection of something a little
strange (unless one is going to see one's own biopic), and so it is a
shame to render the whole process profane, as in 'Independence Day.'  As a
final illustration, compare 'Independence Day' with 'Star Wars.'  Whereas
the latter performed the same feat as the former (only with vastly greater
force) by having a very spectacular spaceship opening, it retains that
sense of the spectacular until its climax, weaving an epic tale with
wonder upon wonder, until by the end the audience is left positively
overflowing with received sensation.  'Independence Day,' on the other
hand, makes its wonders seem very ordinary, until by the end, one is
simply accepting the inwards of the mother ship, or some fantastic battle
scene, as par-for-the-course.  Given that these are really the film's only
selling point, it seems inevitable that the film will become resigned to
mediocrity, as it possesses no sense of diminuendo or crescendo, merely
jolting from a loud bit to a quiet bit, thus losing any kind of dramatic
contrast.  Unfortunately, the film to which it must be compared is 'Star
Wars,' which reveals 'Independence Day's' epic pretensions as stillborn. 
Another point which seems incongruous: why are the protagonists of
Independence Day not more awed themselves?  It makes sense to merely
accept intergalactic war when it is part of one's life, as in, you guessed
it, 'Star Wars,' but when one is faced with something so profoundly alien,
the human psyche would be much more given to trauma than is portrayed in
'Independence Day.'  Exploration of such could have enormous dramatic
potential: a good delineation of the terror and fear, paranoia and horror
that a hostile alien attack would engender could have made the film much
more successful, but instead the characters merely bumble through, taking
the whole thing very much in their stride, Will Smith at one point
cheerfully bopping an alien on the nose.  Well, damnit, if the characters
aren't gripped by proceedings, then why the hell should I be?
   Unfortunately, the nature of the film and its publicity only
exacerbates these problems.  Having been stunned by the trailer, one sits
through the movie, undistracted by anything else, waiting for the next
effect shot.  That is no way to watch a film, but the whole 'Independence
Day' phenomenon, film included, leaves one with little choice.
   Now, having severely criticised the film, there are a few good points,
as I said earlier.  Pullman, Smith and Goldblum make sympathetic,
watchable leads, and the special effects are, of course, stunning,
unusually so, even in this day and age.  This largely not because of any
particular technical brilliance, though that is present, but instead
because of their amazing visual flair.  Some of the sequences do stand
comparison to 'Return of the Jedi' or 'The Abyss' (the  special edition,
not the vastly inferior original release).  The jet strike scenes' thrill
comes from a real sense of motion, and there are some scenes in which a
ship hovers above ground, while an unholy battle takes place in its
shadow, which are stunning, providing the film's only true moments of real
emotion, sending a genuine awed shiver down the spine.  What a pity, then,
that the special effects director's sense of visual style is so much
better than Emmerich's: the contrast between these battle scenes and the
rest of the film is sometimes really pretty shocking.  And, you'll already
have seen most of these scenes in the trailer.
   As a final point of denigration, the score is truly terrible.  Where it
should be unnoticable, it is intrusive, where it should be ominous or
emotive, it lapses into fanfare.  The film has enough problems without
some of its only good moments being spoiled by some marching brass band.  
   So, like 'Jurassic Park,' it has Jeff Goldblum as that eccentric
intellectual, an awful score, it is dramatically pathetic, and it has
enough in it to make a fantastic trailer.  'Jurassic Park,' at least, was
great cinema, if weak anything else.  'Independence Day,' then, comes
across as something of a poor man's 'Jurassic Park:' an impressive feat of
mediocrity.

Title
Review for Se7en (1995)
   Much has been made of this film, and indeed it is portentous for the
thriller genre.  The dark cinematography breaks new ground for colour
noir, and it pulls no punches to deliver the most substantial and
breathtaking climax to any popular film since Star Wars.  However, it is
of interest to briefly study Se7en's place within the literary tradition
of tragedy. 
   The history of the genre is punctuated by innovative landmarks: Oedipus
Rex (unwittingly) introduced psychology, the Book of Genesis mythology and
Hamlet, character.  The themes explored are traditionally the same: a
hero, disconnected and alienated by fate, or destiny; and an epiphany in
which the hero matures into disillusionment, or a kind of spiritual
adulthood.  These are evinced by my earlier examples: Oedipus provides a
disturbingly literal realisation.  Oedipus,  not just disconnected, but
actually banished for his future sin, marches inevitably towards his
apotheosis.  Upon learning the truth of his relations with his parents, he
enters into a new stage of awareness, blinding himself, signifying his
loss of faith in both noumena and phenomena.  Fundamentally, this figures
a maturing, a growth, from a naive faith in literalism and superstition,
into a sight of the true loneliness and desolation of human existence. 
Like a child moving away from its mother, like humanity moving away from
God, he loses the sense of security in which infantility is founded.  In
the Christian creation story, these themes are largely reiterated, but
upon the gaining of knowledge, the protagonists are cast out of Eden,
which is an unsually pungent statement of the religious implications of
the tragic form.  
   Shakespeare, and, for the sake of argument, Hamlet, is worthwhile
covering here.  As any nascent critic should know, he shifts the focus of
the tragic form from plot to character, and distorts it in other ways
without interrupting its fundamental impetus.  This is a work of subtlety
and emotional resonance probably unmatched until Joyce's Dubliners and
Ulysses.  The subtlety stems from new insights into the nature and
motivation of the tragic hero: rather than being a simple plot device,
Hamlet brings to the proceedings a pre-existant self-awareness and a rally
against the play's necessary conclusion, which is probably the first time
that such a work suggested that self-consciousness renders the tragedy of
gnosis evitable, though in the end Hamlet of course suffers the
revelation: 'The rest is silence.'
   All these are important in discussion of Se7en, which follows the
twentieth century tradition of combining the emotional power of
Shakespearean tragedy of character and the dramatic power of Classical
tragedy of plot: witness Joyce, Eliot, Hughes and Golding as forebears. 
The critical innovation of Se7en is to devolve the tragic responsibility
upon both Somerset and Mills.  Somerset is as Hamlet, seperated from his
colleagues by education and perception, who brings to the film the same
sense of unease, and desire to prevent the revelatory pain.  Mills is more
traditional: literally naive.  As the film progresses, we are given clues
that Somerset's alienation derives from more than intelligence, and that
he has himself undergone some kind of maturing epiphany, though we are
told that 'It wasn't just one thing.'  However, at the climax, there is no
doubt that Somerset is aware of what is about to happen to Mills.  He
rails against Mills's destiny, implores him not to fulfil the sin which
will give him view upon despair.  Freeman's impeccable performance implies
that, inwardly, his character is aware of the futility of this exercise. 
Such realisation of subtle, obscure nuance is the mark of a superb
portrayal; Freeman's lack of Oscar nomination is in itself a tragedy.
The last reel reveals the cript's only moments of facility, Doe rather
obviously stating 'He didn't know.'  However, this does not diminish
Se7en's true value.  Though its innovations are minor, they work
beautifully, and it deserves full marks for three main achievements. 
First, it is the best delineation, of tragic revelation and redemption, of
the latter half of the twentieth century.  Disregarding the critic, it is
also the most stark and shocking delineation of the same ever, possibly. 
Thirdly, it deserves full marks for being populist.  Although its success
hinges upon exploration of the same tenebraic ideas that fuel Crow and
Finnegan's Wake, it is greatly more accessible than any other major
tragedy one might care to name.
   With reference to Eden, one might say that Brad Pitt has truly become a
'legend' of 'the Fall.'  Se7en is a stunning and important film.

Title
Review for Daylight (1996)
        Daylight is a film that demands an unusual amount of attention from
the critical eye, given its nominal genre.  It is, overall, a success,
and before cries are raised of conclusions coming at beginnings, this
shall be qualified.
Daylight is a film that will not let itself be categorised as a single
thing, and there is very little associated with it that can simply be
nailed down and left; there is a significance to this that extends
into genre history, as will be explained later.  In its origins, in
the performance of its star and even in the camerawork, there is not a
single thing which can be said to dominate.  For instance, Stallone
here seems to run through his entire oeuvre: the stumbling, melancholy
Rocky; the mythic action hero from Cliffhanger and Judge Dredd; the
man who is both bowed down by and an inspiration to the people who
surround him, the socially flawed icon of bravado that runs through
all of his work but was most callously exploited in Stop, or my Mom
Will Shoot!  This is supposed to be his last action film, and it is in
some way a summation of all that has gone before: when explaining to
the principle heroine an incident from his past, his speech is so
obscured that it is actually incomprehensible.  Stallone is, as ever,
laconically himself.  
And yet this summation cannot be seen as synthesis.  Works that have
displayed a true wit in bringing together disparate elements usually
exude an elegance and a great coherence which is lacking in Daylight.
To evince further: the film veers between forms.  In its opening
scenes there are suggestions that it will open out into a traditional
gung-ho action film.  However, as the darkness closes further and
further around the protagonists, we see that it really owes much more
to both disaster and submarine films, coming across nothing so much as
a cross between Crimson Tide and The Towering Inferno.  Still, though,
there remains the problem of the nature of this cross: Daylight is
neither black nor white, nor even grey, but rather it is many dots of
black and white arranged such that, from a distance, it appears to
possess chromatic unity, an illlusion that breaks down upon closer
perusal.  And this is indeed the fate that befalls many films of its
type, lacking either brilliance or even the single-mindedness of, say,
Die Hard, they are content merely to flop around in a nether world of
compromise, neither this nor that, but something rather dissipatedly
in between.
It is in resolving this difficulty that we may appreciate the strength
of Daylight.  Consider the analogy of a parachute: while flaccid, it
lacks any kind of life, and is simply a patchwork of different colours
all jumbled and crumpled in a heap on the ground, and yet, given a
strong motive force throwing it aloft, it assumes shape and form,
never the shape and form of something with an integral, durable
structure, but shape and form nonetheless.  Daylight's somewhat
dissolute nature is swept aside as the actual concept and its
realisation generate sufficiently huge power as to give the film a
real presence and even, on occasion, magnificence.
Still, one remains uncertain as to the origin of this power of
realisation, whether it derives from the details, the mini-climaxes,
which are often treated with brusqueness by the director - there is
one moment when Stallone's character nearly drops an explosive, an
event which I neither realised was occurring nor felt the importance
of, because it was simply lost in the noise - or from some kind of
grand overall sweep untroubled by such trivia, something which the
film lacks.  It does not come from the performances, nor from the more
literary aspects of its plot, more of which later.  So, what?
One may reasonably contend that the idea at the core of the film,
namely being trapped in a collapsing tunnel under seventy-five feet of
water while all around you exists ineptitude and attrition, is so
inherently strong that, given a certain minimal level of technical
achievement, a high order of suspense would arise necessarily.  And
the film is, indeed, technically excellent.  The camerawork, now
jittery, now steady, now whooshing, is really first-rate, and the
various cave-ins and blow-outs and explosions are visually very
impressive: the eye, being used to confinement, is readily awed by
sudden changes in scale and pace.  The editing is sharp, and the score
is functional at worst and pretty good at best.
There may arise at this point a thought: 'But surely all that, while
important, is not sufficient to make the film good?'  And with this
thought we may agree: there is something more.  One often feels that
the director has stayed his hand where a less disciplined one - Renny
Harlin's? - would have strayed, and the film feels economical.  And
yet the film is involving.  Too often in films of this type, the
protagonists are superhuman, and everyone else is simply shot, which
is surely not the case with Daylight.  This does not refer here to the
occasional sentimental moment, or the irritating and superficial
attempts to flesh out the humanity of the characters, but rather to
the fact that the film does a very good job of giving us an idea of
the torment, suffering, and, in the end, sheer exhaustion which they
undergo, and this must be to the director's credit.  One might not
have thought it after Dragonheart, but Rob Cohen seems to know what he
is doing.  Unfortunately, this rendering of primal humanity is marred
by what I think must owe to the script and to the studio executives,
that is, the not infrequent moments of aforementioned sentimentality.
One gets the idea that this kind of thing is inevitable, and so we
must be patient, and await the film's ascent out of melodrama each
time it descends into it.
The note which sounds most oddly, though by no means the most
unsuccessfully, are the odd hints of a more profound and intellectual
agenda that crop up here and there.  There can be no doubt that the
film as a whole is intended as a dramatisation of a Dantean or
Miltonian theme - 'long is the road, and hard, that leads up out of
darkness and into the light,' though the film that quoted that line
dramatised it both more strongly and with far greater profundity than
Daylight.  Yet there is also the suggestion of, depending on how you
look at it, a Christian or Conradian idea.  This suggestion is just
the faintest of suggestions, particularly if you choose to look at the
issue in the latter sense, but both the illuminated face of the icon
of Christ in the pitch blackness of the water as Stallone and
Brenneman swim for safety and the path to salvation being described by
the abominated rats scurrying amid the same icon's apparel could be
seen to redound upon both of these traditions.  But this is mere
speculation.
In summary then, one may say that, owing to its phenomenal momentum,
the flaws of Daylight are almost transformed into strengths, as, like
a boat in a storm, it pitches insanely and wildly from side to side,
as oppose to just, as it were, dawdling from side to side, and thus,
in the shape of the film do we gain a further insight into the
confusion and bewilderment experienced by the main characters.  A
relative of mine once saw fit to describe Crimson Tide as 'a very good
bad film,' and, amid cries of plagiarism, I shall describe Daylight as
not all a bad bad film, and, strongest in a litter of weaklings, the
finest example of its type that we have seen this year.
