Authors
David Chute
Number of Reviews
4

Title
Review for Cruise, The (1998/I)
Credits: Director/Producer/Photographer: Bennett Miller; Executive
Producers: J.B. Miller, Theodore Miller, David Yamner, David Cohen;
Editor: Michael Levine; Music: Marty Beller. Featuring: Timothy
"Speed" Levitch. No MPAA rating." Running Time 76 minutes. B&W.
        Timothy "Speed" Levitch, the one and only subject of Bennett
Miller's documentary gem "The Cruise," is an authentic improvisational
master of the non-stop rant, an unproduced 28-year-old Manhattan
playwright whose only venue is the windblown upper deck of a Grayline
tour bus. 
        Miller, working as a one-man film and sound crew, records big
chunks of Speed's tourist-baffling workday spiel ("The sun, another
great New York landmark, above you on the left") and follows him from
one temporary dwelling to another, as he pursues his dedication to
"the cruise," a free-flowing passionate interaction with the world,
and above all with the inexhaustible metropolis. ("I couldn't believe
how angry the city was with me," Levitch recalls, of an especially
dicey period in their relationship.) Anything that impedes or
restricts his intensely focused drifting is dismissed as an aspect of
"the anti-cruise."
        We can imagine Speed Levitch making the transition to a job in
radio or performance art; he's certainly a more bracingly original
voice than a lot of what passes for greatness now in either medium.
Several chunks of his monologue here, particularly an extended
denunciation of "the grid plan," initially as a function of urban
design and then as an extended metaphor for  boxed-in modes of thought
and behavior in general, are polished enough already.
        Miller seems to revere Levitch's principled devotion to all
things shapeless and impulsive, but a note of sadness creeps in.
Levitch wonders aloud if his judgmental relatives are right after all;
if he really is just one more babbling urban nut-case. In order to
shape his eddying perceptions into performance pieces he'd have to
collaborate with the anti-cruise in a way that may be impossible for
him.
        Luckily, Speed Levitch had Bennett Miller to shoot and
re-shape this very raw material, to craft something durable from
Speed's ecstatic ramblings.
                                      -- David Chute        

Title
Review for Truman Show, The (1998)
        "There are only so many stories," says "Esquire" magazine film
critic David Thomson, commenting on the suggestion that the new Jim
Carrey picture, "The Truman Show," acclaimed for its striking
originality, had an unackowledged antecedent in a 1968 dark comedy
called "The Secret Cinema." 
        Paul Bartel, the writer and director of "Secret Cinema" (and
of "Eating Raoul" 15 years later) said he has "heard nothing to
indicate that the creators of 'The Truman Show' knew of my film or
were influenced by it in any way."
        And "Truman Show" screenwriter Andrew Niccol, in a statement
issued through Paramount, the studio distributing the film, said he
hadn't heard of 'The Secret Cinema' when he devised the script, and
still has not seen it. For that reason, he had no comments to offer on
any possible similarities.
        Few recent American movies have landed the kind of reviews
that have been lavished up on director Peter Weir's bittersweet satire
about a hapless chump (Jim Carrey) whose entire life has been secretly
filmed and broadcast around the world as "reality infotainment."
Raised from birth in a picture perfect fake town, a huge enclosed
studio set in which all the other citizens are actors working to
perpetuate the deception, Truman spends the second half of the picture
struggling to escape to the real world outside the domed film set..
        Bartel's "Secret Cinema" is a 28 minute, self-described
"underground" film. The protagonist, he says, "is a young woman named
Jane who begins to suspect that her boyfriend and her office
associates are conspiring to make a film of her daily life that is
being shown in a downtown theater on Saturday nights, for the cruel
amusement of the in-crowd. 
        "She assumes at first that she must be suffering from paranoid
delusions. But when she tries to discuss the problem with her shrink,
she discovers that he is in fact the producer of the secret
movie."
        Bartel says he first heard about "The Truman Show" and its
strangely familiar premise "about six months ago, when it must have
been finished already." His initial reaction? "Pleasure, actually. If
it turns out they had seen my film, so much the better. In a sense
their interest in the idea validates my own interest."
        "The similarities [between the two films] are obvious to
anyone who has seen them," says "Daily Variety" film critic Todd
McCarthy, one of the few reviewers to mention Bartel's picture in his
coverage of "Truman." (The Times' Ken Turan was another.) "'Secret
Cinema' played the New York Film Festival at the time." McCarthy
notes, "and it was re-made by Bartel as an episode of the 'Amazing
Stories' TV show in 1986. So it's not exactly obscure."
        In 1969, "Secret Cinema" was released as a short with Woody
Allen's feature comedy "Take the Money and Run." Re-runs of "Amazing
Stories" on the Sci-Fi Channel's have featured the 1986 re-make
episode several times, most recently on May 30, a week ago Saturday.
And Rhino Home Video's cassette release of the 1969 version is still
in active distribution.
        "Still," McCarthy says, "I don't attach huge significance to
the similarity", "because there is no such thing as a totally original
idea."
        Originality, however, is exactly what "The Truman Show" has
been credited with in some quarters. The critical drums began beating
early, when Thomson declared "The Truman Show" "the movie of the
decade" and "one of the most spectacularly original American movies in
years."
        For John Powers, of Vogue, "Truman's" is merely, "the most
widely inventive Hollywood movie this year."
        "Truman" screenwriter Niccol (who also wrote and directed last
year's "Gattaca") seemed to echo that assertion during a interview
broadcast June 4 on the National Public Radio program "Morning
Edition:" Explaining why some Hollywood executives were initially
uncomfortable with his script, Niccol said, "studios like to have
something where there's a precedent, and there really wasn't one for
this film."
        The question of originality in the arts has been endlessly
discussed: whether it can exist at all, and if so to what extent. As
Bartel observes, "Art is all about appropriation and elaboration,
ideas that are taken up and developed in different ways." If art
accurately reflects life, does that make is less original?
Certain ideas seem to lie dormant in popular culture for years, taking
on additional relevance as circumstances in society shift around them.
Bartel's' premise in "The Secret Cinema" may be one of those, an
amusing eccentric notion in its day that has come to seem central in
the new world of mass-media that has since arisen.
        In a recent interview, "Truman Show" director Peter Weir
suggested that the closely watched lives of celebrities like Princess
Diana become a form of reality entertainment. He theorized that people
were shocked at her death partly because "it reminded them that she
was a real person."
        Two other upcoming movies also explore the general subject of
people whose lives become the raw material of TV. The October release
"Pleasantville," written and directed by Gary Ross (the screenwriter
of :Big" and "Dave") depicts teenagers trapped in what seems to be a
TV sitcom of the 1950s. And Ron Howard's "Ed TV," due next year,
concerns an ordinary man who volunteers to have his mundane doings
taped for a program seemingly modeled on the MTV series "Real Life."
        McCarthy noted many other echoes in "Truman Show," as well,
"most obviously of the old Patrick McGoohan TV show 'The Prisoner.'
That was actually the first thing I thought of when I saw that bland
sunny town by the ocean; the resemblance is really quite striking."
        After his review appeared, McCarthy says, he received messages
from readers pointing out other possible antecedents. Obvious
candidates include the Peter Sellers vehicle "Being There," Ira
Levin's novel "The Stepford Wives" and its popular movie adaptation,
the British series of the 1960s "The Prisoner," and Terry Gilliam's
"Brazil."
        John         Powers notes that Niccol is reputed to be an
aficionado of French New Wave films of the 1960s-which raises the
possibility that François Truffaut's "Fahrenheit 451," Jean-Luc
Godard's "Alphaville" and Chris Marker's "La Jetee" (re-made by
Gilliam as "12 Monkeys") might also have shaped "The Truman Show."
        "Not to mention 'Gattaca,'" Powers adds, "which Niccol wrote
and directed. The two films tell basically the same story."
        Several critics have noted a general "Twilight Zone-ish"
quality of the film. McCarthy says one of his correspondents cited a
specific "Zone" episode , "A World of Difference," as a near match for
"Truman." Written by the respected science fiction novelist Richard
Matheson, it was originally broadcast in 1960, eight years before
Bartel made "The Secret Cinema."
        The on-line fan site "The Twilight Zone Directory" summarizes
the episode as follows:
        "A business man [Howard Duff] working in his office turns to
see that his once solid, four walled office is a movie set. The people
on the set tell him he's an actor, and that he's only playing a
business man. He rushes to the place he remembers as his home, but
there's no trace of it. He returns to the studio to find that the
office set is about to be struck. He pleads to the heavens to return
him to his 'reality.' He finds that the walls are now real, and
everything has returned to 'normality.'"
        According to Marc Zicree, author of the book "The Twilight
Zone Companion," this was one of many episodes of the show whose theme
was "that our life is not what we think it is, that it is an illusion
being foisted on us." And while many viewers assume that the business
man's world is the bedrock reality of that episode, Zicree says writer
Matheson thought otherwise: "His viewpoint was that the guy is an
actor whose delusion is that he really is what he is portraying."
        Zicree cites an even earlier treatment of the theme, a 1941
Robert Heinlein short story called "They," "about a guy who claims
that his wife and everyone else in his life is an actor, and that for
instance when he flies to New York there's no city there until they
build it."
        Perhaps the question finally is, where does the organic
process of theme and variation end, and something that might be called
a rip-off begin? 
        Paul Bartel, for instance, contends that the tone and the plot
details of "The Secret Cinema," are very different from those of "The
Truman Show." The new film is an ambitious comic satire of
international mass media, while "my approach was very personal, very
microcosmic. It's really an allegory for the way a lot of us sometimes
feel, that somehow we're the only people who don't get the joke, that
other people know things we don't know and are snickering at us."
        But in "The Truman Show," too, the creepiness of what's been
inflicted upon the hero only fully comes home to him, and to us, as
the people he feels closest to, his supposed wife and best friend,
even his "mother," are exposed as actor-conspirators. Several critics
have singled out a chilling scene in which Truman's ersatz buddy,
played by an actor played by Noah Emmerich, pledges his loyalty to
Truman in seemingly heartfelt terms-although he's repeating word for
word lines that are being whispered to him, through a tiny ear phone,
by the remote "creator" (Ed Harris) of this back-lot universe.
        "The element of 'everybody knows but him' might be somewhat
close to my film," Bartel admits.
        For Vogue's Powers, "The originality of 'The Truman Show'
isn't just in the premise. It's also in where they go with the basic
idea, in the style of shooting it, in the use of lots of different
formats and angles, all the elaboration of the detail."
        Although he is quoted prominently in ads for the film, Powers'
notes that his "Truman" review was not overwhelmingly positive.
"There's no feeling in the film," he says. "It's very, very clever,
but there's no heart in it. Once you've established that town and how
awful it is, there's no reason or earth why anyone would want to stay
there, so there's no conflict within the character."
        Once ideas are in wide circulation,  Powers suggests, they
tend to take on a life of their own: "A lot of this has become the
common currency of so-called post-modernism. Once you have the plays
of Luigi Pirandello and Tom Stoppard's 'Rosencrantz and Guildenstern
Are Dead,' there are already ideas in the air that could have
generated this movie, without reference to possible specific
antecdents. The question of what would be really original in a case
like this becomes very complicated."

Title
Review for Paul Monette: The Brink of Summer's End (1997)
By David Chute
        It is sometimes difficult, and perhaps even wrong headed, to
cling to normal critical standards when judging documentaries. The
complex force of something real can be overpowering, even when the
best that can be said is that the filmmaker doesn't impose himself
between the viewer and the material, that he allows it to speak
clearly for itself.
        Monte Bramer's "Paul Monette: The Brink of Summer's End" is a
case in point. A thoroughly conventional clips-and-interviews
documentary; standard TV biography stuff, it is nevertheless a
powerful record of a life devoted stubbornly, even heroically to
self-expression. The power derives from the material rather than the
moviemaking, but that doesn't mean the power isn't real, or
significant.
        An openly gay poet and novelist ("The Long Shot"), Monette won
a National Book Award in 1992 for his memoir "Becoming a Man: Half a
Life Story." At that point he had already lost two lovers to AIDS and
was terminally ill himself. His determination to keep writing every
single day, shuffling to the computer clinging to his IV stand, must
have required huge reserves of physical courage. Monette emerges as a
role model not just for writers, and not just for gay writers; for
anyone inclined to take the freedom to speak and to create for
granted. Monette in one scene displays an "I Am Salman Rushdie" pin
conspicuously on his lapel, a clear indication that he understood, and
fully intended, the larger implications.
        "Becoming a Man" was designed to be the book Monette had
longed to read as a young gay man, but couldn't find, because it
didn't yet exist; a plain-spoken account of shared experience that
rang true and offered useful advice and reassurance. If the
award-winning status of the book means anything (always an open
question), it's that the work transcends its immediate purpose, that
it describes one form of a common human occurrence, and makes its
universality clear. As Monette says here, "We all have a closet we
have to come out of if we are ever going to be free."
        One of the movie's strongest "subplots" is an assessment of
what it cost the writer to arrive at that mature outlook. At the
start, according to his editor, Monette was not so much a man who
wanted to write as a charismatic young go-getter "who wanted to be a
writer;" less a matter of having something urgent to say than of
playing a certain role in the world. In retrospect, it seems, the only
thing missing was a personal experience harrowing enough to stir him
to the core, to burn off the impurities.
        Monette seems to have been transfigured, transmuted into an
artist, by his experience of AIDS, his lovers' and then his own. His
first work of non-fiction, "Borrowed Time: An AIDS Memoir," was an
unflinching yet affirmative and even romantic account of his life with
his companion of 12 years, attorney Roger Horowitz, and of Roger's
illness and death; a book often cited as the first about the plague to
cross-over strongly to straight readers. For many, it gave the crisis
a human face.
        Will "Borrowed Time" survive as the "Diary of Anne Frank" of
the AIDS scourge, as Monette himself incautiously suggests? It's an
indication of the personal power of his story that we respond to
Monette's most extreme positions (like the equivalence implied here
between AIDS and the Holocaust) not with acceptance, perhaps, but
certainly with understanding. They emerge as consistent extensions of
a personality, as essential components of a full portrait.
        A movie can honestly earn an emotional response in many ways,
and distinguished film technique is only one of them. "I'm not dying
of AIDS," Monette insists, "I'm dying of homophobia." In this film,
and in the most literal possible sense, we can see where Paul Monette
was coming from.
Unrated. Times guidelines: Frank verbal descriptions of gay sex;
scenes of Monette's decline as a victim of AIDS are necessarily
shocking.
"PAUL MONETTE: THE BRINK OF SUMMER'S END"
With Paul Monette, Larry Kramer, Judith Light, Roger Horowitz, Stephen
Kolzak, Winston Wilde, Star Black, 
A presentation of First Run Features. Director/Writer Monte Bramer.
Producer Lesli Klainberg. Readings from the works of Paul Monette by
Jonathan Fried. Narrated by Linda Hunt. Original Music by Jon Ehrlich.
Running time: 90 minutes
At the Laemmle Music Hall Theatre until May 28.

Title
Review for Pants on Fire (1998)
Credits: Director/Writer: Rocky Collins; Producer: Stephen Apicella;
Director of Photography: Rufus Standefer; Editor: Sherry Daniel;
Original Music: Robert Miller. Cast: Julie: Christy Barron; Max: Harry
O'Reilly; Barry: Neil Maffin; Diedre: Karen Young; Marriage Counselor:
Alice Playton; Mom: Eileen Brennen. No MPAA rating. Running Time 107
minutes. Color.
        Julie (Christy Barron), a grammar school art teacher and
would-be illustrator, is by repute "the nicest woman on earth." But
she maintains that front mostly by grinning broadly and telling people
what she thinks they want hear from one moment to the next; whatever
it takes to keep things bouncy and upbeat. But Julie is also carrying
on an impulsive affair with Barry (Neil Maffin), a co-worker with a
self-rightious streak. As the fibs proliferate and start to pile up
and intertwine, Julie's sunny grin locks desperatly into place.
        The set up is promising, but Rocky Collins' "Pants On Fire" a
mild, sleek attempt at a domestic black comedy in a middle-class,
yuppie-American setting, is neither as savage or as concise as it
should be. This triangular farce of suburban adultery could be a lot
tougher on its characters, though, and at times writer-director
Collins seems to pile on plot complications for the hell of it. In the
work of a great cruel humorist of passion like Pedro Almodovar,
there's a consistant world view, the sense of a malign universe toying
with the characters. The darkness of the comedy in "Pants on Fire"
lacks conviction; it's an attitude Collins is trying on for size.
        There is sharp dialog on display here, and skillfully nuanced
performances in the major roles. Christy Barron's Julie, a femme
fatale by default, emerges as a tactical rather an pathological liar.
She lies in order to keep her options open, to evade a hard-and-fast
choice that she just isn't ready to make. Julie dithers and dodges,
and the film does, too. The one character who knows exactly what she
wants, Karen Young ‘s Diedre, Barry's abandoned wife, is almost too
passionate a presence, and Collins also ends up dumping her, simply
omitting her from the makeshift "lifestyle choice" that is "Pants of
Fire's" limp subsitute for a finale.
        The most engaging character is Julie's clueless husband, Max,
well played by Harry O'Reilly. A big man whose strong features have
gone soft around the edges, Max is a workaholic Assistant DA embroiled
in a mud-slinging election battle for the top job. He comes on like a
typical callow careerist, clutching his security-blanket cel phone.
But there's something dazed and hesitant about him from the start, as
if he's been awkwardly miscast in his own life---miscast not just as a
high-powered lawyer but as a grown up human being. Unhinged when the
affair is exposed and his wife threatens to bolt, Max torpedoes his
own campaign with visible relief.
        Rocky Collins is no fumbling amatuer, but he, too, may be
miscast, here, as a subversive dark humorist; he may simply have a
more conventional sensibility than he thinks he does.
                                                --David Chute
