Authors
Michael Summers
Number of Reviews
4

Title
Review for Thin Red Line, The (1998)
Terrence Malick made an excellent 90 minute film adaptation of James Jones' 
World War II novel. Unfortunately, he buried it within an overlong and 
overreaching 3-hour long pseudo-epic. This is a shame because the film 
features an outstanding performance by Nick Nolte. The best scene is when Nick 
Nolte's character, Lt. Col. Tall, is forced to deal with the direct refusal by 
Capt. Staros (Elias Koteas) to execute an order.  Nolte's reaction and 
transformation may be the best work of his career. Had Terrence Malick 
concentrated on the great performances of Nolte and Koteas as well as those by 
Sean Penn, Woody Harrelson, and John Cusack, he could have made a truly great 
film. Instead, Malick saddled the film with plodding pacing, unnecessary 
flashbacks, and a voice-over narration all designed to telegraph the great 
philosophical underpinnings of the story. The narration was especially 
annoying as much of it sounded like very bad high school poetry.  With a lot 
of editing, the core story could be transformed into a truly classic war film. 
Hopefully, the DVD version of this film will feature options to suppress the 
narration, and perhaps will even provide for an alternate, shorter version of 
the film. I give this film two stars out of five.

Title
Review for General's Daughter, The (1999)
Review: The General's Daughter (1999)
Director:  Simon West   
MPAA Rating: R (Nudity/Sex/Violence/Language)   116 minutes
        This movie stinks!  Although it is professionally crafted and there 
are some decent performances, the plot is so bad it drags the film into the 
abyss.  I knew I was in for trouble when, during the opening establishment 
shots, we see a detailed close-up of Warrant Officer Paul Brenner's (John 
Travolta) military identification card and it is the wrong color.  This might 
seem like a minor detail, but anyone who has spent anytime with the military 
knows that active duty identification cards are green and dependant cards are 
yellow.  And what about the senior military officer whose uniform shirt is so 
wrinkled he looks like he is a recruit on his first day of training.  Or what 
about when Brenner tells a suspect that, because he is in the military, he 
doesn't have the right not to answer his questions even though these rights 
were central to military law well before the Miranda decision.  How hard is it 
to get someone familiar with the military to check these facts?  Now details 
like this could be overlooked if the underlying story held up, but this story 
is so full of holes it is painful to sit through.  For example, at the 
beginning of the film, Paul Brenner, an undercover Army investigator, gets 
into a gun and knife battle at his off-post houseboat and winds-up killing an 
arms dealer he had been investigating.  The local police investigating the 
death are openly hostile to the military and they discover that Brenner has 
been lying to them about the killing.  But instead of arresting him, or at 
least take him into custody for further questioning, they release him. Duh! 
Ultimately, Brenner gets assigned to investigate the murder and possible rape 
of the commanding general's daughter, a young captain also assigned to the 
post. When Brenner finds graphic sex tapes featuring the general's daughter, 
does he use them to generate a suspect list and begin grilling suspects. No, 
his instinct is to suppress them because they might be potentially 
embarrassing.  Eventually, Brenner discovers that this murder is related to a 
violent gang rape at West Point eight years earlier.  I won't even go into the 
totally unbelievable rationale for the Army's suppression of this horrendous 
crime.  I will just mention one final flaw. Brenner is investigating a crime 
that occurred in Georgia.  The rape occurred in West Point, which is in New 
York. He is under a very tight (and totally implausible) 36-hour deadline to 
solve this case.  He needs to discuss the rape with a psychiatrist at West 
Point.  Does he phone the doctor?  No, he travels (via some unexplained very 
fast transport) to New York to question the psychiatrist in person, and then 
he returns to Georgia (again by the miracle transport), without once worrying 
about the impact any of this will have on his deadline.  You have been warned, 
stay away from this one.  
Review by: Mike Summers (BikeMan-202) on 14 March 2000. 
Email: michael@smart.net

Title
Review for Henry Fool (1997)
Reviewed by:  Mike Summers (michael@smart.net)
I found this film in the new release section of my local video chain.  I 
selected it largely on the strength of its description as a "biting 
black-comedy".  Well, this film falls short as a comedy, but that complaint is 
really more of an indictment of the video marketers inability to pigeon-hole 
this strange little film than as a slam against HENRY FOOL itself. There are 
many parts of HENRY FOOL which are quite funny, the most memorable being when 
the title character Henry Fool's (Thomas Jay Ryan) replies "His throat was 
sore from the cigarettes" when confronted by his wife (Parker Posey) about the 
alcohol she smells on their 10-year old son. But the film is really an 
allegory about artistic expression and the catalytic effect that people have 
on each others lives.
The story relates the impact that stranger Henry Fool  has on the quiet, 
backward garbage-man Simon Grim (James Urbaniak) and Simon's dysfunctional 
family and friends. Henry's passion for writing prompts Simon to begin writing 
on his own. Although it could use a little tighter editing, for the most part 
the film is well directed. The opening sequence cleverly  introduced Simon's 
name, not in dialog, but through the visually prominent name-tag on his work 
clothes. This little trick was then capitalized on in the scene in which Simon 
and Martin Fool first meet. However, while the direction was strong, the 
writing was weak. The title character is highly unsympathetic, which made it 
difficult to care about what happened to him.  Parker Posey's character Fay, 
although pivital to the story development,  was  shallow and one-dimensional. 
The other characters were even more cartoonish, a fact which ultimately sapped 
much of the dramatic strength from the final conflict leading to Martin Fool's 
downfall. Finally, a subplot dealing with the election of a right-winged 
Congressman was developed and seemed to be having an interesting impact on the 
minor characters when it was suddenly dropped in the last 30 minutes of the 
film. In short, I would classify HENREY FOOL as an interesting failure. 
However, even as a failure, the film had enough promise that I am looking 
forward to the next Hal Hartley directed film with a just a small bit of 
enthusiasm.  I give this film three out of five stars.

Title
Review for Final Destination (2000)
Director:  James Wong   MPAA Rating: R (Violence/Language)      180 minutes
Review by: Mike Summers  ** out of *****
        The premise of the new James Wong film, Final Destination, is that 
Alex Browning, the protagonist, prevents six of his friends from boarding a 
doomed airplane, thereby cheating fate. However, fate is not so easily bested, 
and Alex's friends soon begin dying in unusual circumstances. Essentially, 
this premise is a clever-way to make a slasher-flick without the slasher.   
Unfortunately, this is practically the only clever thing about the film. As 
far as teen horror flicks go, Final Destination is better than many.  There is 
enough shocking death, graphic gore, and requisite black humor to provide the 
essential "roller coaster" type thrill at the heart of the average horror 
flick.  Unfortunately, this film also suffers from the worst characteristics 
of this genre. The relationships between the main characters are tenuous and 
their motivations are meaningless except as excuse to set-up the next death. 
The scene where two of the characters break into a funeral home to view the 
body of their recently killed friend is suppose to be scary and dramatic but 
features some of the dumbest dialogue I have witnessed.  If you are looking 
for a Saturday night thriller to scare your date, this film might do the 
trick. Other than that, wait until it goes into heavy-rotation on cable.   
Review by: Mike Summers (BikeMan-202) on 12 March 2000. 
Email: michael@smart.net
Copyright Mike Summers (2000)
