Authors
Rick Pali
Number of Reviews
4

Title
Review for Peril from the Planet Mongo (1966) (TV)
Released in 1966 for TV, this film is a re-editing of a 12 part serial
called Flash Gordon Conquers the Universe. I'm in a bit of confusion over
the serial's original release date. The film itself claims 1936 while the
Internet Movie Database says 1940. Regardless, you get the idea.
This is one in a series of Flash Gordon serials starring Larry 'Buster'
Crabbe, also of Buck Rogers and Tarzan fame. This time, Ming the Merciless
is back and he still has his sights on conquering the Earth. He's got a new
secret weapon in the form of a metal that burns with the heat of the sun
when exposed to oxygen. He's had his scientists make 'projectiles' out of
them so he can burn the Earth to ashes at the first sign of resistance.
Ming's decided to test them on Arboria to teach Prince Barin a lesson. Once
the metal starts burning, there's no way to stop it. The projectiles have
been fired and they're on their way, with only Flash to stop them...
Let me tell you, I was very much looking forward to seeing this film and I
was not disappointed. I've seen clips of the Flash Gordon serials and still
clearly remember the spaceships with the sparks and smoke flying out the
back. And the sound! I don't know where they got it, but it's unmistakable
and I don't think I'll ever forget it.
It's not that this film has a brilliant plot, characterisation, and
terrific acting. That's not it at all. I bet that it wasn't even so hot, in
those areas, for its own time, but looking at this film is looking at
history. Much like Star Trek today, the Flash Gordon of sixty years ago is
what some people expected the future to be like. Watch it with your 1990s
eyes, and of course it's funny. But look at it as an entertainment slanted
vision of the future of the 1930s, compare it to our visions, and it's
fascinating. Both the differences and the similarities are interesting.
This was done before World War Two and it really shows. That conflict
completely redefined the art of war, and those changes are not reflected
here. You don't expect mounted warriors, or astronauts fighting with
swords. Some of the uniforms look straight from World War One or even the
Crimean War. But you really can't expect them to have known what was
coming. Heck, at least they've got ray-guns. And the shooting effect was
done by scratching the beam into the film itself!
And look at Dale Arden (Carol Hughes). Is there any doubt that she's along
for the ride to keep the men and boys watching? She doesn't do much more
than get taken prisoner by Ming, but her short dress leaves no doubt that
she's got wonderful legs. I'll sheepishly admit that I was mad at Ming for
making her change into less revealing clothes when he kidnapped her. Some
things never change, I guess.
As you might expect, the physics are all over the place. Most people in the
spaceships aren't even sitting, nevermind belted in. Given inertia, that's
not really reasonable. Mongo is another planet, but the spaceships are
never shown in space. Ming's scientists are working in a vacuum, with these
really funky helmets...but with bare hands. At least there's an airlock.
But picking this film apart for mistakes in the science and other errors,
completely misses the point. This film is sixty years old and is a prime
example of not only very early science fiction, but a type of moviemaking
that just doesn't exist any more: the serial. It's been edited into a
single film, but the cliff-hanger breaks are still recognisable.
If you're the type that can't even watch a black and white film simply
because it's not colour, steer very clear. But if you're a more seasoned,
wide-ranging viewer, see one of the Flash Gordon serials if you get the
chance. It's the grandfather of your beloved Star Wars and Star Trek.

Title
Review for Ghost and the Darkness, The (1996)
Supposedly based on a true story in which the British drive to build a rail
bridge deep in Africa grinds to a halt after a pair of lions start killing
off the workers in 1898. John Patterson (Val Kilmer), the bridge building
expert set to oversee the operation, tried to rid his operation of the
lions, but fails. A world renound hunter, Remington (Michael Douglas), is
called in and the battle, man against lion, begins. 
This film has a great soundtrack, and wonderful scenery. The acting is not
too bad except the characters are all so thin. We only see one side of each
character. Kilmer is a bridge builder and that's all we see him as. These
lions kill dozens of his men and he doesn't even appear to be too upset
about it.
And the plot? It's Jaws, but with lions. Again we're presented with an
animal that behaves not at all as it should. It appears to kill men because
it just likes too. Why? Who knows. I guess there wouldn't be much of a
story if it didn't. The problem is that there isn't much of a story even
though it does.

Title
Review for North by Northwest (1959)
Roger Thornhill (Cary Grant) is a Madison Avenue advertising executive.
He's mistaken for someone else and a pair of thugs kidnap him right in the
middle of a meeting. What follows is a suspenseful roller-coaster ride as
we follow Thornhill in his attempts to escape this nightmare and get his
own life back. Be ready for lots of surprises because nothing, and no one,
is what they first seem.
In some reading I've done, I've seen this film referred to as a first James
Bond film, but without gadgets. It was released just three years before the
first Bond film, Dr. No. I see what they were trying to say but I don't
completely agree. What this is rather, is a Bond film without gadgets or
Bond. Thornhill is a regular guy, not an international spy! Sheesh, his
mother (Jessie Royce Landis) nags at him every chance she gets. When's the
last time you saw Bond in that situation? And I think that the film is all
the more interesting and entertaining because of Thornhill's more domestic
origins.
Of course, Grant is great in this film. He can really play a character that
knows what he's doing, and he can really play a character that doesn't.
Rarely has any actor done both so well with the same character in the same
film. What's not to like? Eve Kendall is the main female character (played
by Eva Marie Saint), but she doesn't come off nearly as well. I found her
performance cold and emotionless. One could argue that's exactly how that
character should be played, but it was a little extreme for me. James Mason
is the wonderfully sinister mastermind villain, and the ridiculously skinny
Martin Landau is not one to tangle with as the villain's right-hand-man.
North by Northwest stands very tall among the grand-scale action thrillers
of the 50s/60s in my books. It's simply a classic. If you haven't seen it,
you'd best correct that oversight.

Title
Review for Contact (1997)
Ellie Arroway is a radio astronomer that's taken the professionally
dangerous specialisation of searching for extraterrestrial life. She's been
interested in radio since learning about her father's ham radio as a child.
Her old teacher David Drumlin (Tom Skerritt), as gruff as he is, thinks she
should change to a more respectable field within radio astronomy. When she
refuses, he manages to get the funding for her project pulled.
She manages to find funding from the enigmatic mega-rich recluse S.R.
Hadden (John Hurt) and continues the search. Later, she's given notice that
this search is to be cancelled, but not before she finds a signal from an
extra-terrestrial civilisation. The U.S. Government, in the guise of
Micheal Kitz (James Woods) moves right in and tries to limit the
information leaking out to the public.
Despite all the interference, they discover that there's a television
signal in the transmission and there are coded plans that seem to be for
some sort of machine. Should they build it? It clearly shows that there's a
seat for someone inside. Of course it's built, but what will it do when
activated?
I haven't revealed any more than the trailer or television commercials but
I think they even have gone a bit far. I don't even know where to begin
this review because there's so much I want to say.
Firstly the story. It's a faithful rendering of Carl Sagan's 1985
best-selling novel Contact. Of course, books change in their translation to
the screen and this one is no exception. I think that the story is very
strong and can easily hold the interested viewer for the two-and-a-half
hour length of this film. The shares the qualities of the best science
fiction. That is, the story is about people rather than effects or gadgets,
and it always makes you re-examine things that you normally accept without
thought. The film pays off in spades in both of these departments.
Jodie Foster has to have been the perfect choice to play Ellie. She's a
very strong character, but has weaknesses that Foster made the audience
believe. Every film I've seen Foster in has increased my respect for her
work and Contact has probably best displayed her flexibility as an actress
to date. The film was so much about Ellie, that very few other characters
had major roles. Notably though, most other characters without bit-parts
were given opportunities to show some development or different sides. I
rarely got the impression that they were one-dimensional cutouts.
The effects were excellent, but as I mentioned earlier, they serve only to
support the story. If you're expecting Independence Day, you'll get the
same quality effects, but they are attached to a very different type of
film. Particularly notable were the effects during the first test of the
machine. I distinctly recall that the whole theatre was completely silent.
And that wasn't the only time that the film had the crowd completely in its
thrall. But make no mistake, this isn't a film for everyone. If you're
looking for entertainment to be handed to you pre-digested, you're in the
wrong theatre. This is a film that requires you to think and pay attention.
Like any good piece of art, the onus is as much on the viewer as it is on
the artist and every viewer will take something different away from it. I
suspect that it shares that quality with 2001: A Space Odyssey but it's not
nearly as abstract. It's not an ID4 type of film and for that reason, I
very much doubt that it will be a runaway success. People seem not to want
to give anything to be entertained, despite the rewards. But because of
that, this film will be remembered for a very long time after ID4 is
forgotten.
I understand that Sagan was intimately involved with the film in an effort
to keep it true to the spirit of his work and to make sure that the science
was right. There he has succeeded brilliantly. No where will you find that
the filmmaker has bent the laws of physics for the purposes of the story.
How refreshing. And indeed that should never be necessary if it's taken
into account right from the start. Contact is one of the few examples of
hard SF that's ever made it to the screen intact. And that attention to
detail must've been contagious because it appears everywhere in the film.
The effect is so convincingly complete, that it's easy to forget you're
watching a completely fictional film. 
Sadly, Sagan died during the production and never got to see the finished
product. He's given a touching tribute at the end with all the love and
respect he so richly deserved. I thought to myself that dedication was a
nice offering to his memory, but realised the whole film is largely a gift
from him to us. And what a gift.
Contact is easily the best science fiction film in a decade but it
transcends what Hollywood means when it says science fiction. It's a story
about humanity, not aliens. Don't under any circumstances miss this one.
