Authors
Jonathan Richards
Number of Reviews
20

Title
Review for Tea with Mussolini (1999)
     Franco Zeffirelli's reminiscence of his formative years in
Mussolini's fascist Italy is pretty irresistible, in spite of a
persistent shallowness of story and a touch of weakness for self-
glorification.  What it has going for it is Zeffirelli's reliable
bonfire of surface vanities, including a nice evocation of period and
glorious camerawork by David Watkin ("Out of Africa"); and best of
all, a cast of actresses as delicious as the ice cream sundae
disparaged by one of their number as an American vulgarism.
Dame Maggie Smith is Lady Hester, widow of the former British
Ambassador and the doyenne of a clutch of pixillated British lady
expats in Florence known as the Scorpioni.  Lady Hester is a full-bore
snob, and when she snorts "Americans!", of course we love it.  Among
her circle are Arabella, a dotty romantic artist played by Dame Judi
Dench, whose career was crowned with a Tony this week, and Mary (Dame
Joan Plowright), secretary to a philandering Italian businessman.
Mary finds herself with the care and feeding of young Luca (Charlie
Lucas), the motherless and unwanted illegitimate son of her boss.
Luca, the end titles tell us, "grew up to be an artist and helped with
the making of this picture."  A degree in rocket science will help you
understand that Luca is Zeffirelli himself.
Rounding out this bevy of talent is that American vulgarism
herself, Elsa (Cher), a former showgirl who marries rich old men and
gives them a bang for their buck before they go on to their next
reward ("He's an angel," she confides of the latest, "or soon will
be....")
The Scorpioni are at tea in an elegant hotel dining room when
their protected world is rudely interrupted by shouting blackshirted
hooligans smashing the stained glass windows and letting in an
unpleasant whiff of the real world outside.  Troubled, the
ambassador's widow travels to Rome to see Mussolini, who smarmily
reassures her over tea that she has nothing to fear.
But of course she does, they all do, though when war breaks out
they stubbornly refuse to leave the country that is, after all, their
home.  They're rounded up as enemy aliens and incarcerated, though
they are soon moved to hotel quarters in San Gemignano -- courtesy,
Lady Hester is sure, of her friend and protector Il Duce.  At this
point the teenage Luca (Baird Wallace) returns from school in Austria,
where his father had sent him to learn to be a good Nazi.  Instead, he
devotes himself to the ladies and to the Resistance, and eventually
the war turns out well.
Smith and Dench reprise their characters from "A Room with a
View", but these ladies are so good that you gladly accept the
type-casting.  Best of all is Joan Plowright, who plays a lovely scene
with young Luca and a puppet stage that anticipates his future
calling.  Cher in her best scenes reminds us what a wonderful and
charming actress she is, and dazzles us with what can be truly called
a sculpted beauty.  Lily Tomlin is good in a smaller role.
It's an up-and-down ride, but it would be a shame to miss a movie
that offers such pleasures just because of a few shortcomings.  Take
"Tea" and see.

Title
Review for Chicken Run (2000)
Written by Lord, Park, & Karey Kirkpatrick
     Just when it was starting to look like comedy was plucked, along 
comes the funniest movie of the year to put it back on its perch.  This 
will come as no surprise to fans of Nick Park and Peter Lord, the 
geniuses behind the Oscar-winning Wallace and Gromit shorts. 
     Park and Lord work in claymation, a process so slow and painstaking 
you can't imagine how they can find anything funny.  But oh, do they!  
In their first feature-length film, produced through Dreamworks, they've 
created a hilarious spoof on WWII POW movies like The Great Escape.  But 
you don't have to know the sources - Chicken Run is funny and endearing 
and completely entertaining in its own right.
     The action takes place on the chicken farm of Mr. And Mrs. Tweedy 
(Tony Haygarth and Miranda Richardson), a grim stalag of barracks where 
chickens must produce or perish.  Some of them take it lying down, but 
not Ginger (Julia Sawalha of TV's AbFab), a plucky little hen with 
escape in her blood.  "So, laying eggs all your life and then getting 
stuffed and roasted, that's good enough for you, is it?" she demands, to 
which another chicken (Jane Horrocks of Little Voice) replies "It's a 
living."
     When the Tweedys install a chicken pot pie machine, things get 
desperate - when out of the sky comes what looks like the answer to 
Ginger's prayers: Rocky the Flying Rooster (Mel Gibson), a refugee from 
a circus who calls himself "The Lone Free Ranger."  She offers to hide 
him if he'll teach them all how to fly.
     What makes Lord and Park's work so great is a deeply wonderful 
sense of humor, both verbal and visual.  It's in the timing, in the 
characters, in the lines, in the lighting and the camera angles and the 
sets and the music (including the R&B classic "Flip, Flop and Fly".)  In 
a world of computerized high-tech, this is basic, and brilliant.

Title
Review for Star Wars: Episode I - The Phantom Menace (1999)
     Say this for George Lucas: he still knows how to dazzle us
visually.  The hardware, the architecture -- there's plenty of eye
candy in this retro opening episode of the Star Wars franchise.
There's very little for the heart, and nothing for the brain.
Lucas's imagination fails him when it comes to spaceoid critters; he
seems to have cut a devil's pact with Toys R Us.  If the Gungan Jar
Jar Binks doesn't get on your nerves pretty quickly, you're probably
under twelve.  And for all the 20 years of computerized advance in
special effects, there's no moment to tingle the skin like that first
"Star Wars" jump into hyperspace.  The pod race here is exciting, but
it feels like a video game.
The ground is dutifully laid for the next episode with the anti-
Christ Anikin Skywalker (9-year-old Jake Lloyd), born of a virgin, and
destined to father the twins Luke and Leia and then turn to the dark
side as Darth Vader.  Yoda and the Jedi council have misgivings about
him, and right they are.  But he's successfully championed by Jedi
Knight Qui-Gon Jinn, effectively played by Liam Neeson.  Ewan McGregor
as his apprentice Obi-Wan Kenobe is good at anticipating the great
Alec Guinness, but he gets a bit too emotional for a Jedi.  Natalie
Portman is Queen Amidala, and she's convincingly regal but not much
fun.  Nobody's much fun -- there's no cocky Han Solo, no feisty
Princess Leia, no doofus macho innocent Luke Skywalker.
In "Star Wars", Lucas created a futuristic "American Graffiti"
with jalopy jockeys and teen-age types he understood.  Now that he's
become Joseph Campbell, he's sunk beneath the weight of his own
significance, and been seduced by the trivial side of the Force.

Title
Review for Glaneurs et la glaneuse, Les (2000)
THE GLEANERS AND I (Les Glaneurs et la Glaneuse)
     In New York City, people put out their unwanted furniture one night 
a week, and in my garret days my apartment and those of many of my 
friends were furnished with items rescued from curbside a step ahead of 
the trash collectors.  I still have a piece or two of these foraged 
treasures.  Like most of us, I am a sort of gleaner.
     Traditionally, gleaners are people who gather what's been left in 
the fields after the crop has been harvested.  By extension they're 
scavengers, people who live off the fat of the land and society's 
careless excess.  By further extension they're artists who turn waste 
into beauty.  And by one more extension, they're Agnes Varda, the 
extraordinary French filmmaker known as the Grandmother of the New Wave, 
who has been creating films for nearly half a century (Cleo From 5 to 7; 
One Sings, the Other Doesn't).
     In her wonderful new documentary about people who, out of 
necessity, principle, obsession, or just for the fun of it, gather up 
the discards of a disposable society, Varda herself is a gleaner of 
stories and people on the fringes of everyday life.  Armed with her 
digital camera, her photographer's eye, her irrepressible wit, her 
curiosity, and her social conscience, she gathers the gatherers into a 
film that is informative and funny and wise.
     Les Glaneurs, a famous 1867 painting by French Barbizon painter 
Jean-FranE7ois Millet, shows three peasant women in a wheat field =
gathering up what had been left behind after the harvest.  Varda visits 
this painting at the MusE9e d'Orsay, and then takes us out on a =
gleaning expedition of her own.  We go to potato fields and apple 
orchards, market stalls and restaurant dumpsters. We meet patrons of a 
rural bar who explain the difference between "gleaning" and "picking", 
and a black-robed lawyer who quotes statute and verse on ancient 
gleaning rights established back in 1554 by the young King Henry IV.  We 
visit with a salvage artist whose medium is what people cast aside: 
"Where others see a cluster of junk, I see a cluster of opportunity."
     There is not quite enough material here even for this film's modest 
82 minute length, and so it tends to double back on itself from time to 
time.  But the people are amiable, and Varda is in no hurry.  From time 
to time she shows us shots of her own graying hair and liver-spotted, 
wrinkled skin as she muses about the always surprising phenomenon of 
aging.  From a junk pile, she salvages a clock with no hands.  Varda, in 
her 70s, is not one to countenance waste, and she makes it clear she is 
committed to gleaning abundant riches out of what remains of her time 
here. 

Title
Review for Notting Hill (1999)
     Hugh Grant gets chastised from time to time in the press for the
encroaching familiarity of his mannerisms, but as he's been making
fewer movies lately (or we've been getting fewer of them), he seems to
be wearing better again.  The diffident dip of the bushy head of hair
(here homage is paid with the nickname "Floppy"), the hesitations in
speech -- they all add up to real charm here, as Grant teams up with
Julia Roberts in a "Pretty Woman"- ish romantic fairy tale in which he
gets the woman's role.
Roberts is the rich and powerful figure, here an American movie
star promoting a blockbuster film in London, where Grant has a little
travel bookshop in Notting Hill.  She wanders into his store, a little
later he spills orange juice on her and has her back to his nearby
house to clean up, and she thanks him with a kiss that goes a chapter
or two beyond the perfunctory peck on the cheek you might expect.  A
few days later she calls, they meet, he asks her out, and they go to
his best friends' house for a dinner among common people.
There are several things that take this material and raise it to
the level of delightful, satisfying entertainment.  The script by
Richard Curtis ("4 Weddings and a Funeral") has enough solid wit to
carry it through heavy stretches of predictability, and Roger Michell,
who directed the best of the Jane Austen movies ("Persuasion"), guides
it all with a nimble hand.  They've loaded it with in-jokes (like
Roberts being mistaken by an adoring fan for Demi Moore) that are not
so obscure that we can't be amused.  They've given us the supporting
cast of supportive friends that worked so well in "4 Weddings",
including Grant's slovenly Welsh roommate Rys Ifans, and the lovely
Gina McKee, his former girlfriend who is married to his best friend
Tim McInnerny.
And they've given us Grant and Roberts, who provide good
chemistry in their reversal roles.  It is Roberts who is the moving
force in the relationship, Roberts who moves in and plants the kiss,
who makes the call, who dictates the pace of play.  Grant is the
adoring planet circling this radiant sun, and he pulls it off with a
self- deprecating humor that makes him the focus of our interest and
really carries the picture.  We might, however, wish for a little more
character delineation.  We don't expect an awful lot of men in
romantic situations, but we're used to women requiring something more
profound than a pretty face with which to fall in love.
But why quibble?  Summer's here, and this is a romantic comedy to
lift us into it.

Title
Review for Bian Lian (1996)
     "King of Masks", an endearing if sentimental Chinese melodrama,
joins the ranks of movies about crusty grownups reluctantly adopting
adorable tykes and growing to love them -- "Central Station", "Kolya",
"Gloria", "Big Daddy"; the list runs back, including such classics as
"Little Miss Marker" and Chaplin's "The Kid".  There are few among
them that do not require that pocket pack of Kleenex.
In this story, Wang (Zhu Xu) actually wants the kid.  He's an
elderly street performer who specializes in lightning-fast changes of
paper masks, but he has no heir to whom to hand down his secrets.
This is provincial China in the 30s, and tradition requires that these
mysteries be passed only from father to son; no girls allowed.  Wang
goes to a shadowy small-town slave market where destitute parents
peddle their children.  Girls are a glut on the market, but healthy
little boys are not to be had, not even for ready money.  To his
surpassing joy, Wang spots a bright 7-year-old and snaps him up.
Doggie (Zhou Ren-ying) is everything a street performer could
want in a son.  Almost.  He's cute, loyal, hardworking, a talented
acrobat, and can find the right spot to scratch a back.  There's only
one thing missing: when circumstances require him to pee on demand, he
lacks the "little teapot spout" that distinguishes the male of the
species.
A girl!  In a culture that held performers in low esteem, girls
were not even esteemed enough to be performers.  The King of Masks
tries to dump the deceitful baggage, but she won't stay dumped;
eventually, he relents.  But no more "Grandpa".  From now on, it's
"Boss".
Zhu Xu is a veteran of the Beijing People's Artistic Theater, and
he brings a craggy warmth and quicksilver dexterity to his title role
as the King of Masks.  Zhou Reng-ying is a big-eyed, round-faced kid
with a remarkable gymnastic talent honed by her background as a
professional acrobat.  Zhou also brings life experience to the role --
she was sold to a circus troupe at the age of 3.  Shanghai opera star
Zhao Zhigang plays Master Liang, a famous female impersonator.  These
three characters all live on society's fringes, and all survive
through the use of masks and deception.
Director Wu Tianming draws us into this old hanky with an exotic
setting, good storytelling, and beautiful cinematography.  There's a
bit too much of the maudlin, a little excess in the weeping and crying
"Grandpa" department, but with three fine actors and even a trained
monkey pulling the strings, it's satisfying sentimentality.

Title
Review for Midsummer Night's Dream, A (1999)
     Have you ever had one of those dreams where things don't quite
work the way they should, where stuff happens out of context and in
the wrong places and the people don't all fit, but you still wake up
feeling pretty good?  That's the way it is with Michael ("Soapdish")
Hoffman's take on "A Midsummer Night's Dream".
This is one of those conceptually reimagined Shakespearean
productions, and while such adventures can work (Ian McKellan's
"Richard III"), they run the risk of throwing the proceedings out of
balance, and that's what happens here.  Hoffman has set his version of
the Bard's Athenian comedy in Tuscany, which causes a few problems,
and he's updated it to the late 19th century (presumably to be able to
throw in bicycles), which causes a few more.  References to Athens
seem a little strange in the setting, and a hundred years ago they
were letting girls play girls' parts, which strains the logic of the
"Pyramus and Thisbe" play-within-a-play casting.
The first clue that something may be amiss comes at the main
title, which is overlaid with a wink-and-nudge note to the effect that
corsets and high-button collars were still in fashion, but "the good
news is that the bustle was on its way out, which made possible the
use of that new-fangled invention, the bicycle."  This doesn't set a
Shakespearean tone, but it seems to embolden Hoffman to make a few
other improvements on Shakespeare as he rolls along.  The worst of
these is a digression where, to give more prominence and pathos to
Bottom, he has rude workmen spill red wine on the weaver's white suit,
and then sends him home crestfallen to his apartment and his harridan
wife (whom we've seen earlier looking for him and demanding in Italian
"Where's that worthless husband of mine?")  It becomes a virtual
subplot, and it's of no great help to Shakespeare.
But the source material is magnificent, and the settings are
beautiful, and the cast for the most part is up to the challenge.
Dominic West as Lysander falls the shortest, but Calista Flockhart is
a revelation as Hermia, and Stanley Tucci makes Puck a rascally
animated cartoon that nicely fits the sprightly character.  Rupert
Everett is good as a quietly scheming Oberon, and Michelle Pfeiffer's
beauty and talent do lovely things with Titania, though she
occasionally seems to lose confidence and resort to acting flourishes.
The outstanding performance belongs to Kevin Kline, whose Bottom
the Weaver radiates a rustic goodness and balances buffoonery with
simple wisdom.  Kline's language is effortless, his timing flawless,
and his depth bottomless.  He and Sam Rockwell (as the boy Thisbe)
make a hilarious romp of the climactic play-within-a-play, which
features that current comedy staple, the hurled dog, and might be
retitled "There's Something About Thisbe".
The bottom line: despite its many flaws, it's still "A Midsummer
Night's Dream", and it's still well worth seeing.

Title
Review for Eyes Wide Shut (1999)
     Stanley Kubrick died within a week after finishing his cut of
this movie, and if he had any inkling of the critical and audience
controversy he was spawning, he died a happy man.  Some have hailed
"Eyes Wide Shut" as a masterpiece, while others have suggested the
emperor is as unclothed as most of the people in his movie.  I have
even heard it wildly speculated that he might have shot up a speedball
and taken the easy way out rather than face the consequences of his
folly.
    Now, how can you not want to see a movie that can kick up this
kind of dust?
    "Eyes Wide Shut" is essentially a movie about family values with a
lot of naked women in it.  If that sounds like an intriguing recipe,
the sad fact is that in the hands of the legendary cinematic genius,
the dough did not rise on this last loaf.  Genius has been defined as
an infinite capacity for taking pains; if anything, too many pains
were taken here, and the result is a strangely earthbound,
unsurprising movie.
     Kubrick was known for working slowly.  There are children in
junior high who were not born when he made his previous film, "Full
Metal Jacket", and there are children in preschool who were born since
production began on "Eyes Wide Shut".  Harvey Keitel and Jennifer
Jason Leigh had to be replaced when the months began to turn into
years.  The little girl who plays Tom Cruise and Nicole Kidman's
daughter must have been given a compressed shooting schedule; if she'd
had to stick around for the two years Tom and Nicole did, the aging
process would have shown (Tom and Nicole hold up pretty well.)
     The story, based by Kubrick and co-scenarist Frederick Raphael
("Two for the Road") is based on "Dream Story", a 1926 novella by
Viennese author Artur Schnitzler.  It follows Dr. Bill Harford and his
wife Alice (Cruise and Kidman) through a couple of days of sexual
fantasy and temptation.  The fantasies are consummated, the
temptations are not.  After a Christmas party at the Manhattan mansion
of a friend (Sydney Pollack) at which both are sexually tempted, they
have a fight, and Alice taunts her husband with a memory of a naval
officer with whom she would have gladly cheated.  Bill is then called
out into the night to the home of a patient who has just died.  Over
the course of a long night he is hit on, solicited, tempted, and in
the movie's centerpiece scene, attends a masked orgy at a palatial
Long Island estate (unforgivably digitally altered by the MPAA to
protect the innocent), but the closest he comes to actual sex are his
tortured fantasies of Alice and the naval officer.
     "Eyes Wide Shut" is full of intellectual concepts about sex and
human nature, but very few of them translate into cinematic life.
Kubrick constructs complex metaphors with color, using a palette
dominated by reds, blues, and yellows, and constantly fragmented by
the garish lights on the Christmas trees that turn up in every scene.
He does a treatise on masks, and some of it is eerily effective.  He
ruminates about the nature of men and women -- Alice tries to provoke
Bill by being deliberately hurtful, Bill uses deception to try to
avoid stirring things up.  Bill can be thoughtless and condescending,
Alice tends toward the irrational and emotional.  Bill has a maddening
habit of repeating what's said to him ("What do you think?"  "What do
I think?"); eliminate the repetitions and the pauses that mount
agonizingly as the film slows and slows in the last third, and Kubrick
could have brought it in under two hours.
     Who knows what he might have done if he'd lived a little longer?
Kubrick famously edited up to the last minute.  But for all his
profound ideas, lavish sets (he built New York in London, and the
result is a mesmerizingly off-keel and strangely all- white Manhattan)
and attention to detail, the goods just aren't there on film.
Dialogue is banal ("You know what they say -- once a doctor, always a
doctor") and, especially in the unfortunate last scene, painfully
direct in tying up philosophical threads ("A dream is never just a
dream.")  There are some terrific small performances, notably Marie
Richardson and Alan Cumming, but Kubrick's direction of Pollack's big
scene is embarrassing, and Cruise and Kidman don't quite manage
characters that make us believe or care.
     Having said all this, there's only room here to graze the iceberg
of things to talk about with "Eyes Wide Shut".  Kubrick's screen
legacy is so rich, and his legend so powerful, that we bring loaded
expectations to this movie, for better or for worse , and we find
ourselves endlessly discussing and examining meanings, successes,
failures, images, details, inconsistencies, motives, metaphors, music,
prurience, eroticism and the lack of it, dreams and reality.  In the
end, after the disappointment of his last movie, this becomes
Kubrick's final success.

Title
Review for Arlington Road (1999)
     Whether or not "Arlington Road" slips in beneath your tolerance
radar screen depends on a variety of factors -- how much you like
improbable action/adventure, how much of a stickler you are for
plausibility, how much coincidence you can stand, how much umbrage you
take at having your intelligence insulted, that sort of thing.  On the
plus side, it's pretty well-acted, with some good fast-paced suspense
sequences.  On the minus side, it's a ridiculous, sloppy piece of
junk.
The movie was ready for release last year but was held off
because of public sensitivity about the very similar Oklahoma City
bombing, and then derailed again earlier this year by the Columbine
shootings.  It finally saw a window of opportunity between spasms of
American violence and got its opening.
Jeff Bridges plays Michael Faraday, a widower teaching a course
about terrorism at a Washington university.  He doesn't seem to have
any other classes, or much else to do besides cope with his withdrawn
son (Spencer Treat Clark) and girlfriend Brooke (Hope Davis), and
brood in his dark house about his deceased wife, an FBI agent who was
killed in a botched Ruby Ridge-type raid.  Until, that is, he meets
the neighbors.  Oliver and Cheryl Lang (Tim Robbins and Joan Cusack)
are what God had in mind when He created the Midwest.  But Michael,
with precious little to go on beyond Oliver's pudding face and
porridge-bowl haircut, begins to suspect that his Ozzie-and-Harriet
neighbors are really Mr. and Mrs. Tim McVeigh.  He can't convince
anybody -- not Brooke (who leaves the room every time he mentions his
late wife), not his wife's old FBI colleague (Robert Gossett).
A premise of the movie is that Americans would rather feel safe
than get to the bottom of things, and once we've arrested somebody in
a terrorist case we don't even want to think about far-reaching
conspiracies.  The core idea on which this exercise in paranoia is
constructed is an intriguing one, but so much of Ehren Kruger's
screenplay turns on the most far-fetched coincidences and
improbabilities that it stumbles over itself like a drunk in an
earthquake.  It's the kind of movie you come out of with a laundry
list of protests, and then keep thinking of more on the way home.  It
fails Alfred Hitchcock's cheese sandwich test -- if a thriller is
successful, you won't think about its holes until you've had time to
get home and are making a cheese sandwich.
The ending toward which the movie drives us (with depressing
literalness) is a nice twist, but getting there isn't much fun, and
again we're asked to swallow plot devices that require people to act
unerringly in very specific and highly unlikely ways.  If my plan for
blowing up a federal building depended on such unpredictable behavior,
I doubt I could get any respectable terrorist organization this side
of the Mississippi to back it.
Bridges and Robbins are good, but show-stealing honors go to the
wonderful Joan Cusack, whose smile will never strike you as quite so
innocent and goofy again.

Title
Review for Abre los ojos (1997)
     "Open Your Eyes" is the picture Alfred Hitchcock might have made
if he were very young and Spanish and in film school today.  It's a
twisty, multi- leveled succession of screens and masks (literally and
figuratively) that takes on identity and reality with all the earnest
passion of a late-night bull session among college kids who are
flirting with the idea of switching majors to Philosophy.
Eduardo Noriega is Cesar, a young Lothario who makes it a point
of honor never to sleep with the same woman twice, until he meets his
best friend's new girl Sofia (Penelope Cruz of "The Hi-Lo Country")
and falls madly in love.  Unfortunately, his wild oats have sown a
bitter harvest with Nuria (Najwa Nimri), a recent one-night stand who
is so obstinate about trying to keep him that she drives her car off a
cliff, killing herself and horribly disfiguring his once-pretty face.
As time and reality scramble, we find Cesar scrunched on the
floor of a cell in a psychiatric prison wearing a mask to conceal his
deformed face and amnesia to conceal who it is he's killed (and why
and how), while his doctor (Chete Lera) tries to peel away these
coverings.  We go back to pick up key moments of the story, some of
them obviously dreams, some of them apparently real, with the
distinction becoming more and more blurred.
The 27-year-old tyro Amenabar has the talent to dress his story
up handsomely and twirl it with dazzling flourishes, but his
immaturity shows through and becomes more and more pronounced as he
reels toward the finish line.  Masks play a big part in his legend,
and he's partial to repeated lines of dialogue ("Can't you tell dreams
from reality?") that resonate with meaning.  Cryonics also play a big
part, to fuzz the line between life and death just as dreams and
reality are confounded and confused.
The Hitchcock thing is a conscious embrace -- an homage, you
would say, that Amenabar overtly acknowledges when at the end his hero
is teetering on the ledge of a skyscraper and says "I forgot, I get
vertigo."

Title
Review for Violon rouge, Le (1998)
"The Red Violin" does for the violin what "Babette's Feast" did
for food.  It draws you in with such visual beauty and extravagant
lushness that you lose yourself in the sheer sensual pleasure of it,
even when -- unlike "Babette's Feast" -- it spirals over the top into
Ken Russell territory.  "The Red Violin" is like a can't-put-down
bestseller, enthralling even through its moments of guilty pleasure.
In a 17th century workshop, a master violin-maker (Carlo Cecchi)
crafts his masterpiece: a near-perfect instrument, which he will give
as a gift to the son he is expecting.  His very pregnant wife (Irene
Grazioli) sits in the kitchen of her home and listens to a tarot
reading from her cook.  The future the old woman tells is puzzling,
full of travel, adventure, romance, and danger.  As the movie spins
on, it quickly becomes apparent that some astral wires got crossed;
the predictions aren't for the woman, but the violin.
The film, written by director Francois Girard and actor Don
McKellar (who previously collaborated, along with cinematographer
Alain Dostie, on "32 Short Films About Glenn Gould"), uses as a frame
a Montreal auction house's sale of the legendary Red Violin, so named
for its unusual reddish varnish.  This lost treasure has been recently
rediscovered and authenticated by American expert Charles Morritz
(Samuel L. Jackson).  As the dark-hued instrument hesitantly swings
into view on its auction house panel and tension mounts with the
bidding, the story keeps reaching back to a succession of owners -- an
Austrian monastery, a Viennese child prodigy (6-year-old Christoph
Koncz ), a band of gypsies, a 19th century British virtuoso (Jason
Flemyng) and his passionate mistress (Greta Scacchi, naked again!)
Then it's off to the Mysterious East for this tough little number,
where it languishes in a pawnshop, survives China's Cultural
Revolution, and finally makes its way to our auction in a consignment
of decadent Western instruments put on the block to raise a little
decadent Western currency for the People's Republic.
There are, to be sure, moments of cheesy excess at which you can
only grin -- Flemyng lying nude and stroking the neck of the
instrument protruding from between his legs -- but that's all part of
the fun.  The ending is a bit hard to swallow.  But there are moments
of music so exquisite they make you weep.  The magnificent score is by
John Corigliano, and Joshua Bell performs the violin solos with the
London Philharmonic under the direction of Esa-Pekka Salonen.
"The Red Violin" won't win over all the critics.  But audiences
will love it.  It's a real page-turner.

Title
Review for Moulin Rouge! (2001)
The first ten minute of Moulin Rouge are a bit unsettling.  It's 
like arriving at a party where everyone is at least three drinks ahead 
of you.  They're all feeling giggly and hilarious and you're wondering 
what the hell you're doing there.  But as you're fumbling for your keys 
and mumbling your excuses, the spirit of the occasion starts getting to 
you.  And then, what a party! 
Nominally the action is set in and around Paris's legendary Moulin 
Rouge at the end of the 19th century, but the real setting is in the 
romantic imagination.  Director Baz Luhrmann (Strictly Ballroom, William 
Shakespeare's Romeo + Juliet) and production designer Catherine Martin 
have created an opulent digital fantasy of Montmartre, and peopled it 
with a wild and crazy cast of characters. 
The narrator is Christian (Ewan McGregor), who functions as the 
Christopher Isherwood of this cabaret, and his Sally Bowles is the 
beautiful courtesan and Moulin Rouge diva Satine (Nicole Kidman).  The 
role of Master of Ceremonies is manned by Jim Broadbent (Topsy-Turvy) as 
Zidler, the impresario with a bluster of toughness and a heart of mush.  
Christian has come to Paris to be a writer, and he soon falls in with a 
crowd of Bohemians led by that zany little painter Toulouse-Lautrec 
(John Leguizamo) who hang out at the Moulin Rouge.  Christian is swept 
up by their credo of "truth, beauty, freedom and love," (the summer of 
1899, like another season seven decades later, was apparently a "summer 
of love,") and he lets himself be drafted to write a musical 
extravaganza for Satine and the Moulin Rouge.
He falls for Satine, and she for him - beneath the rouge and 
provocative costumes beats an honest, loving heart - but the course of 
true love is complicated by disease (she has a nasty cough, and it 
leaves ominous spots of blood on her handkerchief) and economics (a 
musical, even in 1899, could not be mounted for a song.) 
Enter the wicked Duke of Worcester (Richard Roxburgh), who wants to 
bankroll the show and bedroll its star.  And so it goes - dissembling 
and stolen moments, agony and ecstasy, sacrifice, villainy, and heroism, 
all building to a romantic climax.
But the story is only a small part of the story.  Moulin Rouge is 
about rapture, and the rapture explodes from every pore of this glossy 
reinvention of the musical.  Luhrmann has packed it with a pot-pourri of 
 20th-century hits, and from the moment Christian extemporizes Elton 
John's "Your Song" for his admiring new pals, the movie stakes out a 
roller-coaster course that invites you to hang on for a wild ride or 
bail out then and there while the getting is good.
The pop flows like a barrel of weasels, with songs like "Diamonds 
Are a Girl's Best Friend", "The Sound of Music", "Roxanne", "Lady 
Marmalade", "All you Need is Love", and a hilariously saturnine 
rendition of Madonna's "Like a Virgin" sung by Broadbent.  McGregor 
strikes the right note of puppydog lovesickness and earnest pluck as 
Christian, and Kidman is irresistible in a performance that will make 
you forget all about Tom Cruise.  But the biggest star is Luhrmann, who 
stages this lollapalooza of an entertainment like a man deeply in the 
grip of hallucinogenic drugs.
Above, beneath, and throbbing through all the flash is the 
unabashed romanticism that is at the core of most great musicals.  It's 
driven home by the coda that reappears throughout the movie, from Nat 
"King" Cole's 1948 hit "Nature Boy":
"The greatest thing
"You'll ever learn
"Is just to love,
"And be loved
"In return."     

Title
Review for Amores perros (2000)
Directed by Alejandro Gonzalez Inarritu
Screenplay by Guillermo Arriaga (from his novel)
     The movie opens with a high-speed car chase through the crowded 
streets of Mexico City. A wounded dog lies bleeding on the back seat of 
the pursued vehicle.  The chase ends in a two-car collision that's 
horrific even by our jaded moviegoing standards.  And from that deadly 
intersection we move back and forward in time, following three separate 
stories of dogs, love, and violence that occasionally brush up against 
each other.
     Though the end credits assure us that no dogs were hurt in the 
making of this film, it will still test the sensibilities of animal 
lovers.  At the very least, a few dogs must have been drugged, or else 
sent for extensive method training at the Canine Actor's Studio.  The 
first story centers on a teenager who earns a nest egg to run away with 
his brother's young wife  by entering his dog in dogfights, which he 
wins until an opponent spectacularly cheats.  The grimy arenas awash in 
fur and blood are likely to be more upsetting to many audiences than the 
human violence, though there's plenty of the latter as well. 
     The second, and least effective, story concerns a supermodel and 
her married lover, and her fluffy little dog Richie who gets stuck 
beneath the polished floor of their new apartment when he dives through 
a hole in pursuit of a ball.  The metaphors run a bit thick here, but 
what undercuts this section most is the unbelievability of the 
characters' responses.
     The last part of the triptych features El Chivo, a man who was once 
a college professor with a wife and small daughter, then a revolutionary 
guerilla, then a convict.  Now he's a homeless bum who makes a sporadic 
living as an assassin, living in filth and shattered illusions in an 
abandoned building with the pack of stray dogs he's taken in.  He yearns 
for a reunion with the grown daughter who thinks he's dead, and he's a 
walking case study in the maxim that no good deed goes unpunished.
     Director Alejandro Gonzalez Inarritu, who grew up in Mexico City, 
sees the love, loyalty, and brutality of dogs mirrored in the lives of 
the people who feed and care for them them.  It's the first theatrical 
feature for Inarritu, but he handles it with a veteran's sureness.  
Comparisons are inevitable with Tarantino's Pulp Fiction, and also with 
Soderberg's Traffic; Inarritu lacks Tarantino's cocky comic swagger, but 
he leaves Soderberg in the dust.  In part he benefits from the use of a 
cast of talented actors unknown here, who create their characters 
without the distraction of recognition.  Best is Emilio Echeverria as El 
Chivo, the hirsute hit man, whose face rivets our attention whenever he 
rambles across the screen.  If  it were Michael Douglas in the role, no 
matter how good he was, a part of our consciousness would be distracted 
by his Michael Douglasness.
     Inarritu set out to explore the social structure of Mexico City in 
this film, and he does it best when he stays in its sprawling 
underbelly, where it's a dog-eat-dog world.  Amores Perros was Mexico's 
entry in the Oscars, and it's a terrific movie - if you can stomach the 
(simulated) dogfights.

Title
Review for Winslow Boy, The (1999)
     Somebody run a DNA test on David Mamet, and fast!  The expletive-
happy  playwright/filmmaker ("Glengarry, Glen Ross", etc.) has produced
a G-rated movie; the  master of painfully self-conscious pseudo-
naturalistic *dialogue interruptus* has turned  out an eloquent period
drama; and it's marvelous.
Mamet has adapted the Terence Rattigan stage play based on a
celebrated British court  case from the early part of this century.  A
boy is cashiered from military school for  stealing.  His father,
convinced of his son's innocence, fights the case first in the school 
and then in the courts, putting a tremendous strain on his family's
financial and emotional  resources, and catching the imagination of an
enthralled British public.  The boy's  suffragette sister champions his
cause though it wreaks havoc with her private life.   Buttons crop up
all over London, songs are written, cartoonists and editorial writers
opine  in newspapers, and even Parliament is tied up with hot debates on
the merits of the  Winslow Boy's situation.  One of London's leading
barristers takes an interest in his case -- and inevitably, past initial
friction, in his sister as well.
Nigel Hawthorne ("The Madness of King George") delivers an
extraordinary  performance that should once again land him in the thick
of the Oscar race.  His Arthur  Winslow is never quite what you expect. 
Our first impression is of a typically stern  Victorian patriarch, but
he immediately begins extending that character with humor,  shyness,
irony, tenderness, loyalty, and a perseverance that takes a toll on his
health and  family but not on his convictions.
Rebecca Pidgeon, the resident Mrs. Mamet, is Catherine Winslow,
whose  uncompromising dedication to principle has made her a leader in
the battle for women's  rights; when her brother's rights are
compromised, she brings the same cool fire and  perseverance to clearing
his name.  Pidgeon, who made Mamet's stylized dialogue work so  well in
"The Spanish Prisoner", here has a more nuanced character to work with,
and she  takes full advantage.  And there's an equally fine job from
Jeremy Northam ("Emma") as  the great lawyer, a man with the legal mind
of a Clarence Darrow and the dark  handsomeness and tightly controlled
emotional fires of a Heathcliffe.  
The movie is exquisitely lit by cinematographer Benoit Delhomme 
("The Scent of Green Papaya") with a conscious debt to the
contemporaneous American painter John Singer Sargeant.  Mamet's writing
is economical, powerful, and moving, and his direction is controlled and
sure.  He has burnished his characters with such sharp definition that
they move through his atmosphere like planets in the service of an
integrated theory of the universe.  You watch this celestial clockwork
with a profound appreciation of the individual elements, and of the mind
that shaped the whole.           

Title
Review for Me, Myself & Irene (2000)
Written by the Farrelly Brothers  and Mike Cerrone
     When your comic inventiveness runs to a guy crapping on his 
neighbor's lawn or commandeering a suck at the breast of a nursing 
mother, you'd better have a helluva comic actor to bail you out.  This 
must have been the game plan of the Farrelly Brothers, looking to ride 
the wave of their gross-out blockbuster There's Something About Mary.  
They hired Jim Carrey, filmdom's highest-priced comedian, and gave him a 
script that could have been written during recess at junior high.  The 
guy does his best, but it's like bailing with a sieve.
     Carrey leaps, he crawls, he slithers, he rubber-faces, he crashes 
through windows and tumbles down embankments, he even drops his pants 
for that revenge squat (not the only time he'll lower his trousers in a 
search for laughs), but it's no use; Carrey is funny, but he's not that 
funny.
     He plays Charlie, a mild-mannered Rhode Island highway patrolman.  
His troubles start when he's humiliated on his wedding day by the 
African-American Mensa-president dwarf who chauffeurs the limo.  When in 
the fullness of time his wife produces black triplets, Charlie willingly 
suspends disbelief.  He raises them on Richard Pryor videos, and grown 
up, they become huge louts (Anthony Anderson, Mongo Brownlee, and Jerod 
Mixon) who use "motherfucker" as everything from article to adverb, but 
are actually smart.  When Charlie's wife runs off with the dwarf, he 
sublimates his feelings.  And develops Advanced Delusionary 
Schizophrenia with Involuntary Narcissistic Rage.  In other words, a 
split personality.  His alter ego is Hank, a mean, crude bastard with a 
Dirty Harry swagger who dishes out revenge.  Charlie has medicine to 
keep him bottled up, but when he forgets it, his evil genius bursts 
loose.
     There's a plot.  Irene P. Waters (get it?), played as wallpaper by 
a resigned Renee Zellweger, is a greenskeeper who may know something 
about a nefarious scheme that involves a rich guy and a golf course and 
most of the New York State Police.  It's important enough to have almost 
everyone in the movie except Carrey trying to kill her, but not 
important enough to tell us what it is.  Charlie's supposed to escort 
Irene back to New York and turn her over to the authorities, but when 
the attempts on her life start, he and Hank spring to the rescue, and 
both fall in love with her.
     By the end of this mess I was trying to find places to laugh out of 
sympathy for Carrey, who really tries.  He does some nice 
two-characters-fighting-for-control-of-the-same-body schtick, but Steve 
Martin did it better in All of Me.  He works hard for his $20 million, 
but that sieve just won't hold water.

Title
Review for Wandafuru raifu (1998)
     One of the most endearing and enduring subgenres of cinema is the
peek behind the curtain to a glimpse of the Great Beyond.  The way we
choose to imagine the hereafter tells us a few things about ourselves,
and for the most part we seem to prefer a prosaic, familiar feel to
it.  For a Crossing the Bar Film Festival at home, check the video
store for some of the following: "Green Pastures" (1936), "Our Town"
(1940), "Here Comes Mr.  Jordan" (1941) -- remade as "Heaven Can Wait"
(1978), "Stairway to Heaven" (1946), "Truly, Madly, Deeply" (1990),
"Defending Your Life" (1991)...the list goes on and on, and most of
them are wonderful.
Which brings us to the latest, a Japanese film called, in
Japanese, "Wandafuru Raifu" ("Wonderful Life") and released here as
"After Life".  Writer-director Kore-eda's set-up here is a processing
station at which the newly-dead are politely interviewed by young
bureaucrats sitting at desks in a dingy office building, and asked to
think of one memory that they would like to take with them into
eternity.  Once they have chosen, all other memories of their lives
will be erased.  The memory is then recreated by the staff on film,
using props and makeshift sets that resemble the resources of a very
down-at-the-heels summer stock company.  Everything about this
production is simple and bare-bones, and this leaves room for the
complexity to express itself in the film's ideas.
How do you settle on the one memory?  It's a hell of a choice,
and after watching this movie's wonderful characters grin and scratch
their heads and wrack their brains to come up with the right choice,
you'll find yourself playing the game for the rest of the evening on
your own.

Title
Review for Austin Powers: The Spy Who Shagged Me (1999)
     Mike Myers's follow-up to his enormously successful 60s superspy
hit is relentlessly  and cheerfully tasteless.  To call it sophomoric
would be an insult to sophomores  everywhere.  And to call it funny
would be an understatement.  
     It's not all funny, not by any means.  A lot of toilet humor is
just plain excrescence, and  there's a lot of toilet humor here, as well
as jokes covering the entire lower end of the  comedy spectrum.  But
Mike Myers is a funny guy, and his inspired creations Austin  Powers and
Dr. Evil still have some good miles left in their tread.  He tries a
third persona  here, a fat slob of a Scotsman, who has none of the wit
of the other two and should have  been drowned at birth.
     If you think you might be offended by the movie's crudeness, it's a
good bet you will.   But if you're up to it, there's a lot to laugh at
here.  At the close of Powers I, Austin had  foiled archenemy Dr. Evil
and married the beautiful Elizabeth Hurley.  But marriage isn't  the
swinging superspy's bag, baby, and it's a relief when circumstances
leave him single  and available to the shaggadelic Felicity Shagwell 
(Heather Graham).  The bad doctor  reappears to surprise his son (Seth
Green) on a Jerry Springer show on the theme "My  Father Is Evil and
Wants to Take Over the World".  He then constructs a time-travel 
machine, and, accompanied by his compact clone Mini-me (Verne J. Troyer)
, heads back  to the 60s and steal Powers's mojo, a marrow-like
substance extracted from the agent's  cryogenically preserved body which
provides his irresistible sex appeal and shaggability.  
     The plot is all in the service of the gags.  Product placement
figures shamelessly, as  with Dr. Evil locating his headquarters in a
Starbucks atop Seattle's Space Needle.  There  are good gags, bad gags,
scatological humor, sexually incorrect humor, fat jokes, short  jokes,
penis jokes, breast jokes, lesbian jokes.  Sometimes a joke works once,
and falls flat  when it returns for an encore.  Sometimes once is too
much.  If you're still in your seat  after half an hour, you're probably
in for the long haul. 

Title
Review for General's Daughter, The (1999)
     Just in time for Father's Day, "The General's Daughter" swaggered
onto the big screen last weekend with a heartwarming story about a
dysfunctional father-daughter relationship in the military.  If you
can't say anything nice, my mother taught me, don't say anything at
all, so I'll keep this short.
There's a cast of good actors doing their best with lines like
"She could change a tire, and bake a hell of a key lime pie."  That
line falls to James Cromwell, in his heavy mode here (see
"L.A. Confidential") as the General in a sober scene as he recalls his
beloved murdered daughter.  The daughter is well played by Leslie
Stephanson while she lasts -- we even get to see the tire-changing
scene.  John Travolta is the Army cop investigating her murder, and he
does a better job than the writers have any right to expect with their
dialogue.  Madeleine Stowe as his co-investigator and
once-and-possibly-future love interest is beautiful as always, but
shows few signs of acting.  Most of the rest of the characters are
colonels -- Clarence Williams III (of the original "Mod Squad"), John
Beasley, Timothy Hutton, and James Woods (whose cagey scenes with
Travolta are the best in this whole sorry affair.)  One of these
colonels is in the movie for no discernible purpose other than to be a
surprise bad guy, and you won't have much trouble guessing which.
Early on there's one of those .007 plot-irrelevant action scenes
which explodes and disappears without a trace.  Then it's on to the
sex-and-titillation stuff, which involves your usual
stars-looking-at-porn-with-distaste, and then a particularly vicious
and gratuitous rape scene where the girl is stripped and spread-eagled
to tent pegs, calculated to shock and horrify but still grab the
attention with a nicely backlit breast.  It's the worst kind of sleazy
cinematic pandering.
The whole thing is shot and paced like a bad John Grisham TV
movie.  There's heavy-handed exposition, tortuous plot twists and
connections, and material just plain too ridiculous to turn on the
projector for.  The general's daughter, a captain in Psy-Ops, explains
her work to Travolta: "Mostly we just fuck with people's minds."  In
this movie, our minds never get that lucky.

Title
Review for Ideal Husband, An (1999)
     Marvelous actors wearing beautiful clothes and speaking the
exquisite dialogue of Oscar Wilde; this may not be a recipe for
perfection, but it's as welcome as a cool lemon squash on a sultry
afternoon.
Oscar Wilde's laconic, intricately-plotted drawing room farce
lifts the garment of faultlessness we demand our lovers and leaders
wear, and tickles the feet of clay that lie exposed.  Set on the eve
of the century we're about to shed, it reminds us that scandal in high
places is timeless ("Scandals used to lend charm and interest to a
man; nowadays, they crush him"), and we'd do well to evaluate things
on balance, not in absolutes.  Sir Robert Chiltern (Jeremy Northam of
"The Winslow Boy") is a rising politician, adored by his wife Gertrud
(Cate Blanchett) and noticed by the Prime Minister.  Into this
paradise comes a lovely serpent, Mrs. Chevely (Julianne Moore), who
has possession of an incriminating letter written years earlier by
Chiltern -- a letter which would reveal the one dishonorable blemish
on his spotless public record.  In return for his support in
Parliament of a dubious Argentine canal project in which she has a
financial interest, she will return the letter.
Observing all this, at the story's center, is Lord Arthur Goring
(Rupert Everett).  Goring is Wilde's alter ego, and as such gets most
of the best lines, from the moment he opens his eyes and grumbles that
it will be a busy day "with distressingly little time for either sloth
or idleness" through such classic observations as "To love oneself is
the beginning of a lifelong romance."  Everett, who is fast becoming
one of the screen's most irresistible presences, sails through this
production with the aplomb of a yacht.  With his sleek good looks, and
his inexaustible range of nuance, he is An Ideal Wilde, and a man for
whom the great Oscar would happily have thrown over his beloved Bosie.
Everett's Oscar could well rate an Oscar.
Oliver Parker, who misfired on Shakespeare's "Othello", has done
much better by this giant of English letters.  Despite a few liberties
of which the master might or might not have approved -- tweakings of
story, and the discreet flash of breast and buttock -- he's managed a
thoroughly enjoyable and generally faithful work of Wildeana.

Title
Review for Deep End of the Ocean, The (1999)
Jonathan Richards, THE SANTA FE REPORTER
     The good news is that Ulu Grosbard's adaptation of Jaquelyn 
Mitchard's kidnapping bestseller steers scrupulously clear of the tear-
jerking excesses you might expect. The bad news is it seldom engages your 
emotions.  It's got moments of tremendous tension, and it provides a lot 
to think about.  But it never pierces the place where we feel.  
     The story, for those who have ignored Oprah's exhortation to read 
the book, is about Beth Cappadora (Michelle Pfeiffer), whose 3-year-old 
son Ben disappears from a crowded Chicago hotel lobby while she is 
registering for a high school reunion (it was a very good-looking class.) 
 She's wracked with guilt, and shuts herself off emotionally from the 
rest of her family -- 7-year-old Vincent (Cory Buck), baby Kerry, and 
husband Pat (Treat Williams).  
     And then nine years later, when the family, still miraculously 
together, has moved to Chicago, a neighbor boy named Sam (Ryan Merriman) 
shows up at the door to mow the lawn.  Beth takes one look at him and 
knows: it's Ben.  
     But we're only halfway through the movie, which extends way beyond 
the normal kidnapping story and explores the complexities of what's right 
and what's wrong for all involved when nobody still alive is to blame.  
Like Natalie Wood in John Ford's "The Searchers", the boy has forgotten 
his first family and loves the one he's grown up in.  When he does return,
 he doesn't know them and they don't know him.  "We've missed a lot of 
years," says Pat.
     Grosbard digs around in a cold fire of family and social issues, 
prodding sparks out of the embers.  He keeps us busy with things to 
consider, such as the role of the press, which the family uses to 
publicize and plead when the boy goes missing, and then shuts out when it 
swoops down on them in a feeding frenzy of intrusive questions.  We're 
asked to think about such things as how much grief and guilt is allowed 
and how much becomes excessive when you lose a child.  "You may think 
you're a rotten mother," the detective 
(Whoopi Goldberg) tells Beth, urging her back to her other two kids, "but 
you're the only one they've got."
     But they don't get enough of her, and neither does her husband; a 
big piece has gone with Ben, and though she pastes on smiles and goes on 
living, she's a long way from whole.  
     There's some excellent acting, led by the tightly-wound and wounded 
Pfeiffer, whose early radiance vanishes under her burden of guilt.  
Vincent (as a teenager played with compelling sullenness by General 
Hospital's Jonathan Jackson) has his load of guilt too -- he let go of 
his brother's hand when he was minding him.  And Pat labors under the 
guilt of blaming Beth, though he tries to conceal it.  They're a poster 
family for dysfunctionality.  The trouble is, they're so unable to 
communicate that they fail to communicate with us as 
well.  
     Grosbard doesn't pander to his audience, but he seems to be trying 
so hard not to that he skips along the surface of this story, hurrying 
from this scene to that, telling us with edgy coolness what's at issue 
and what's at stake, but never bringing us in to share it.
