Authors
Matthew Brissette
Number of Reviews
14

Title
Review for Lethal Weapon 4 (1998)
Watching Lethal Weapon 4 is a bit like spending two hours with friends
you have not seen in a while. In 
fact  , the producers should have released this movie on the fourth of
July. Why? Because you do the same things you would during an
independence day party with family: chat about old times , complain
about the clock gaining on you and trash a few things after having too
much to drink. To me , and perhaps many others of my generation , Riggs
and Murtaugh are like old pals that we grew up with. 
There are many franchises in Hollywood but the Lethal Weapon series is
the one I grew up on. So I hope you will forgive this reviewer for not
being as impartial as he should be. I was not there for the birth of the
Bond franchise , Friday the 13th or Freddy franchises but I was
definately there for the first Lethal Weapon. Thus , when you consider
all the movies that I want to see at the top of the box office this
summer...I guess you could say LW4 my sentimental favorite. 
I'd like to start of this review by saying that you should not let the
trailers fool you. The scene , you know which one I mean , that you have
all seen a dozen times in the trailers caught me off guard. I had seen
it many times and , quite frankly , it was starting to bore me. Let me
tell you , what you see in the promos is only half of this scene. There
is even more to the explosion that what you might think. 
With that out of the way , LW4 is the second best movie I have seen this
summer. Mind you , number one is The Truman Show and that is hard to
beat. The X-Files is third on my list. I have a feeling The Mask of
Zorro is the only real threat to this list's order. Anyway , LW4 is not
the best in the series , it's not even second best. It's not as bad as
three ( which was still pretty damn good , mind you ) but not as good as
two. 
What really restrains this movie from becoming great is the plot. We all
know that LW4 was rushed through production to fill the void left by
Superman this summer , so it's kind of hard to know who to blame for
this. Don't worry too much , the movie's story is still good , better
than I expected after reading so many bad reviews , but it lacks the
edge of the previous installments and sometimes takes the easy way out.
The bad guy this time is Jet Li. Wanna know why he's called Jet? Cause
he moves at Mach 5 , that's why! And for somebody who as never played a
bad guy , well , he's pretty darn scary at times. ( Major spoilers
follow , look away if you do not want to know , something wicked this
way comes...boogie boogie boogie!...sorry...)
However , the problem with such good and nearly invincible bad guys (
hell , even our heroes say they can't beat him ) is that filmakers will
almost always kill them is the cheapest possible way. Just before the
final confrontation between our heroes and Jet , Riggs and Murtaugh
actually think that maybe they should just walk away from this one. ( I
know , I know...it does not sound like them but wait until you have seen
the movie and it will all make sense ) 
So , at the last possible moment and after and lengthy ass whupping ,
Mel Gibson just happens to find a fallen machine gun and proceeds to
fill our bad guy full of lead. Can anybody say cheap? Luckily , the just
mentioned ass whupping makes up for this lackluster ending. Ever feel
like the Lethal Weapon series as gone soft? That it's not as violent as
the first two flicks? Fear not , this three way battle makes up for all
of it. 
Before we get to some major praise , I must mention the only other thing
that bothered me about LW4. I believe it is called Mortal Kombat
syndrome , in other words: too many characters too fast. Chris Rock's
role is so damn small that I really do not understand what his name is
doing next to the real stars. He is there for less than ten minutes ,
never really does anything , never really says anything except for one
funny scene with Joe Pesci...heck , they could have cast an unknown and
it would not have made much of a difference.
Rene Russo is fine and her presence never really bothered me , however ,
in this one she becomes a useless sub-plot instead of the ass kicking
broad we came to love in LW3. Joe Pesci , while laugh out loud funny ,
is given wayyyyy too much screen time. I went to see the boys , Riggs
and Murtaugh. 
All this aside , LW4 is the funniest of the LW series. If you have not
seen the previous ones you will miss several insider jokes. The end
credits are the most orginal thing I have seen in a while , instead of
the usual scrolling credits we get a photo album filled with pictures of
the cast and crew. While quite nice , it felt too much like a goodbye
rather than an ending and got me thinking that this could really be the
last LW. 
The action scenes are quite spectacular and never did I feel the need to
scream out "Oh come on!!!!" because this is Riggs and Murtaugh and we
expect these kinds of things from them. Anybody walking in expecting the
opposite will hate this movie. It's not as over the top as , say ,
Armageddon. Armageddon was one big stunt while LW4 as to make the most
of several smaller stunts. 
All in all , Mel and Danny were born to work together , Pesci is still
funny as Leo "okay okay okay" Gets , Chris Rock is the living definition
of redundant , Rene Russo is just there for the ride and Jet Li rules
whenever he is on screen. 
Rating: 4 stars out of five for the chance to hang out with the boys one
more ( last? ) time , a weak script , the best villain of the year ( the
iceberg does not count ) , the chance to play Where in the movie is
Chris
Rock? and the best fight scene in recent memory.

Title
Review for X Files, The (1998)
I think the first thing this reviewer should mention is wether or not I
am a fan of The X-Files. First , let me assure you that no prior
experience with the series is required to fully enjoy this movie. The
producers are not stupid , making a movie just for fans of the series is
not profitable. You have to reach for a larger audience. Therefore , the
movie is quite user-friendly. Altough , non-fans will only fail to
understand certain emotions behind the looks many characters exchange.
But fear not , Duchovny and another man later on provide more than
adequate background info on what is going on. You will never feel as if
you just walked in on the third act of some great opera. 
In any case , the answer is no. I am not a fan of The X-Files , I only
watch it when nothing else is on and I prefer Millennium. However ,
since the Fox network as been so kind as to air several key episodes for
several weeks before the movie's opening weekend I took that opportunity
to test the movie. I taped all of these episodes and watched them only
after seing the movie , I am glad to report that I learned nothing new.
Everything you need to know is explained to the viewer by Duchovny and
others. I know I am going maybe a bit too far to make my point but
everybody should get the chance to experience this movie.
Warning: Major Spoilers Follow! Please do not read to fully enjoy this
movie , you must not be able know what is coming , what exactly is over
that hill and what that weird "hummm" sound is all about. You have been
warned.
The X-Files is what a summer should be. Exciting , scary , great special
effects ( unlike other summer movies the effects do not take over the
movie and are only there when it is really necessary ) and good
performances. This is coming from a guy who thinks David Duchovny is the
human equivalent of a wooden plank. From start to finish , this movie
does not let go of you. When I compare it with last summer's movies the
best way to describe it would be : take the excitement and great score
from Face/Off and the deadly use of sound from Event Horizon. 
This flick is scary , not in a B movie kind of way where you always know
where and when the critter will jump at our heroes. In fact , the first
time the critter in this movie makes an apperance it is totally out of
the blue. You might as well bring ear plugs because this thing is
louuuudd! The last time a monster scared me that much was when I first
saw Aliens as a six year old kid. You know , when you are affraid to put
your feet on the floor because the creature might be under the chair ,
or when you keep trying to cover your throat with your shirt? 
So yeah , the X-Files is scary. And guess what? You never even have to
see the monster but your imagination works overtime and it sure beats
having to watch a flawed , computer generated , Babyzilla , it looks
like you could walk right through it not even scarier than your grandma
in undies type of monster. Do not think that The X-Files is a monster
movie. In fact , the creature is there for maybe three minutes total.
No , The X-Files is definately a Mulder episode of the series. Scully is
at his side , of course , but Gillian Anderson gets maybe half the
screen time. She has a couple of good scenes with Duchovny , but she
gets kidnapped during the last half hour of the movie so she does not
get to do much. No , this is Mulder's time in the spotlight. 
By now , you have heard of the scene where Mulder "showers" Independence
Day. If you have not then I will not spoil it for you , let's just say
that due to recent events Mulder should be "showering" Godzilla instead.
To those of you wondering if Mulder discovers that the truth is indeed
out there...who cares!? If he did find it the series would over anyway
so what are you complaining about? 
The dialogue in interesting and the director is marvelous. The camera is
almost always looking over the shoulder of our heroes so we feel as if
we are right there with them when they open a door or climb a hill. The
script is spotless , every thing that happens happens for a purpose. If
you are confused by something , do not worry because it will all become
clear later on but , and I cannot stress this enough , PAY ATTENTION!!!
Unlike most summer movies , the dialogue is twice as important as the
effects. Miss one vital piece of information and , like most people who
talk during movies , you will go home and tell all your friends how this
movie made no sense. Also , to those people who need to go to the
bathroom during movies...DON'T! The person who watched the movie with me
had to go twice and twice she missed an important conversation.
There is no time to take a breather between scenes because , again
unlike most summer movies ( Godzilla anybody? ) The X-Files does not
need to fill scenes between the suspense and the action with useless
subplots , every scene is crucial and serves a purpose. Who needs to see
the blond chiouaoua have a "big emotional scene" between Godzilla
attacks? 
So far this summer I have seen only one movie who ranks higher on my
list of movies I'd recommend and that is the Truman Show but it only
wins by a nose. But The Truman Show is not what I would call a summer
movie , The X-Files is. What more do you ask from a summer movie other
than the chance to be excited? Cool effects? It's got some. Pulse
pounding? Hell yes! 
Strangely enough , I think that fans of the series will hate this movie
while non-fans will have a good time. It does not provide answers to the
show's many questions , the status quo remains nearly the same and , no
, Mulder and Scully do not get together. 
Rating: Four and a half out of Five stars for the best movie yet this
summer , several jump right out of your seat thrills , many "Whoah , I
never saw that one coming!" moments , four "Holy Shit , where the hell
did that come from" and one heck of an ending. 
You may wonder where this movie lost half a star. Well , I swore never
to give a movie the full five stars so I had to find something about The
in his ice truck , the tracks it leaves in the snow behind him go on for
several miles but then they just stop. It's pretty obvious the film's
makers drove the truck for several miles to give the appearance that
Mulder had been driving for a long time , but in the end it looks like
Mulder just dropped from the sky and started driving. 

Title
Review for Halloween H20: Twenty Years Later (1998)
There are more classic lines in horror movies than in any other genre.
"I'll be right back , don't start without me!" comes to mind. Or how
about "Everybody stay calm!" and "Is somebody in there?" Classic lines
of dialogue , but the the award for best line ever in a horror movie
simply must go to Adam Arkin for his: "That's horrible! Take off your
clothes." 
Unfortunately , that little tibbit from Halloween : H20 is the only
thing you'll remember about this movie years from now. Before going any
further I have to get this off my chest , mostly because it's one of the
few good things I have to say about H20 : if you can stand a full hour
of bad acting , half a dozen false alarms , several cheap "it was just a
cat , dog , bird , man , girl , car , bell , phone , door , window ,
glass...etc etc..." moments...then you can look foward to a thirty
minute long cat and mouse chase between Laurie Strode and Mike Myers. Is
it worth that long a wait? Yes. Barely. 
H20's final half hour contains more truly scary scenes than during the
entire length of Scream 2. No , that's not quite right : H20's final
half hour contains more truly CREEPY scenes. There are no jump out of
your seat scares but you will feel the hairs on the back of your neck
rise up. Micheal is more frightening than he as been in years , this is
definately not a guy you would want coming after you. Fans of the horror
genre , I include myself in that clique , will get a good vibe from
seing Jamie Lee Curtis once again in the genre that made her famous. 
Luckily , she manages to hold the movie together for all the other
actors. The actor playing her son does a decent enough job , nothing
spectacular but at least I found him less annoying than the other teens.
This brings up an important question : why is it that psycho killers
always go after teens? As a teen myself , I find that pretty annoying.
Why should they always pick on us?! 
Once , just once , I'd like to see ol' Jason or Michael go wacko in a
retirement home or one of those places in florida where old guys and
gals go. Stop picking on us! Anyway , it's not really that much of a
problem since you will want most of these teens dead anyway. People
often complain that horror movie teens are way too dumb...that's the
point! That way you don't feel too bad when they get chopped to pieces. 
I'm speaking of Michelle Williams , of course. Will somebody tell me
what's wrong with her cheeks? 
( No , not those cheeks you perverts...)  She looks like she swallowed a
pair of balloons! And what's up with those eyebrows anyway? Yuck. Anyway
, she is one of those Dawson's Creek kids. That should tell you enough
about her acting.
Adding to the babe factor , an important factor in any good scary movie
, is Jodi Lyn O'Keefe. I wanted to hate her but her character gets to
die during H20's scariest scene , an exciting busboy chase , so she gets
brownie points for dying in a cool way. Boy , I bet Nash is gonna drive
the cuda right up Michael's butt when he hears what he did to Cassidy.
( If you don't get that one then you must not watch Nash Bridges. So
don't think about it too much. Moving on...)
Adam Arkin is wasted in a thankless role , maybe he took the role
because he wanted the chance to have Jamie Lee Curtis feed him some
candy. ( You'll know it when you see it. ) LL Cool J provides a little
comic relief , usually this type of character gets to die in some heroic
way in horror movies. In H20? Ever hear of friendly fire? 
H20's biggest weakness is it's lack of any real surprise and several
plot holes. Of course the mother and her child don't get killed ,
children under the age of ten never get killed. See any previous
Halloween or Friday The 13th. Of course Jamie Lee does not hide in the
closet , that's why they showed us that flashback at the beginning of
the movie. 
Can somebody explain this to me : the producers asked us to forget any
Halloween sequel after number 2 
( gladly! ) and told us that H20 is the only real sequel to Halloween 2.
Here's my problem : in Halloween 2 , Doctor Loomis dies in a blaze along
with Myers. Of course ,  Loomis was back in four-six with "serious
burns" but 3 to 6 never happened according to the producers. Thus ,
since Loomis is in fact dead since number 2 , why does a police man in
the doc's house  , twenty years later ,  says that doc loomis died "a
few years ago" and that he was living with a nurse?
How does it end , you ask? Badly. H20 does the unthinkable : it actually
kills it's monster! No , no , no...for real this time! I doubt even ol'
Mike Myers can repair a severed head. I actually felt bad for the guy.
Sniff. Final analysis: I was fast feeling asleep near the end of the
first house but my pulse was doing the rumba in my chest for the final
confrontation.
Rating: Three and a half stars out of Six for the chance to hear that
catchy theme one more time , a kick ass Jamie Lee Curtis , a thrilling
conclusion , overwhelmingly bad acting by the supporting cast , one butt
ugly blonde ( those eyebrows...those
cheeks....ewwww....must...resist...urge to pop....her...cheeks...) and a
"really big kitchen knife". 

Title
Review for Sphere (1998)
If there is a lesson to be learned from Sphere , it's that sometimes
less is...well , less is sometimes not a good idea for a potential
blockbuster. Not that Sphere enters that esteemed category , oh no , far
from it. Add to this the fact that , weeks in advance , i was preparing
myself to be sorely disappointed by this flick. I am happy to report
that all those weeks of mental preparation and intense meditating have
paid off...these excercises have softened the blow i received upon
learning that this movie is perhaps the biggest rip-off since i bought a
Beta video all those years ago. (The horror , the horror...)
As with all Michael Crichton adaptation it is safer to stick with the
novel , which just happens to be one of his best. Please god , tell me
why Hollywood feels the need to rip open and tear out the heart of every
good novel it plans on filming , i need to know. Why! WHY! Of course , i
know that some scenes from certain novels are impossible to film , that
some scenes need to be left on the cutting room floor because the movie
might run too long. Ok , fine. But i get the feeling the editor went a
little overboard with the scissors this time. 
(Warning , minor spoilers ahead. But nothing you haven't already deduced
from the trailers.)
A perfect example of the destruction left in the wake of the psycho
editor (or the accountant who kept decreasing the budget) is what is
supposed to be a thrilling giant squid attack. Well , at least it was
thrilling in the book , there the monster from the deep kept ramming and
squeezing the undersea habitat. Kool. Now , Hollywood knows giant
squids. Hollywood as done giant squids. So how come we do not get to see
the fucking squid!!! All the elements are there , the hull is buckling ,
glass is cracking , the power is dropping and things are bursting into
flames and exploding...normal behavior during a giant squid attack.
A few years ago NBC did a mini series called The Beast which had a giant
squid. If NBC can do a (semi) convincing squid why can't a major studio
like Warner Brothers even show us one??? Oh sure , we see it's outline
on the radars when it is coming but that is it. No tentacles , no great
big menacing eyes...nothing. Not one sucker.
Except for any poor fool who paid to see this movie.
Later on , somebody asks if "you liked the giant squid"? 
I'll leave my reaction to your fertile imaginations.
In fact , the entire set of special effects (or lack of ) leaves
something to be desired. The Sphere itself is , for lack of a better
term , liquid metal. Yawn...been there , done that. The submarines and
the spacecraft are no better than your average Seaquest episode and
except for one gorgeous explosion near the end , the effects are
forgettable.
Ditto the cast , which is a shame since these are all actors i like.
Dustin Hoffman makes grand gestures when he talks and squirms like a
dying cockroach when a sea serpent climbs up his leg. Mind you , i'd be
doing the same thing...but better. Sam de Man breezes through his role ,
i know he can be great so i'll forgive him for this
performance...eventually. Sharon Stone is a bit better than usual ,take
it as you wish. 
My reaction to their performances is due to their lack of reactions.
Person just died , pass the bagels. Giant squid attack (hehehe) causing
two more deaths , heck , let's play cards. Yes i know that's not what
they 
do , but they might as well have.
The camerawork is so erratic i could not tell what was going on half the
time. This is supposed to be exciting. I have to suppose that a headache
is the price to be for being excited that much. And finally , the
pacing. The movie keeps jumping from one scene to the next without any
sort of "while he was busy trying to enter the Sphere we were cooking
muffins". No sir , instead we get "say , i really wanna get in the
Sphere BING! i'm there".
Rating: 1 and a half stars for Dustin Hoffman in a wet t-shirt (if you
like that sort of thing you can add a star) and a less than convincing
giant squid (ladies and gentlemen , the amazing invisible giant squid ).
Warning: Exciting scenes in this movie might cause coma.

Title
Review for Alien: Resurrection (1997)
I was six years old when my parents dragged me to see Aliens. Now , I
had seen the original but since I was probably still drooling back then
I really did not know what to expect from it's sequel. I think my
parent's were trying to get rid of me early by scaring me to death ,
that's the only possible explanation for making a child watch Aliens in
a dark room during the first days of surround sound. You've all heard
the expression "traumatic experience" , well to this day I cannot watch
Aliens alone or in the dark. This is not meant as a joke , I start to
breathe faster , for some reason I need to swallow every ten seconds and
I keep grabbing hold of whatever is available. 
For some people it's going into the cellar , for others it's spiders ,
for me it's James Cameron's Aliens. Imagine being immersed in a dark so
total that closing your eyes could provide the same effect , then
imagine knowing that something is in there with you , stalking you ,
circling just out of your reach. The room is chilly , the wind is more
annoying than cold but it still makes the small hairs between your
shoulders stand up in alarm. 
All the blood as left your legs , you feel like two empty paper bags are
the only things holding you up . You feel unsure where exactly to place
your arms: by your side , maybe you should cross them , you cannot even
see them. You are in desperate need of air , you've stayed too long
underwater and it is like some great weight is pressing down on your
lungs.  You try to force air in but your heart is beating too fast to
keep any precious oxygen inside you. 
The noise is terrifying , a great orchestra drum is beating between your
breasts. You clutch your heart , you feel as if your hand is the only
thing keeping your heart from bursting out of your chest. You are
affraid to look to either side of you , you are affraid to to expose the
naked flesh of your neck to the other side as you turn. You fall to your
knees , bending in half , praying for some warmth and silence. Then
everything stops , your heart beats normally , breath comes easily , you
feel safe and pure bliss overwhelms you...
....that's when a cold pair of hands grabs you by the throat from behind!
It's a bit melodramatic , I know. But it's the best I can describe what
it is like for me to watch this movie. Especially with surround sound ,
I remember I kept looking all around because I thought the monsters were
in the theater with us. When Michael Biehn lifts the grate above the
marines and swings his flashlight around I was also looking up. 
All of this just so you can better understand my disapointment at the
direction the series has taken. The problem with the Alien franchise is
that it as not followed a natural progression. Explanation: first we had
one alien and several humans with practically no weapons. It seemed only
natural to follow that up with several hundred aliens and tough marines
armed with state of the art gear. Then something went wrong , instead of
moving up we took a step back. Afer experiencing the onslaught of a
hundred aliens plus their queen it was kind of a downer to just having
one running after us.
And without weapons the possibility of maximum carnage was very limited.
Plus , for the first time in the franchise's history the supporting cast
was extremely weak. I wanted Lance Henricksen and Michael Biehn to have
survived to pod's crash. Heck , I wanted to see more of the Ripley/Newt
relationship. After having taken the fight to the ennemy in Aliens it
was sad to just being able to run away and hide in Alien 3. 
Which brings us to the latest instalment in the franchise: Alien
Resurection. Let me start off by saying the director was wrong for this
project. Why? Everything scene he shoots is too bright. Even the dark
corridors of the ship aren't dark. Part of what makes the alien lethal
is that you cannot see it coming , but now we can clearly see down the
length of every corridor which makes it hard for a surprise attack. Also
, in the three previous flicks we only caught glimpses of the creature ,
when we saw completely it was only for a few seconds.Now , the Alien is
fully exposed in most scenes and it becomes just another B movie
monster.
The first flick was about a hundred years into the future , the second
was ninety , I think , the third was a couple of decades and this latest
is , again I think , a hundred. Now , we can travel through space ,
clone entire persons and establish colonies on distant worlds but guns
still need bullets? Oh sure , they had small lasers but come on...
Now we move on to Alien Resurection's biggest fault: Ripley , the
original ( well , okay , her clone ,  but let's not split hairs ) psycho
bitch. What people want to see is Ripley tape two big ass guns together
and lob grenades at aliens and alien eggs , oh , and let's not forget
the flamethrower. 
But , unfortunately , in this movie Ripley is not pro-active she is only
re-active. Meaning she is just running away with the others instead of
doing what we want to see her do: open up a can of whup ass on them
critters. I know that she is not the original Ripley but instead of
leading the men to safety she just hangs back and offers some less than
inspiring comments once in a while. "What did you do?" he asks. "I
died." So much for morale.
Another little nitpick: the alien's acid can melt through a dozen
bulkheads but if you get a face full of the stuff you just get a not so
nasty burn? Right , as if you'd still have a head after that. While we
are bitching: the "use the airlock to get rid of the final alien" bit
got old back in Aliens. Movies are supposed to have big , explosive
endings ( again I must mention Aliens in regards to this comment ) ,
instead we get a really fake looking atmospheric re-entry. 
Rating: Half a star out of 5 for a legend in the breaking , bad CG
effects ( mostly when the Alien jumps out of the water , ugh! ) and the
half of star is for the ok but not great underwater chase.

Title
Review for Starship Troopers (1997)
Starship troopers is a weird movie. Not weird as in "giant bugs want to
take over the unniverse and we are first on the list" weird...that i can
buy. It is weird because it uneasily balances two very different genres.
First there's the "look at me , i'm so good looking" genre from 90210
and then there's the "let's kick some alien butt" genre from ID4. 
Any fool will tell you that these two items do not go together...but the
director , Paul Verhoeven , is not just any fool. He's a fool with a 100
million dollar budget. Unfortunately , he could not spare a few bucks to
buy a pencil and some paper to write a decent script. Money is power and
power corrupts. While wtaching this movie i swear i could sometimes hear
Paul screaming "More effects! More gorgeous people!" and laughing
sadistically in the background. 
Hell , i'd be laughing too if i could get away with making a 100 million
dollar movie for the 90210 crowd...while making sure it contains enough
violence to attract the adults. Teens will love this film because of the
familiar surgically enhanced faces of their favorite tv actors and
adults will adore it for the outrageous violence.  The cast is straight
out of the Aaron Spelling school of acting , 'nuff said.
On the bright side of things it 's also the most fun i've had while
watching a movie since Men In Black. But i would be remiss in my duties
as a critic if i did not say that Starship Troopers is the most godawful
piece of crap i've ever seen. 
My question to Paul Verhoeven is this:"What happened?"
He used to make great movies like Total Recall , Robocop , Basic
Instinct... So , at the risk of repeating myself , what happened? 
Melrose Place happened , Baywatch happened...and this disease is
spreading to hollywood directors. I realized i was watching an episode
of 90210 during the scene when the prettiest girl in class barfs during
biology. Or when we find out our hero is in a love triangle. Or when he
loses the first girl , gets close with the second , she dies and he
jumps right back into the arms of the first. 
I know this is what happens in the book but the directing is so bad it
feels like a bad soap opera. The actors are wooden planks that can run
and fire weapons. Except for Michael Ironside and , to a small degree ,
Dina Meyer. How bad are the rest? One girl gets stabbed through the
shoulder by a bug. She has a hole the size of a baseball in her shoulder
but , hey! , she's a tough cookie so the next second she's firing her
rifle and blasting bugs with said shoulder. 
It's not all bad. In fact , it's pretty damn fun even amazing at times.
The effects and incredible and there is nothing more satisfying then
killing bugs. So , in conclusion...

Title
Review for Rainmaker, The (1997)
If there is one thing we can expect from a movie based on a John
Grisham novel it's star power. Tom Cruise , Julia Roberts , Gene Hackman
and Sandra Bullock have each had their turn portraying a John Grisham
character. Therefore it comes as a pleasant surprise that The Rainmaker
offers a cast of relative unknowns and some little seen actors. 
There is a lesson here: just because an actor costs 20 million it does
not mean he's worth his weight in gold. The cast of The Rainmaker is
like a breath of fresh air from a bunch of fresh faces. Matt Damon
donates a wonderful performance which will most likely kick his career
into overdrive. Heroic yet flawed , he is an imperfect hero , and
underdog for the audience to cheer for.
Mickey Rourke offers his usual quiet intensity and makes the most of
his five minutes of screen time. Clare Danes is the love interest /
battered wife / useless sub-plot only in the movie because people cannot
watch an entire movie without at least one scene of violence. 
Still , she is cute as a button so we can forgive our hero for
indulging his "knight in shining armor" side. Danny Devito is comic
relief , something that was missing from previous Grisham movies , Jon
Voight is incredibly sleazy , as usual. That's just the main cast ,
let's not forget an incredible supporting cast.
Danny Glover , Roy Schneider , the dying boy and his father whose names
i forget. Not one bad performance during the entire movie. Like in all
John Grisham movies the bad guys are , well , bad. First it was sleazy
lawyers , then a corrupt government and rapists...now we have insurance
companies. Ooooohh , my skin crawls at the mention of the name. 
It is always a good sign when viewers actually boo the bad guys. It
means we actually give a damn about their actions and the consequences
of these. Luckily , we have a lawyer fresh out of law school and an
assistant who flunked the class six times on the side of all that is
good and mom's apple pie. 
Shit. We're screwed. 
Actually they...well i won't give away the ending but it certainly
makes you hate the insurance companies even more. All in all , an
enjoyable movie with a dynamite cast...a cast that probably cost less
than two or three of those bugs in Starship Troopers.

Title
Review for U.S. Marshals (1998)
I do not know what to make of U.S Marshalls. I find myself in the unique
position of hating having loved it. On one side , it's a pretty intense
, pulse pounding movie. Unfortunately , it's many faults prevent us from
really enjoying a potential coronary from all the ecxitement. Case in
point , the image of Wesley Snipes swinging from a building and towards
a moving train while a helpless Tommy Lee Jones looks on is firmly stuck
in our memory. After all , when you've seen the commercial twelve dozen
times , it is kind of hard to forget. In fact , i could have kept my
eyes closed during the whole thing and still i would have known every
little detail of what was going on.
I know what you are thinking , that i am going to rant about how
horrible the trailers and adds for this movie are. Wrong. However , i
simply must know one very simple thing : since the train that Wesley
lands on is going at , oh , ten miles per hour and that from Tommy Lee
's point of view he can keep track of the train for about , oh , 6-7
minutes and that our hero has his trusty radio at his side , a tool he
can use to communicate with the , OH , twenty police cars beneath
him...please , puh-leeze tell me why our hero just watches the fugitive
make a hasty (snicker ) getaway when he has all the tools needed to
catch him???
No matter how bad that sounds , i do not want you to get the impression
that this is a bad movie , far from it. It's just one of "those" movies.
The kind where you do not feel the need to bitch about it on the way
home but you have this nagging suspicion that it something is missing.
What could it be?
The acting , perhaps? Let's examine this aspect of the flick.
I am now even more certain that Tommy Lee Jones is god. Or at least ,
the voice of god. I am quite certain that when i step through the pearly
gates , Tommy Lee Jones will be there to greet me , dressed in a white
robe and glowing like a christmas tree. Or maybe , with that tough but
grampa like voice , he'll say "Welcome to heaven , young man." Because
for some reason , he cannot help but call everybody in the movie either
"kid" or "young man". 
While he will not be winning an oscar this time , his performance is the
movie's strongest point. You know this man has presence when he orders
Snipes to turn around and you can barely stop yourself from obeying.
Speaking of Snipes , an usually very energetic actor , i'm affraid to
report that he is no Harrison Ford. ( Well , who is?) Or , for that
matter , he is no Richard Kimble , the fugitive from the first movie.
At least Mr. Kimble was smart. Our boy Snipes makes several rooky
fugitive mistakes. What kind of moron on the run (now there's a good
title for a sitcom : Morons on the run ) makes contact with his
girlfriend , the same woman who paid his hospital bill a couple of days
ago. "Gee whiz , those pesky marshalls probably forgot to tap my girl's
phone , heck , they probably will not go through all the trouble of
following her day and night just in case she tries to meet with me , no
sirree!" Despite these massive flaws , several impressive stunts ,
action  sequences and a good score redeem , to some small degree , the
movie. I'm glad i saw U.S Marshalls , i liked U.S Marshalls but it will
not be the first movie i rent the week it comes out on video. 
Rating : 2 and half stars out of 4 for Tommy Lee Jones in a chicken
costume ( don't ask ) , several "holy shit i cannot believe how kool
that was" , Tommy Lee Jones in full bad ass mode and one very " saw that
one coming a mile away" ending.

Title
Review for X Files, The (1998)
I think the first thing this reviewer should mention is wether or not I
am a fan of The X-Files. First , let me assure you that no prior
experience with the series is required to fully enjoy this movie. The
producers are not stupid , making a movie just for fans of the series is
not profitable. You have to reach for a larger audience. Therefore , the
movie is quite user-friendly. Altough , non-fans will only fail to
understand certain emotions behind the looks many characters exchange.
But fear not , Duchovny and another man later on provide more than
adequate background info on what is going on. You will never feel as if
you just walked in on the third act of some great opera. 
In any case , the answer is no. I am not a fan of The X-Files , I only
watch it when nothing else is on and I prefer Millennium. However ,
since the Fox network as been so kind as to air several key episodes for
several weeks before the movie's opening weekend I took that opportunity
to test the movie. I taped all of these episodes and watched them only
after seing the movie , I am glad to report that I learned nothing new.
Everything you need to know is explained to the viewer by Duchovny and
others. I know I am going maybe a bit too far to make my point but
everybody should get the chance to experience this movie.
Warning: Major Spoilers Follow! Please do not read , to fully enjoy this
movie you must not be able know what is coming , what exactly is over
that hill and what that weird "hummm" sound is all about. You have been
warned.
The X-Files is what a summer should be. Exciting , scary , great special
effects ( unlike other summer movies the effects do not take over the
movie and are only there when it is really necessary ) and good
performances. This is coming from a guy who thinks David Duchovny is the
human equivalent of a wooden plank. From start to finish , this movie
does not let go of you. When I compare it with last summer's movies the
best way to describe it would be : take the excitement and great score
from Face/Off and the deadly use of sound from Event Horizon. 
This flick is scary , not in a B movie kind of way where you always know
where and when the critter will jump at our heroes. In fact , the first
time the critter in this movie makes an apperance it is totally out of
the blue. You might as well bring ear plugs because this thing is
louuuudd! The last time a monster scared me that much was when I first
saw Aliens as a six year old kid. You know , when you are affraid to put
you feet on the floor because the creature might be under the chair , or
when you keep trying to cover your throat with your shirt? 
So yeah , the X-Files is scary. And guess what? You never even have to
see the monster but your imagination works overtime and it sure beats
having to watch a flawed , computer generated , Babyzilla , it looks
like you could walk right through it not even scarier than your grandma
in undies type of monster. Do not think that The X-Files is a monster
movie. In fact , the creature is there for maybe three minutes total.
No , The X-Files is definately a Mulder episode of the series. Scully is
at his side , of course , but Gillian Anderson gets maybe half the
screen time. She has a couple of good scenes with Duchovny , but she
gets kidnapped during the last half hour of the movie so she does not
get to do much. No , this is Mulder's time in the spotlight. 
By now , you have heard of the scene where Mulder "showers" Independence
Day. If you have not then I will not spoil it for you , let's just say
that due to recent events Mulder should be "showering" Godzilla instead.
To those of you wondering if Mulder discovers that the truth is indeed
out there...who cares!? If he did find it the series would over anyway
so what are you complaining about? 
The dialogue in interesting and the director is marvelous. The camera is
almost always looking over the shoulder of our heroes so we feel as if
we are right there with them when they open a door or climb a hill. The
script is spotless , every thing that happens happens for a purpose. If
you are confused by something , do not worry because it will all become
clear later on but , and I cannot stress this enough , PAY ATTENTION!!!
Unlike most summer movies , the dialogue is twice as important as the
effects. Miss one vital piece of information and , like most people who
talk during movies , you will go home and tell all your friends how this
movie made no sense. Also , to those people who need to go to the
bathroom during movies...DON'T! The person who watched the movie with me
had to go twice and twice she missed an important conversation.
There is no time to take a breather between scenes because , again
unlike most summer movies ( Godzilla anybody? ) The X-Files does not
need to fill scenes between the suspense and the action with useless
subplots , every scene is crucial and serves a purpose. Who needs to see
the blond chiouaoua have a "big emotional scene" between Godzilla
attacks? 
So far this summer I have seen only one movie who ranks higher on my
list of movies I'd recommend and that is the Truman Show but it only
wins by a nose. But The Truman Show is not what I would call a summer
movie , The X-Files is. What more do you ask from a summer movie other
than the chance to be excited? Cool effects? It's good some. Pulse
pounding? Hell yes! 
Strangely enough , I think that fans of the series will hate this movie
while non-fans will have a good time. It does not provide answers to the
show's many questions , the status quo remains nearly the same and , no
, Mulder and Scully do not get together. 
Rating: Four and a half out of Five stars for the best movie yet this
summer , several jump right out of your seat thrills , many "Whoah , I
never saw that one coming!" moments , four "Holy Shit , where the hell
did that come from" and one heck of an ending. 
You may wonder where this movie lost half a star. Well , I swore never
to give a movie the full five stars so I had to find something about The
in his ice truck , the tracks it leaves in the snow behind him go on for
several miles but then they just stop. It's pretty obvious the film's
makers drove the truck for several miles to give the appearance that
Mulder had been driving for a long time , but in the end it looks like
Mulder just dropped from the sky and started driving. 

Title
Review for U.S. Marshals (1998)
I do not know what to make of U.S Marshalls. I find myself in the unique
position of hating having loved it. On one side , it's a pretty intense
, pulse pounding movie. Unfortunately , it's many faults prevent us from
really enjoying a potential coronary from all the ecxitement. Case in
point , the image of Wesley Snipes swinging from a building and towards
a moving train while a helpless Tommy Lee Jones looks on is firmly stuck
in our memory. After all , when you've seen the commercial twelve dozen
times , it is kind of hard to forget. In fact , i could have kept my
eyes closed during the whole thing and still i would have known every
little detail of what was going on.
I know what you are thinking , that i am going to rant about how
horrible the trailers and adds for this movie are. Wrong. However , i
simply must know one very simple thing : since the train that Wesley
lands on is going at , oh , ten miles per hour and that from Tommy Lee
's point of view he can keep track of the train for about , oh , 6-7
minutes and that our hero has his trusty radio at his side , a tool he
can use to communicate with the , OH , twenty police cars beneath
him...please , puh-leeze tell me why our hero just watches the fugitive
make a hasty (snicker ) getaway when he has all the tools needed to
catch him???
No matter how bad that sounds , i do not want you to get the impression
that this is a bad movie , far from it. It's just one of "those" movies.
The kind where you do not feel the need to bitch about it on the way
home but you have this nagging suspicion that something is missing. What
could it be?
The acting , perhaps? Let's examine this aspect of the flick.
I am now even more certain that Tommy Lee Jones is god. Or at least ,
the voice of god. I am quite certain that when i step through the pearly
gates , Tommy Lee Jones will be there to greet me , dressed in a white
robe and glowing like a christmas tree. Or maybe , with that tough but
grampa like voice , he'll say "Welcome to heaven , young man." Because
for some reason , he cannot help but call everybody in the movie either
"kid" or "young man". 
While he will not be winning an oscar this time , his performance is the
movie's strongest point. You know this man has presence when he orders
Snipes to turn around and you can barely stop yourself from obeying.
Speaking of Snipes , an usually very energetic actor , i'm affraid to
report that he is no Harrison Ford. ( Well , who is?) Or , for that
matter , he is no Richard Kimble , the fugitive from the first movie.
At least Mr. Kimble was smart. Our boy Snipes makes several rooky
fugitive mistakes. What kind of moron on the run (now there's a good
title for a sitcom : Morons on the run ) makes contact with his
girlfriend , the same woman who paid his hospital bill a couple of days
ago. "Gee whiz , those pesky marshalls probably forgot to tap my girl's
phone , heck , they probably will not go through all the trouble of
following her day and night just in case she tries to meet with me , no
sirree!" 
Despite these massive flaws , several impressive stunts , action 
sequences and a good score redeem , to some small degree , the movie.
I'm glad i saw U.S Marshalls , i liked U.S Marshalls but it will not be
the first movie i rent the week it comes out on video. 
Rating : 2 and half stars out of 4 for Tommy Lee Jones in a chicken
costume ( don't ask ) , several "holy shit i cannot believe how kool
that was" , Tommy Lee Jones in full bad ass mode and one very " saw that
one coming a mile away" ending.

Title
Review for Dark City (1998)
For about five minutes , Dark City is the most boring experience of
your life: A narrator explains how beings from a distant galaxy are
experimenting on us poor humans to gain better understanding of the
soul. These beings , called strangers , use a technique called "tuning"
to shape reality into whatever fits their purposes. Following this corny
intro , we are introduced to our heroes and villains at such a rapid
fire pace that we fail to become immersed in this film. So yeah , for
five minutes Dark City left me wondering if i should abandon my jumbo
tub o' crispy , threatening to establish a permanent home in my throat
and foul tasting pieces of dried up boogers ( commonly known as popcorn
) to the mercy of the kid kicking the back of my seat.
        Let me tell you , Dark City is the real deal. An expertly woven story ,
more twists and turns than Ronald Reagan 's brow , acting ranging superb
to good , a creepy music score and the coolest special effects in recent
memory. Now i know what you are thinking , that any second from now i
will start singing a song praising the glory of this movie. You might
even suspect i think that Dark City is the second coming of movies.
Eeeenh! Wrong , i am not trying to get more people into theaters to see
this flick , as a matter of fact i happen to think that some people
should stay away from it and stick to more healthy flicks like Titanic
and Good Will Hunting.
        Movies like this cater to a very small audience. Let me put it this way
, if you hated Event Horizon because of it's religious overtones , hated
the Devil 's Advocate because you thought that "it was all a dream" like
some idiots i know and had trouble swallowing Contact because the
possibility of alien life is way over your head...stay away from this
movie. All you will do is walk away from it and tell all your friends
that "it 's so darned stupid". That 's how closed minded most people
are. 
        If you liked to movies mentioned above then you will enjoy Dark City.
Not that the Devil and religion in general are important in this story
but if you can buy that the Devil is here on earth , you have the
necessary requirements to appreciate DC. 
        I will not give away anything more of the plot , just like the trailers
for the movie. If you know too much it will ruin the half dozen
surprises scattered throughout the movie. Suffice it to say , your jaw
will drop to the sticky theater floor more than once. ( Just watch out
for the green stuff on the floors , i hear it 's radioactif. ) In fact ,
i felt that the less than talkative trailers added to the fun i had. Who
needs to see Wesley Snipes jump from the building in the trailer for U.S
Marshalls? Or Bruce Willis save the kid from Mercury Rising before the
train crushes him? 
        But i am moving away from my review. Rufus Sewell stars , for some
reason he reminded me of Luke Skywalker. Especially during his final
confrontation with the head stranger ( strangest stranger? ) who looks a
bit like an unmasked Darth Vader. ( You know , the old dried up prune
look. )
        Anyway , i recommend Dark City over most movies now in theaters ,
except for most of the oscar nominated ones. All in all , one heck of a
good time. 
        Rating: 3 and a half stars out of 4 for creepy bad guys , the best
morphing effects ever , several "now i get it" moments and the single
best , explosive , pulse pounding , Luke versus Vader round three and
there will not be a round four , awesome ending ever.
>From imdb.com  Sat Feb 28 12:36:19 1998
Envelope-to: robh@uk1.imdb.com
Delivery-date: Sat, 28 Feb 1998 06:13:17 +0000
Received: from uk1.imdb.com
        by localhost (fetchmail-4.3.1 POP3 run by robh)
        for  (single-drop); Sat Feb 28 12:36:18 1998
Received: from us1.imdb.com [169.207.1.254] 
        by uk1.imdb.com with smtp (Exim 1.62 #1)
        id 0y8fTu-000356-00; Sat, 28 Feb 1998 06:10:42 +0000
Received: from exim by us1.imdb.com with local (Exim 1.61 #1)
        id 0y8fOP-0001zj-00; Sat, 28 Feb 1998 00:05:01 -0600
To: robh@imdb.com
Subject: Exim rejections US1
Message-Id: 
From: exim 
Date: Sat, 28 Feb 1998 00:05:01 -0600
Status: RO
X-Status: 
1998-02-27 02:21:45 sender rejected:   H=terminator2.xtra.co.nz [202.27.184.2]

Title
Review for Deep Rising (1998)
Deep Rising is one of "those" movies. The kind of movie which serves no
purpose except to entertain us. It does not ask us to think about
important questions like life on other planets or the possibility that
there is no god...screw that , it says boldly , let's see some computer
generated monsters rip into , decapitate and generally cause irreparable
booboos to a bunch of little known actors. Heh! Them wacky monsters ,
gotta love 'em. Of course , since we can rent about a thousand B movies
with the same kind of story , Hollywood must give that little extra
"oumph" to  get people in theaters. That is where Deep Rising fails ,
which is a good thing. Confused? Let me explain:
Despite all them flashy effects and big explosions , Deep Rising is
still , at heart , a good 'ol B movie. Luckily , it's a very good B
movie. The worst cliches in movie history are a B movie's bread and
butter. Therefore , things that would destroy a serious movie actually
help us have a good time while watching a movie of lower calibre. Of
course we know there's a big slimy creature behind that door , that one
person will wander off to be picked off by said monster and we always
know which persons or person will make it out alive. We just don't know
when or how horrible it will be. 
I went to see Deep Rising with my expections low and my tolerance for
bad dialogue high. Imagine my surprise when i discover that Deep Rising
is actually , well , pretty darn funny at times. A funny B movie? Well ,
that's new. These flicks are not supposed to make us laugh. (Except for
a few unintended laughs once a while.) And before you know it , Treat
Williams , Wes Studi and Famke Jansen appear on the big screen. 
Our man Treat is the hero , he'll live. Wes is a staple of B movies , he
is the token victim. We know he'll buy the farm but he will take a few
creeps with him on the way out. Famke is the babe , 'nuff said. There is
also a guy with glasses ( the guy with glasses always dies ) a black
person ( B movie buffs know that the black guy always dies , never fails
) and a very funny , nerdy guy. ( Ah! Comic relief. How can we possibly
explain having to kill him...let him live.)
After the first fifteen minutes i felt right at home. I know who to root
for and who i need to boo too and a gum to chew. (Please kill me.) 
Suffice it to say that for the next hour and a half i jumped out of my
seat a few times , went "ewwww" about a dozen times and nearly had an
orgasm over all the explosions and firepower our heroes were packing.
I'm a man , we nottice these things. All in all , i'd recommend Deep
Rising if you are looking for a good time and care to leave your brain
at the door...but bring your sense of humor and excitement in with you.
The acting is decent , the effects top rate. 
How to best describe it? Put together the jet ski scene from Hard Rain ,
the bug attacks from Starship Troopers , a couple of James Bond like
stunts and all those scenes from Friday the Thirteenth and Freddy where
you keep screaming "don't go there , he's behind you" and you end up
with Deep Rising.
Rating: 3 and 1/2 stars out of 5 for creepy crawly goodness , tight
t-shirts , major firepower and the need to go to the bathroom every
fifteen minutes from seing all that water.

Title
Review for Deep Blue Sea (1999)
Warning: the following contains one MAJOR spoiler. I'm not kidding ,
folks. Read this and you will not be able to properly enjoy Deep Blue
Sea's most effective sequence. I'm talking about one of those "straight
out of the left field , never saw that one coming , holy shit where the
hell did that come from" moments. Really. Trust me on this , this is one
of those scenes that only comes around once or twice per year. One of
those scenes that you will never be able to see coming even if I freeze
frame the film a second before it happens and you sit there trying to
imagine what will happen next for the several hours. Oh yeah , it's a
doozy. If you don't want to know what I am talking about then don't (
please please please ) read any further because I would hate to ruin
this scene for you. Okay , enough of this. Read on if you have already
seen the movie , simply think that I am blowing things out of
proportions or just don't care.
I know what you are thinking. "Oh but Matthew , he just gets eaten
during the movie's last five minutes while saving the lives of the other
survivors." Bite me. You are wayyyy off if that is what you think
happens to Sam. 
The sharks eat Samuel L. Jackson. They eat him somewhere around thirty
minutes into the movie. He's only the second person to die in the movie.
Whoah. Nothing quite says "Nyahahaha , you thought this was just going
to be another lame monster movie...well kiss my ass cuz from now on all
bets are off!" like a flick's only big name star getting chewed into
itty bitty little pieces with about an hour and a half left to the
movie. 
Deep Blue Sea takes every familiar monster movie cliche you can think of
and quite gleefully throws them to the sharks to play with. In other
words , place bets on which group of characters you think are going to
live or die during the course of this movie and be prepared to lose a
whole lot of money. If you still think that you know who will make it
out alive after reading the above paragraphs then you must have read the
script or have psychic powers.
In a summer strangely empty of , well , summer movies , Deep Blue Sea is
like a breath of fresh air , or a refreshing swim in the pool , we might
as well stay nautical. Altough a swim will be the last thing on your
mind after seing this movie , at least bring your annoying kid brother
with you into the water. Might as well have him wear bright colored
swimming trunks while you are at it. Anyway...
 It's not a typical summer when most movies are either romantic comedies
, cartoons , small budget pictures and a lot of movies with little to no
big name stars ( where the hell are Nicolas cage , Sly , Ahnuld , Jim
Carrey , Bruce Willis and Mel Gibson this summer anyway? ) and the only
true summer movies either coming out before the season's official start
( The Matrix ) , right at it's very beginning ( The Mummy ) or were
surefire hits even they opened during the olympic games or the recent
JFK jr. fiasco. ( The Phantom Menace )
DBS is not far , by far , the smartest written movie of the summer but
since this is a popcorn movie that kind of goes without saying. This is
not a movie that you can criticize , it was conceived as a fun filled
way to spend two hours and it had no intentions of being a work of art. 
Now I like to be intelectually stimulated as much as the next guy but
once in a while it feels good to leave your brain at the door. It feels
even better when the movie you are going to see is not a effects filled
unscary bore like The Haunting but a movie with good , earnest
performances , fantastic effects ( a DBS topic that movie critics are
now waging war on , half of them say the effects are flawless , the
other half say they look fake. ) and several genuinely scary scenes ,
something that The Haunting cannot boast to contain.
Granted , director Renny Harlin rips HIMSELF off with a ladder scene
that any Cliffhanger fan will recognize , complete with the very same
camera angles , but the movie cannot be accused of ripping off or
copying jaws in any way , another theme that movie critics are obsessing
about. Aside from a clear homage , it can't really be called a rip off ,
of Jaws during the opening sequence the movie stays carefully clear of
that well worn path. 
Overall , this is the second best movie I have seen this summer and ,
quite frankly , the last movie that I really really really wanted to see
this summer. You know it's not a good summer when your must-see list of
movies is about 10 movies short of last year's. 
Deep Blue Sea: 8.5 out of 10 for the ultimate no-smoking advertisement ,
a shark "arming" itself ( nyehehe! ) , a shark with a very clear
attitude towards long speeches , overall good acting and a new twist on
the guess the next victim game.

Title
Review for Playing God (1997)
Some movies ask you to leave your brain at the door , some movies ask
you to believe in the impossible to really have a good time. Playing God
asks just one simple , eensy , teensy thing so it can fully entertain
you , it's accomplished in just four easy to follow steps: crack open
your skull , scoop out your brain , squish it under your foot several
times and reverse steps two and one. Congratulations , you now have all
the necessary requirements to fully enjoy a whole lot of nothing.
Some movies fail at the box office but you manage to see why the
producers thought it could have been a good movie , others are simply
good ideas that are badly executed. Then there's Playing God , which
enters the esteemed category of movies which seem to have grown from the
union of a drunk director , actors satisfied in the knowledge that this
horrible flick will have no lasting impact on their careers and a bunch
of rip-offs ( or homages as they like to call it ) from other , better
movies that end up looking like an unflushed toilet.
This is a movie that is not just satisfied in ripping off other movies
but feels the need to remind us of that fact every ten minutes. For
example , a gunman bursts into a garden with the two guns in his hands
firing away. This does look moderately kool , but the camera lingers on
the actor for so long you can almost hear the director yelling: "Oooh ,
look look! John Woo! Two guns blazing! Slooooow motion!"
And if that wasn't enough , you can also hear the script grunting under
the effort it must take to try and make every single line of dialogue
sound like something deep and meaningful like in a Tarantino movie. Poor
Timothy Hutton gets to deliver most of the corny lines , you have to
admire the effort he puts into it , this guy deserves better. 
Unlike most movies this one does not suffer from "stupid bad guy"
syndrome , just to make things a little different this time we get
stupid heroes. Example: Duchovny manages to distract a bad guy by making
him go into the bathroom to get some bandages. Now the bad guy is , like
, stoned , man , so he leaves his shotgun next to our hero. ( term used
as loosely as possible )
Survival instincts and a good dose of common sense seems to suggest
grabbing the shotgun , which our hero does , but only after
contemplating it for about thirty seconds. Even when he does grab it he
seems unsure how to hold it , going so far as to actually wonder if he
should place a finger near the trigger. Mind you , I've never fired a
shotgun in my life but believe you me that the bad guy would be missing
most of his vital organs , be he stoned or not.
Some will argue that our hero does not have a killer instinct , the hell
with that! Two FBI guys have just been shot in front me , along with one
bad guy and the other looks like he might go ballistic at any second.
Solution? BOOM! I'll take the time to feel sorry about it later thank
you very much. 
Another prime example of the idiot hero syndrome:
Our boy Duchovny needs to reach his girl before something bad happens to
her. He knows the head bad guy has her on the tenth floor of a building
and that he might be running into a room full of people with itchy
trigger fingers. He still has his shotgun , bring it along you say? No
thanks , I'll just ditch it in the back of my car. And the real kicker
is this: when he reaches the room and people start shooting at him he
has the nerve to look surprised!
While we are on the subject of getting shot , why in hades were those
FBI guys sitting with their backs to the door? I've got no formal
training but even I know you never sit with your back to the door. Ask
Mr. Wild Bill , the first and only time he did not sit with his back to
a wall cost him his life. This is the major problem with this movie ,
any mook could have thought of a hundred ways to make it better. Is it
so much to ask that Hollywood actually put a little common sense into
their characters? 
Our heroes hide at Duchovny's summer home , now the bad guys could come
knocking at any moment. Ok , this time our hero does get himself a gun
and has it at his side most of the time. But see , our hero is a drug
addict and guess what? He chooses now to go clean and suffer through DT.
Oh sure , he'll be really impressive when the bad guys come calling.
Going clean is really honorable of him , but I would have waited until I
did not need to be conscious or being able to fire a gun.
Rating: 1 out of 5 for an enjoyable performance by Timothy Hutton , plot
holes the size of Godzilla , getting our intelligence insulted and
several "oh come on!" moments.
