Authors
Richard Wallis
Number of Reviews
2

Title
Review for Blair Witch Project, The (1999)
When was the last time you were scared by a movie? Keep in mind that I'm not
talking about being spooked or startled; I'm talking about being totally and
uttering pierced by the sting of fear. The Exorcist? The Shining, perhaps?
Sure, Hollywood comes out with dozens of cheap thrills each year, and it
doesn't take much speculation to figure out that the true art of horror has
been long since swept under the carpet to make way for a genre of teen
comedies that disguise themselves as slasher flicks. But rest assured; The
Blair Witch Project is the real deal.
But the odd thing is, there is nary one special effect or false scare in the
whole of the film. Shot mostly on video (giving it a gritty, real-life
feeling) for a measly $30,000, Blair Witch embodies all that I love about
filmmaking. Making the audience use a little imagination for once, it really
is a breath of fresh air.
As everyone probably already knows, the films deals with three college
filmmakers who travel into the depths of a Maryland forest to document a
local legend. Though they are never heard from again, the footage they shot
was recovered.
The leader of the pack is Heather, the strong-willed film student making the
documentary based upon the Blair Witch phenomena of the title. If Heather
Donahue isn't at least nominated for an Academy Award for her work here,
then I propose a mass boycott of the Oscars. Blending comedy and pathos
seamlessly, she has created a truly sympathetic and ultimately tragic
figure. The performance of the year, in my opinion, and I will be astounded
if one comes along that is half as effective.
Joining Heather in her venture into the desolate woods are Josh (Joshua
Leonard), the 16mm cameraman, and Mike (Michael C. Williams), acting as
soundman. Though not quite as commanding in their roles as Donahue, I dare
you to spot a single moment where either of them are acting. Of course, this
is no surprise, considering the extremes the actors endured to make their
characters as true-to-life as possible. For 10 days, they pretty much
experienced what is depicted as fiction in the movie. Apparently, the whole
thing was entirely improvised, with notes hidden around the woods to simply
give the actors their motivation for the scene. No one can deny that these
are three courageous performances.
And it all paid off in the end, too. For a micro-budgeted independent film,
set forth amidst a slew of obscenely costly "summer" movies, The Blair Witch
Project has made quite a name for itself. Destined to become the most
successful film of all time (in a cost to profit ratio, that is), Blair
Witch first caused a stir at last year's Sundance film festival and
eventually was sold to an independent studio for a mere $1 million (if the
Louisiana Purchase was the best deal in American history, then this has to
be the second best).
A movie so frightening and completely effective is all too hard to come by.
Set the way-back machine to 1990, when John McNaughten's Henry: Portrait of
a Serial Killer premiered in theaters; audiences and critics alike were
taken back by the honesty of such a film, one that broke all the rules and
pulled absolutely no punches. Anyone who has seen Henry will no doubt recall
the infamous scene where Henry and his partner in crime Otis videotape
themselves invading a suburban home and callously killing the family that
inhabited it. Remember that nauseating terror? Remember that unflinching
honesty?
Blair Witch duplicates that same feeling of inner terror and hammers it home
for no less than 80 minutes. I realize that may seem like an excessively
brisk running time, but I'm not sure I could have taken any more than that.
Blair Witch doesn't simply scare you out of your wits; no, it's far to
clever for that. It drains you of every conceivable emotion, and afterwards
you are left numb.
Which, I suppose, brings us to the film's ending. I will say nothing of it
narrative-wise (ruining it would be a crime against humanity), but suffice
to say that it is the creepiest moment since Norman Bates smiled into the
camera at the end of Psycho. Again, no FX, just a profound feeling of shock
and - are you ready for this? Brace yourself - sadness.
You see, unlike most films of its kind, the characters here function as
people first and plot devices second. Right from the opening title card, we
know that the characters will not come out of their situation alive. This
makes their plight all the more sympathetic.
There have been rumors (I'm not sure if anything has been announced
officially) that a sequel or prequel may be in the works. Words cannot
describe the new level of ineptitude that this notion establishes. What's
next, "Schindler's List: The Babyboomer Years"? Or maybe "Saving Private
Ryan 2: Basic Training"? No, The Blair Witch Project should simply stand
alone and not give way to the system.

Title
Review for Eyes Wide Shut (1999)
Eyes Wide Shut
Rating (out of five): *****
Starring Tom Cruise, Nicole Kidman, Sydney Pollack, Todd Field, Marie
Richardson, Rade Serbedzija, Leelee
Sobieski, Vinessa Shaw and Madison Eginton
Directed by Stanley Kubrick
Written by Stanley Kubrick (based on a novel by Arthur Schnitzler)
Rated R for profanity, sex, nudity, drug use and very mature themes
Theatrical aspect ratio of 1.85:1
Released in 1999
Running 159 minutes
One of the key signatures of a Stanley Kubrick film is that it can be read
on several different levels. In many circles, Dr. Strangelove and 2001: A
Space Odyssey are accepted as allegorical sexual satires. Many people
believe The Shining to be a racial statement against the evils of killing
Indians. Even Spartacus is not safe from intricate deconstruction. And now
comes along Eyes Wide Shut, Kubrick's most thematically complex and
intellectually stimulating film yet. It is also one of his greatest.
Regarding Eyes Wide Shut as merely a plot-driven psychological thriller is
doing the film a great injustice. In fact, I prefer not to take the film
literally at all. Many critics have blasted Kubrick's swan song for being
too much of a free-form, open ended, unsexy bore; shame on them! If you need
pervasive sex to have a satisfactory movie-going experience, look elsewhere.
Based on Arthur Schnitzler's classic novella "Traumnovelle", Eyes Wide
Shut's sole purpose is to evoke a strange, nightmare-like state. The
criticism that the film has no real conclusion is highly inept. After all,
when was the last time you had a dream or nightmare that had any kind of
resolution? This is a tough film that raises some very serious questions,
and is brave enough to admit that it has no clear-cut, black and white
answers. The viewer is left to make his own conclusions and judgments,
something virtually unheard of in modern film making.
At the heart of the story is Dr. Bill Harford's (Tom Cruise) night of sexual
odyssey through the streets of New York and the harsh reality that follows.
In many ways, the plot is very reminiscent of Martin Scorsese's forgotten
sleeper After Hours, which consisted of short, bizarre vignettes where the
hero was at the mercy of whatever oddball he might have the misfortune of
running into. Such is Dr. Bill's case; in the coarse of one night, he has
lost almost all control of his life and becomes dependent of other people's
actions. The phrase "in over his head" doesn't even begin to describe the
potentially deadly situations he gets himself involved in.
The fuel for his fire is jealousy over his wife, Alice (Nicole Kidman,
taking a much more supporting role than was expected). It seems that during
their Cape Cod vacation over a year ago, she was sexually tempted by an
unknown Naval officer, claiming that she would have given up everything -
Bill, their daughter, even her future - for just one night with this
anonymous sailor. Throughout the night, Bill is periodically enflamed by
fantasies of his wife with the officer. This only pushes him further and
further into his self-dug hole.
This is, of course, a very literal interpretation of the story. As I said,
the film is best when viewed in a less superficial light. It is, in all
aspects, a dream (or nightmare, perhaps) put onto celluloid.
Much has been said of the climactic orgy sequence (which, ironically, comes
mid-way through the film) and the digital "masking" that it underwent for
American release. While I am steadfastly against tampering with the work of
a genius, I do believe that some people are making too much of this. The
fact that the studio felt the hypocritical need to cater to younger
audiences (which the movie is clearly not meant for to begin with) is
reprehensible, but if nobody knew that 65 seconds of film had been altered,
I feel confident that the orgy sequence would be remembered as the
brilliantly effective scene that it is. Trust me; it is absolutely
terrifying even as it stands.
Alas, some people are outraged by this alteration (Roger Ebert has dubbed it
the "Austin Powers" version, referring to the strategic placement of objects
to hide certain body parts), even going as far as to dock the film a
half-star for a mistake on the studio's part. Frankly, I find this
laughable; it's almost as if they are looking for a reason to withhold a top
rating for fear of seeming biased. However, I am not afraid to say it; Eyes
Wide Shut is a masterwork, possibly the finest film of the decade and
certainly more than worthy of being a genius' final testament.
Find all of Jason's reviews at
http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Boulevard/7475
