Authors
Eugene Xia
Number of Reviews
5

Title
Review for Starship Troopers (1997)
One can enjoy this film if one is in the right mood.
The film gives exactly the kind of respect the original 
story deserves--a juvenile sci-fi action flick with some 
pseudo-philosophy thrown in.  Or as Scott Renshaw put it: 
"For one thing, you sense that the film-makers are aware 
of the pulp nonsense they have as source material".
Those who criticize the film for its technical and military
"plot holes" probably should observe how an 8 year old boy
play war games--they are more interested in imagining
shooting automatic rifles than pushing buttons to launch
missiles they cannot see.  Once one realizes this aspect,
one sees the frame of mind the director is in when he
made the film:
An eight year old boy keeps nagging his dad (the director)
to play space alien with him.  He was of course not very
interested, but the boy is after all his son.  So he comes
up with this brilliant idea.  At 8, the boy has a lot of
absurd but charming ideas, so he will play along but
exaggerate the absurdity.  The 8 year old will be seriously
disappointed if the dad says that all he has to do is push
a few buttons to launch a few nuke and the game is over,
so he gave him a machine gun (the reason it is a machine gun
rather than a 90's high tech ray-gun is probably a legacy
of the 50's and also due the sense of humor on the part of
the director).  In the end, the boy satisfies his innate
desire for simulated combat and the dad gets a big laugh
and the satisfaction for being so clever.  Both had a great
time.
There is a scene in the film where a soldier was decapitated
by a flying bug.  Ordinarily if this scene were set in a
serious film or anything with a darker under tone such as Alien,
I would be horrified and probably feel nauseated, but in
this comic circus like atmosphere, I bursted out into a
spontaneous laughter--the way I did when the huge guy
exploded in a French restaurant in Monty Python's Meaning
of Life (warning this scene is pretty gross too)--The
absurdity of it all.
Beyond its entertainment value, the film did manage to
convey a serious and subtle message to the adults.  This
kind of game is fun to play with the kids, but one has to
recognize it for what it is and make sure that boys grow up
to be adults.  And a warning that adults should never play
this game with other adults--look at the uniforms.
In the end, the Doogie Hauser character in his
black jacket and his boyish charm, said something like,
"This is not a game any more.  We are doing it for real now".
One can't fail to recognize the menacing and sinister
under tone of what he said.

Title
Review for Breaking the Waves (1996)
If I am to look at this film objectively, I will
say that this is a very good film in the sense that
it accomplishes what it sets out to do.
Emily Watson did a great job as Bess McNeill in
portraying her as an innocent girl who falls in
love and ultimately sacrifices herself for her
love.  Perhaps Watson did too great a job.  For
much of the film Bess has the emotional maturity
of a 5 year old and her reaction to Jan going away
to work is that of a kid parting with her favorite
doll.  I am not even sure one can call what she and
Jan (the husband) had love.  We certainly don't
see much emotional connection or even adult
conversation between the two.  In fact, we don't see
anything going on between them other than sex.
As it is, Bess' character is not very interesting
(It is hard to portray a 5 year old with any complexity).
Towards the end, she did grow a bit, but not much.
The other characters fall into two groups, the sympathetic
and the judgemental--all one dimensional with one exception.
In relative terms, Jan is the only one who exhibits
some emotional complexity.  He is basically a good man.
After the accident, he is willing to let Bess
get on with her life.  Bess, of course, rejects
such a request.  So he conjures up a lie and tells Bess
that she should take up a lover for his sake.  However,
what started as a self-sacrificing gesture quickly
degenerates into perversity and ultimately let to Bess' death.
One sees how easily a person, especially someone in Jan's
condition, can fall.
On the technical side, I think it is a brilliant idea
to make the film feel like it is made on a hand held
video camera, especially with the wedding.  However,
it is a bad idea to do it for the entire
film--all 2 and half hour of it.  I developed a headache
after 90 minute of this.  No matter how great an idea,
it is self-defeating if it gives the viewer a headache
half way through.

Title
Review for English Patient, The (1996)
A piece of rough brown paper fills the screen.  
A brush gently traces an abstract figure of an 
ancient swimmer.  The brown canvas gradually 
transforms into a blurred image of the ancient 
Sahara that suggests a feminine body and surmises 
infinity.  The swimmer fades into a bi-plane 
that along with Wagner-like music soars above 
the desert and, true to Wagnerian form, bursts 
into a blazing fire.
Like so many epic poems, The English Patient 
begins its story in the middle.  From this point, 
it relates two love stories, one in the past and 
one in the future.  The one in the past is 
constructed in the tradition of a grand romantic 
tragedy.  It is a story of forbidden love:  Two 
people driven and compelled by passion to do 
something the ordinary people would never do.  While 
the events of that story happened only a few years 
ago, the setting suggests that it might as well 
have happened thousands of years ago.  The remote 
desert serves as a vast theater upon which a grand 
tragedy unfolds as similar events must have occurred 
and repeated again and again for countless many times.
As a perfect theater, the desert remains the same for 
eons leaving no trace of the drama that once unfolded 
upon it.
It is a cosmic story.  The two main characters were 
carefully and deliberately constructed out of 
their respected space and time--remote, grand and 
mythical.  Unlike the people around them, they were 
the only ones who truly lived in and belonged to the 
desert, and totally oblivious to the contemporary 
events unfolding around them.  They understood the 
desert and its intricate language and the desert 
embraced them.  They never said much to each other, 
but the desert spoke for them and declared their love--
the sand storm and the stars it obliterated, 
Herodotus and his story of Gyges and the rain of 
blood on the English coast, a place and time even 
more remote than the desert.  They lived in the time 
and the cave of the swimmers.
In an ancient monastery of Italy, another love 
story unfolds--not grand and cosmic, but an 
intimate one of plums, gardens and olive oil.  In 
contrast to the desert which obliterates everything, 
here all is green and steeped in history.  In this 
story, Count Almasy is like an ancient relic both 
physically and psychologically.  Structurally, all 
this serves to push the first story further back 
in time.  Ultimately, this too is a story of doomed 
love, but in a very human way.
The four lead actors did a fine job, but not outstanding.
In a film of this nature, a competent performance is all 
that is required.  Fiennes and Thomas come out far 
better than Andrews and Binoche but this is because 
Fiennes and Thomas had roles that are far better written.  
Binoche's character had a few cliches such as "Everyone 
I loved is dead" and in general suffers from talking a 
bit too much.  Andrews' character is not well developed.
The true star of the film is the desert and the desert 
speaks with the most solemn voice.  There was a scene 
in which a few characters exchanged a few comic lines.  
Then suddenly, came this overwhelming echo of a Muslim 
prayer.  Before seeing this film, I always thought 
these prayers a bit quaint.
Toward the end, we return to the desert with Almasy as his
plane takes off while Hana and Kathrine's voices merge 
into one, declaring they being the real country, and we 
remember the image of the infinite Sahara at the beginning
that resembles a feminine body.

Title
Review for Ikiru (1952)
Kurosawa's Ikiru is a story of a man (Wanatabe) dying
of cancer trying to reclaim his life in his remaining
days.  The film contains technical elements that reminds
me of the various elements in Fellini films and "It's a
Wonderful Life" and Kurossawa's later film "Ran".  While 
watching it, I kept thinking that this is Capra with 
depth and Fellini with a soul.
As soon as Wanatabe realized his condition, he decided
to experience life one more time before his death.  He
started drinking and asked a writer he encountered in a bar
to show him the life he had been missing for the last
twenty-five years.  With that we entered the decadent and
self-indulgent world of Fellini.
The first half contains scenes that are straight
from "La Dolce Vita", but are done with taste and
restraint.  Moreover, they are there to serve a purpose--
to build up to the moment when Wanatabe sings his
"Life is short, dear Maiden.  Fall in love..."   At this point
Wanatabe made the discovery that all is empty and shallow in
this world.  In fact, the world of the writer (who jokingly
calls himself, Mephistopheles) was hell.  When morning
came, Wanatabe was hollow and miserable as ever.
As in "It's a Wonderful Life", Watanabe had his own
guardian angel in the form of the young
coworker.  She was ill equipped to handle
the formidable task of giving direction to a dying
man who had been lost for longer than she had lived.
Fortunately, Watanabe was a much older and wiser
man than his Jimmy Stuart counter part.  All he
needed was an insight in the right direction.
This the girl provided, not in the form of wisdom
but in the form of her innocent ideal and vision.
The final encounter of the two was one of the
greatest cinematic moments.  It began with a static
scene where Watanabe and the girl sat in a
Chucky Cheese style restaurant in silence.  In the
background, the restaurant staff was preparing a birthday
party and bright youthful marching music was coming
through, but the girl sensed a gravely troubled man.
Wanatabe began to tell the story of his life and the
tension gradually mounted as the music grew and grew.
Finally Wanatabe asked for directions for the short
remaining days of his life.  We saw the girl was
afraid and we feared for her.  How could anyone offer
advice to a dying man who was three times one's own age?
But Wanatabe's instinct was correct.  She offered him
exactly the wisdom he lacked.  After a few brief moments
of intense contemplation, Wanatabe reached his moment
of enlightenment and the background music exploded into
a thunderous "Happy Birthday to You!"
When I was watching the film on tape, I kept rewinding
and repeating this part.  On the fourth repeat,
my eyes got misty.  In Asian fables, it is usually
the old who offers wisdom and insights to the young 
who has lost his way.  Here it is the opposite.  
Wanatabe lost his life a long time ago and his innocent 
guardian angel helps him to regain it back.
The film is not without weakness.  The sobbing fest
among Wanatabe's coworkers should be cut short.  Instead
of letting those clowns diminishing the mood of the film,
they should simply end the film with Wanatabe sitting
on the swing (which is another moment that made my
eyes misty).  There is too much of this Confucius
philosophy/lecturing of what a good bureaucrat should be.
In the final analysis, Ikiru is an optimistic film
with an inspiring message even though the mood of
the film is intensely somber.  It invites us to 
exam and re-exam our lives and offers a way and hope 
for the dying that is all of us--not in the form of 
our own salvation, but how to help others achieving 
theirs and our salvation comes as a result of this
giving not the purpose.

Title
Review for Contact (1997)
This is a 3 star film. I am beginning to
feel the power of Hollywood and understand why its
films are so successful around the world.  Much of
it is formula writing, yet it all works so well.
When Arroway first heard the pining (very loud in
the background) of the signal from Vega, the film's tempo
went into high gears and I really felt the excitement.
While my heart was pounding rapidly and cheering her on,
a very distant and annoying part of my brain kept
telling me: Here comes Hollywood "adrenaline formula 22".
Then there is also the Spielberg "magic wonder ET formula"
complete with sappy tear jerking yet completely
harmless music.  Foster did a very good job and
so did the girl who played the young Arroway, but
the rest are stereotypical--the paranoid government
fonctionaires, your typical run of the mill villains who
get their just dessert and the Raph Reed character
carefully balanced by the spiritual boyfriend (but would
you want to buy a used car from this guy?).
Sometimes this sort of formula writing can be quite
vicious.  I remember the first time I watched Kieslowski's
Blue.  When Julie locked herself out at night, my automatic
reaction was, "Oh oh, she is going to get attacked by
the hoodlums".  When that didn't happen, I realized
that in the real world, most people don't get attacked
when they are locked out of their apartments.  That was
when I realized that I had watched too many Hollywood films.
At the same time, in my opinion, the most effective 
sequence is the one when Arroway stood in the control 
room watching the on going test process completely 
helpless and useless being reduced to a mere decoration.
Much of the dialogue about science and religion offers
no more insight than the endless and tiresome debates
that have been going on among college freshmen
and the film would have been better off without it.  
When one strips away all this juvenile nonsense,
one is left with a story of a woman obsessed with her 
childhood grief and refuses to grow up.  Sort of like an 
adult version of Ponette.
The ending is definitely a religious one (Hollywood can't
really afford to alienate 90% of the population).  After
delivering a speech of faith, Arroway walks out of the
Capital and found herself the next messiah or at least
the next great prophet.
Despite my somewhat harsh critique above, I highly recommend
the film.  Contrary to what you have heard, it is not
a thinking person's movie although I will stop short of
telling you to check your brain at the door.  It offers you
great entertainment while you are in the theater, but isn't
terribly deep upon reflexion.
