Authors
George Papadopoulos
Number of Reviews
4

Title
Review for As Good As It Gets (1997)
James L. Brooks loves people. He loves the way people form relationships,
the way they communicate, their emotions, their ups and downs and, above
all, their humanity. His films don't have epic narratives, digital special
effects or exotic locations. They often take place in city streets, cramped
apartments and suburban houses. The characters are everyday, down-to-earth
people who have their little eccentricities and personal problems but we
are left to admire their grace and integrity as they battle through life's
uncertainties. 
AS GOOD AS IT GETS is James Brooks' most ambitious film in that he spends
more time on developing the characters here and the slim plot is incidental
rather than essential to the narrative. There is no rush to get to the
point. We're not quite sure where we are heading but we are enjoying the
ride and with Jack Nicholson leading us, we are quite content to allow the
film to indulge us in its many pleasures.
What I loved about this film was its honest depiction of three
emotionally-flawed characters, all on the verge of a mental breakdown.
Individually, they have scraped the bottom of life's barrel: Melvin
(Nicholson) is suffering from obsessive-compulsive behaviour, Carol (Hunt)
has a seriously ill asthmatic son and Simon (Kinnear) was viciously bashed
and is financially broke forcing him to end his career as an artist. These
are not your traditional movie heroes and this is not a conventional
Hollywood film. Its leisurely pace will unsettle a few viewers and its
reluctance to go for the easy solution may be annoying to some. However,
these qualities are its strengths and makes this the best film yet by
Brooks and, in my opinion, is on equal footing with THE ICE STORM as the
best film of the year. Don't be surprised if it picks up Best Picture
Oscar, either.
Films depicting romantic relationships between an older man and a woman 25
years his junior are few and far between. AS GOOD AS IT GETS is very
European in this way. The French have been producing romantic films of an
older man and a younger woman for years now. Just a few gems to mention
are: NELLY AND MR.ARNAUD, LA BELLE NOISSEUSE and THREE COLOURS RED (yes, it
was a romance). Brooks' film also shares their loose narrative style,
virtual absence of plot, exclusive concentration on character development
and disregard for neat resolutions. 

Title
Review for Cop Land (1997)
Director: James Mangold
Cast:        Sylvester Stallone, Harvey Keitel, Robert De Niro, Ray Liotta,
Anabella Sciorra
The first thing you notice about this movie is the excessive weight being
lugged around by the actors. There has been considerable publicity about
the twenty kilos that Stallone piled on but nothing has been mentioned
about the appearance of flubber on the other actors in the film. I fear it
is because, while Stallone deliberately put the weight on himself, the
other actors have let themselves go in the past year or so. Harvey Keitel
is no longer the tight, taut body he was in MEAN STREETS and Ray Liotta is
obviously been gorging on ring-dings due, no doubt, to the fact that he
hasn't been in a Scorsese movie since GOODFELLAS. On the other hand, Robert
De Niro, while he isn't exactly resembling RAGING BULL days, seems to be
enjoying his meals at his Tribeca restaurant a bit too much, whereas Cathy
Moriarty thought it may be a good career move to do the De Niro thing and
look like Jake La Motta. All in all, the stellar cast of this film carries
some excessive baggage in more ways than one.
Weight issues aside, COPLAND is a well-structured, well-cast, well-acted,
well-photographed and well-directed film. While it is no GOODFELLAS, it has
all the ingredients of a better than average cop/corruption movie. The cast
is mind-boggling. It was great to see Keitel with De Niro again, Liotta
with De Niro, Keitel with Liotta, Sciorra with a white guy and Stallone
with someone else other than Talia Shire and Burt Young. 
The film centres on an attempted police cover-up over a cop shooting a
couple of crack-addicted black folk (for a change). The young cop, being so
distressed, jumps off the George Washington Bridge. But did he jump? We
find out later that his uncle (Keitel) set it up so that he could get away
with the killing but things don't go to plan. Things become messy and now
the uncle has no choice but to save his own ass by actually killing his
adopted nephew. Stuck in the middle of all this is Freddie (Stallone), the
sherrif of the town where these policeman reside. The police town "where
everyone feels safe to cross the street" is Garrison in New Jersey (I
didn't think anyone was safe in Jersey), just over the Washington Bridge
from where the cop allegedly jumped from. Freddy knows that the kid is
alive and now has the dilemma of either doing nothing and keeping his
police friends and quiet job or he could do something for himself, his
career and justice, Amen. Guess which option Stallone chooses?
This film could have been a turkey. Stallone could have flexed his muscle
and turned his character from a repressed loner to a Rambo-like law
enforcer. But no, instead we have Stallone giving a terrific performance
and his best one sinceum,well...Rocky 1. His usual droopy eyes and
incoherent mumbling are perfect for a character who lacks the confidence
and self-esteem to take any decisive action (talk about a stretch) until he
is forced too. While the film is not short of action, opting to delve a bit
more into the characters than the usual Hollywood fare, the predictable
final shoot-out is a knockout. It is shot with a muffled sound to reflect
Stallone's impaired hearing and the silence is deafening.
The heavyweights put in their usual strong performances, especially Keitel
who, thank God, isn't playing another sweet-natured middle-aged man and
plays what he was born to play: a baddie. The surprise packet is Stallone.
His performance is a revelation. There is a beautiful scene with Anabella
Sciorra where she asks him why he hasn't married and he gives her this
dopey, alcohol-induced stare and says "Because the good ones are taken" and
his head falls on her shoulder. It is such a touching and restrained
performance that leaves you wanting more. I want more of Stallone like
this. More sensitive, caring and lovey-dovey. More acting and less high
testoserone, macho, American flag-waving bullshit. Give me a character I
can work with. Despite my wishes, I hear Stallone is planning another Rambo
film and his next film is a mindless action flick. Oh well, it was good
while it lasted.

Title
Review for Wings of the Dove, The (1997)
There is a sense of familiarity about THE WINGS OF THE DOVE that appears to
cloud its subtle originality and inventiveness. There has been a plethora
of late eighteenth-century English period dramas over the last five years
and we have become accustomed to the overstated costumes, bombastic scores
and soap-opera narratives. In fact, there have been so many that this
little gem may get overlooked as yet another Merchant-Ivory imitation when
it is vastly superior in every way.
The film starts off innocuously with a romantic interlude on a crowded
train which leads to a passionate affair between Kate Croy (Helena
Bonham-Carter) and Merton Denscher (Linus Roache). However, their love
affair is thwarted by Kate's wealthy Aunt Maude (Charlotte Rampling) who
threatens to disinherit Kate if she continues her flirt with a middle-class
journalist.Their relationship appears doomed until they meet Millie Theale
(Alison Elliot), an American millionairess who happens to be dying of
cancer. As Kate forms a friendship with Millie, she gets this crazy notion
that if Merton should seduce Millie then they would be inherit her wealth.
The film's premise may appear slight and familiar but Iain Softley's
sensitive and intelligent direction transcends the film from mere soap dish
to a provocative and poignant drama about passion, obsession, greed and
ambition. What sets this film apart from the Merchant-Ivory drivel is the
restrained and subtle way the narrative unfolds without resorting to
stating the obvious. There is no unnecessary dialogue exposition stating
what we already know. For once, the audience is assumed to have an
above-average mentality and we are grateful.
The acting all round is outstanding. Helena Bonham-Carter deserved her
Golden Globe nomination and will definitely get an Oscar nod as well. She
gives a striking performance of a woman who is caught between her desires
and ambitions. She often see-saws from a sympathetic character to a villain
but at the end of the film, it was she who received our greatest sympathy.
The complexity of the character would have been quite daunting to any
performer but she pulls it off brilliantly and has now stepped up to the
big league of female actors. However, who knows what Hollywood would do to
her. We may see her in the next Scorsese flick or we may see her strutting
her stuff in SHOWGIRLS 2. Hollywood awaits!

Title
Review for Wilde (1997)
Director: Brian Gilbert
Cast:        Stephen Fry, Jude Law, Vanessa Redgrave, Jennifer Ehle
Running Time: 117 minutes
Unlike the United States, Brian Gilbert's bio-pic WILDE has been released
in Australia and for those living in the U.S, I have written a short review
to whet your appetite until the film arrives on your shores. The delay in
the U.S. distributor closing a deal on the film may have something to do
with a handful of rather explicit homosexual scenes. Although it must be
said, explicit only for the mainstream set; the arthouse cinema goers will
hardly raise an eyebrow, no pun intended.
If you though a big deal was made about Ellen DeGeneres coming out, then
you should see what happens to Oscar Wilde. Brian Gilbert's bio-pic of
Oscar Wilde begins like a gay tribute to a great writer. We see Oscar
Wilde's (Stephen Fry) penchant for young men and his sudden breakthrough of
the personal and social barriers that prevented him from fulfilling his
latent homosexual desires. Oscar's dilemma is made all the more difficult
because, you see, Oscar is married to Constance Lloyd (Jennifer Ehle) and
they have two children. Once his sexual desires are unleashed, however,
Oscar is cruising the streets for all the prime meat he can get his hands
on.
That is, until he meets Lord Alfred Douglas (Jude Law) or as his close-knit
friends call him, Bosie. They strike up an immediate attraction and before
you know it, they're in the sack, raising some serious sweat. At first,
they seem to be enjoying themselves going out to dinner and gay clubs
(similar to today's gatherings but without the techno dance music).
However, things begin to get ugly when Bosie's father, the wicked Marquess
of Queensberry, sets upon destroying Oscar by taking him to court for
charges of gross indecency (that is, for being gay). However, the real
reason for the court action probably lies in the Marquess' inability to
love his son in the caring way that Oscar is able to. The court action
leads to imprisonment and we are left to ponder, once again, how cruel
history can be.
Brian Gilbert has attempted to tell this story of Oscar Wilde in a very
noble manner. Oscar is painted as being the first truly, sensitive, new-age
guy while the conservative establishment is seen as a sinister, prejudicial
lot. At the beginning of the film, we see a happy-go-lucky Oscar walk
through a horde of uniformed legal representatives as a signal of his
future disregard for the establishment (ah, symbolism!). Wilde's constant
outpour of razor-sharp witticisms are a pleasure to the ears and Stephen
Fry's endearing performance ensures that we are made to feel pity for him
throughout his ordeal while we seethe at the evilness of the people
persecuting him. 
The main problem with the film lies in the depiction of Wilde himself.
Despite Stephen Fry's breakthrough performance, we are still none the wiser
as to the inner thoughts of Wilde. The film is all too quick to jump
straight into Wilde's foray into homosexuality without giving us a
foundation of his previous life to compare and contrast. Fry was good at
giving us the droopy eye look whenever Oscar felt any emotion but the film
needed some more background on Oscar and why, all of a sudden, he turned
from Robert Young to Mr. Brady. Okay, we know he loved Bosie but why did he
always go back to him when everyone else, but he, could see that Bosie was
an insecure, spoilt brat who caused nothing but mayhem to all those who
knew him. Is love really that blind? I know that Bosie was attractive and I
know that the director thought so too because we kept seeing Bosie's
athletic buns. In fact, all the gay men were handsome with great bodies
while Oscar had the face of Jay Leno and the body of, well, Jay Leno. No
doubt Bosie's love was blind as well.
Although the homosexual scenes may cause a stir among mainstream audiences,
they are rather timid when compared to some of the independent films shown
at gay and lesbian festivals. The Melbourne premiere screening of this film
resembled the opening night of the Mardi Gras. I haven't seen so many gay
people at a screening since PRISCILLA: QUEEN OF THE DESERT. Being an
extremely, right-wing, breast-loving, heterosexual male myself, I must say
the first male-to-male kiss caught me off guard. I am so used to seeing
gorgeous blondes being toungued by George Clooney that I wasn't prepared
for this homosexual tryst. However, as the film progressed, I became quite
used to it. In fact, by the fifth sex scene where two men are pounding away
in, amazingly, the missionary position, I forgot what a naked woman looked
like.
WILDE is definitely worth catching for Stephen Fry's performance alone but,
overall, Oscar Wilde still remains a mystery to me as the film did not
manage to explain or delve into the inner psyche of this great writer. It
tread the surface while depicting his downward spiral from fame and fortune
to obscurity and exile. However, I did walk away with a better knowledge of
Bosie and his motivations and the ugly presence of homophobia in late
1800's England and that society hasn't really changed that much. We've just
become better at hiding our prejudices.
