Authors
Andrew Campbell
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Absolute Power (1997)
1997
Directed by Clint Eastwood
Screenplay by William Goldman, from the novel by David Baldacci
Starring Clint Eastwood, Laura Linney, Gene Hackman, Scott Glenn, E.G.
Marshall, Judy Davis, Ed Harris
Running Time approx. 2 hrs. 5 minutes
Clint Eastwood is a consummate professional whose efficiency as both an
actor and director are virtually unparalleled in the business of
Hollywood.  He's fairly consistent as well- does anybody really remember
'Pink Cadillac' or 'The Rookie'?
Clint's latest, 'Absolute Power,' in which he serves as both director
and star, also wrapped under time and under budget.  Plucked from the
galleys to be adapted for the big screen even before it was published as
a novel, the film has a plot of the sort that makes conspiracy-theory
lovers drool.  Written by veteran , Oscar-winning scribe William Goldman
of 'Misery' and 'Butch Cassidy and the Sundance Kid,' it features a
stellar supporting cast, some tight editing and thoroughly professional
performances.  This, in fact, is the least that can be expected of a
Hollywood picture, especially one with as much pedigree as there is
here; unfortunately, there's not much more.
The premise is shocking:  a burglar (Eastwood) witnesses a murder and
subsequent coverup involving none other than the President of the United
States.  So far, so plausible.  The first twenty minutes, like Clint's
best efforts, are spare, taut, gripping.  From there out, however, the
tension dissolves into a jumbled-up mess of chases,
reconciliation/revelation scenes, Dirty Harryish one-liners, one
contrived set piece so obviously shot on a studio backlot as to defy
credibility entirely, plus a campy, grossly miscalculated Presidential
tango sequence that takes the cake as far as implausibility goes.
Laura Linney (who was cast in part, undoubtedly, due to her resemblance
to Eastwood's daughter Alison) is the thief's estranged lawyer daughter,
and the director's interest obviously resides in this relationship,
making their scenes together, while unremarkable, rooted and
believable.  This kind of story, however, with its far-reaching
implications and intrigue, requires a larger canvas than Eastwood wants
to use.  Neither he nor the screenplay are interested in examining the
motivations for any of the perephrial characters; instead, character and
plot details are explained away in dialog, if they are at all.  Scott
Glenn, Judy Davis, Dennis Haysbert and Gene Hackman are the
conspirators, and each registers as type more than as understandable
characters- the conscience, the bitch, the coldblood, the hardass,
respectively (Hackman=92s performance could be taken from any number of
his last few films).  There may have been scenes left on the cutting
room floor, but one suspects they truly didn't have that much to do.=20
Only Ed Harris (particularly in a terrific, tensely playful exchange
over lunch with Eastwood's thief), registers as a specific human being,
while E.G. Marshall, as the President=92s benefactor, gets asked to be
little more than old.  It's as if Lord Acton's phrase ('Absolute power
corrupts absolutely') serves as the subtext of the film by default, and
that leaves =91Absolute Power=92 resembling not much more than an expensi=
ve
second-rate TV movie- which it probably would have been without the
names attached to it here. =20
The idea of a corrupt President isn't so far fetched, of course, but it
doesn=92t go without saying, and the film panders to the lowest regard of
its audience for government and political power without revealing
anything new or remotely interesting about the nature of power or, at
the least, the nature of the people of the film.  (Why does Eastwood=92s
burglar return to thieving?  What makes Haysbert=92s Secret Serviceman a
ruthless assassin, while Scott Glenn=92s has a tortured conscience?)  All
of this makes a movie uninteresting, but at its worst, 'Absolute Power'
indulges the more base instinct of the audience, glossing over
interesting questions of responsibility and national security (not to
mention the corrupting nature of power) with movie conventions.  This is
one of those pictures with intended lines and moments of humor which, if
you catch yourself laughing and stop to think, isn't funny at all; it's
a sinking feeling to know that the filmmaker has taken the easy route,
letting the audience off the hook.  Only the professionalism of
Eastwood, his fellow actors and the film=92s technicians make 'Absolute
Power' watchable.
