Authors
Jeffrey Huston
Number of Reviews
8

Title
Review for American History X (1998)
Rated R
(for excessive strong language, strong sexuality, nudity,
and graphic brutal violence including a prison rape scene)
Directed by Tony Kaye. Produced by John Morrissey. Screenplay by David
McKenna. Distributed by New Line Cinema. Running time: 118 minutes.
Release date: October 30, 1998 in limited release; wide November 20th.
(to read this review complete with pictures from the film, visit's Jeffrey
Huston's site at:
http://www.impactprod.org/people/huston/americanhistoryx.htm )
I've lived up and down the Midwest, a.k.a. "The American Heartland", all of
my life. Although I have interacted with different races throughout my life,
I have never been around or confronted by issues of racism. Racial hatred
and injustice was something I saw in the paper or reported on the evening
news.
That isn't to say that I haven't lived around or interacted with different
races; I have. Chalk it up to blessed surroundings or naiveté, but wherever
I've lived, races have intermingled with warm friendship and equal respect.
In some segments of our society, however, racism is alive and well.
Even though there are rural elements of bigotry like the KKK, the majority
of racial tension and aggression in contemporary America is taking place in
our nation's inner cities. I've never seen this life and culture first-hand.
I've never fully witnessed the racist extremes of both blacks and whites. I'
ve never been to these subcultures of anger, hatred, and violence. "American
History X" brought me there.
"American History X" is the story Derek Vinyard (Edward Norton), a smart
young man who is corrupted by hatred of anything or anybody that isn't
Caucasian. After   committing a brutal crime of violence under the guise of
self-defense, Derek lands in jail. This begins a personal journey for Derek
Vinyard, one that forces him to confront his venomous hatred and racist
beliefs and see them for the lies that they really are.
First time feature director Tony Kaye and screenwriter David McKenna have
created a very powerful story here, with much of the dramatic evolution
coming from the way in which they structured the story itself. The events of
"American History X" are not told chronologically. Rather, the story goes
back and forth between the present and the past. In doing this, the story
continues to grab our attention as it slowly develops and reveals the
dimensions of each of its characters, particularly Derek.
I love films that do this because they don't show all of their cards up
front. We see each character act a certain way in the first part of the
story, but only through the course of the film do we slowly come to realize
why they have become the way that they are. It is also a precarious balance
to continue to go backwards and forwards in time, but credit Kaye and
McKenna for always making it clear and seamless.
One of the ways this is accomplished is that Kaye filmed every event from
the past in black and white. But when we return to the present, everything
is in color. Not only is this a good artistic way to express symbolism, but
it is also an effective method to use when telling a story in a non-linear
sequence.
By seeing either color or black and white, we immediately know two things:
A -- when the particular scene is taking place. B  the psychological,
mental, and emotional state of each character. This aids the viewer in
helping them to easily switch back and forth between the different emotional
perspectives that each time period depicts.
Most films that broach the issue of racism are afraid to confront the
complexities that the subject possesses. It's rather brave indeed to have a
main character back up his opinions with statistics and facts that are hard
to refute. Granted, Derek's philosophical conclusions to these facts (as wel
l as his solutions to them) are horrifically wrong and come from a
destructive motivation. But most movies depict neo-Nazi Skinheads as
brainwashed rednecks with no intellect or reasoning. And whereas many of the
Skinheads in this film are exactly that, Derek is much more complex.
Many of the Skinheads get some sort of perverted fun out of being
hate-mongering fascists, but Vinyard takes it very seriously. There is more
than senseless hatred involved; Derek has been hurt and destroyed by certain
elements of society. Empowered with great intelligence, he uses his
intellect to distort complex issues into misguided racist opinions.
"American History X" is able to maintain the correct moral perspective while
challenging us in a very politically incorrect yet honest way.
"American History X" has a stellar cast, led with a powerhouse performance
by Edward Norton ("Primal Fear", "Rounders"). Over the last two years,
Norton has never failed to impress. But his portrayal of Derek Vinyard is
the best of his career. Having beefed up for the role, Norton embodies the
role of an embittered young man who sees hatred and violence as the only
solution to society's ills. We never sympathize with Derek in his racist
incarnation, but we do understand him.
This is a phenomenal job of characterization by Norton as he is able to
humanize Derek without taking it to a level of empathy. It is a responsible
acting effort, one where sympathy is eventually evoked but not to the extent
of absolving responsibility for Derek's actions. With this performance,
Norton emerges as one of the very best actors working in film today. Be very
surprised if he is not recognized with an Oscar nomination next February.
Up until now, I have not been a fan of Edward Furlong ("Terminator 2:
Judgment Day"). Most of the characters he has played have been
one-dimensional rebellious punks. He's still a punk in this film, but the
difference is that Furlong's Danny Vinyard is a fully developed,
three-dimensional person. As Derek's hero-worshipping younger brother Danny,
Furlong delivers a sad, poignant performance of a young impressionable kid
caught in racism's crossfire.
Danny shows as much scholastic promise as Derek did, but sells himself short
as he struggles to live a life according to how he thinks Derek wants him to
live it. Having idolized Derek for most of his life, Danny's world is turned
upside down when Derek denounces his racist past. Furlong's vulnerability
allows us to see the upheaval that Danny experiences.
Beverly D'Angelo is impressive as a mother destroyed by her family's hatred.
Stacey Keach offers a subtle evil as Cameron, Derek's facist mentor and
organizer of the Skinhead faction.  Avery Brooks provides the film's moral
center as an African-American teacher who refuses to give up on Derek and
Danny. But it is comedian Guy Torry who provides the film's greatest
surprise as Derek's fellow prison inmate Lamont. Torry's performance is both
overtly funny and quietly direct. Through Lamont, Derek is finally able to
see an African-Americans as a real person for the first time.
It is also through Lamont that one of the film's central themes is
communicated. While many people of color (as well as Caucasians) are serving
appropriate jail sentences, there are those who are victims of the system.
Lamont is one of those victims. And as much as we may not want to face this
particular cancer that appears from time to time in our judicial process, it
is something we must be willing to face if we are to honestly address the
racial injustices that come into play from time to time.
Director Tony Kaye also serves as the film's cinematographer. As one of the
most respected commercial directors of the last decade, he has made a name
for himself with creative visuals. His talent is very apparent here as he
unintentionally establishes himself as the dramatic John Woo. Kaye, like
Woo, has a penchant for slow motion. But like Woo, Kaye's use of this effect
always seems to fit.
The main thing that impressed me was Kaye's fearless use of the close-up. I
am a big fan of close-ups and believe that directors don't use them nearly
enough. Kaye does in this film, allowing us to peer into each characters
eyes and give us a sense of what they are really feeling. Kaye has the
high-quality acting talent that enables him to do this. Wisely, he takes
advantage of it.
Be warned: "American History X" contains very graphic content throughout the
film. From constant profanities to sexual content, as well as brutally
graphic violence including a male rape in prison, this film is extremely
disturbing to watch. While the message of the film is timely and important,
there will be those who simply can't take the package in which it is
delivered. If these elements sound troublesome, you may need to carefully
consider your decision to see this film.
If "American History X" has a flaw, it comes in some of the plot elements
that it asks us to accept and believe to be possible. Derek is given a scant
three years in prison for the two murders he commits. Granted, the thieves
he gunned down were carrying guns themselves. As a result, Vinyard's charges
of murder are reduced to manslaughter via self-defense. This might happen
for your average Joe, but for a Swastika-brandishing Skinhead who
excessively brutalized one of his victims, it seems too lenient.
Also, the film tries to resolve a couple of its issues and characters too
quickly (roughly a day and a half time period within the film). This seems a
little forced given that the hatred and bigotry has been built up over many
years. But having said that, I credit "American History X" for not tying
this film up in a pretty bow. If anything, the story does not allow the
characters to escape their past even when they may want it to simply go
away. Powerfully and tragically, this film shows the reality of reaping the
harvest of evil seeds sewn, even when you've repented and changed.
But for me, these criticisms are minor because they had a minimal negative
affect (if any at all) on me. In spite of these stretches in realism, the
film never loses its power. It will anger you, move you, shock you, and
change you. It will also stay with you. "American History X" is one of the
best films of 1998. It is a film sure to cause debate, controversy and
discussion. If you can stomach the graphic nature of the film, you will
witness the most honest depiction of modern American racism since Spike Lee'
s "Do the Right Thing". It's a tough, sometimes sickening journey, but one
well worth taking.
If you would like to read other film reviews by Jeffrey Huston, visit his
film review site "Believe Me" at:
http://www.impactprod.org/people/huston/core.htm

Title
Review for Psycho (1998)
Directed by Gus Van Sant.  Produced by Brian Grazer and Gus Van Sant.
Screenplay by Joseph Stefano.  Distributed by Universal Pictures.  Running
time:  109 minutes.  Release date:  December 4, 1998.
(to view this review complete with images from the film, go to:
http://www.impactprod.org/people/huston/psycho.htm )
Ever since Universal Pictures announced that they and director Gus Van Sant
("Good Will Hunting") would be `recreating' the Alfred Hitchcock masterpiece
"Psycho", the most oft asked question has been a simple three letter word:
why?  Well, given that it has been asked so much, it seems almost futile at
this point to ask it again.  It's done, it's in theaters, and that's
that-deal with it.
Besides, to ask `why?' to such an issue is as pointless as asking, `Why is
there pain and suffering?' or `Why do NBA players feel they need more
 money?' or even `Why is sleeping with an intern young enough to be your
daughter so easily forgiven nowadays?'  There are no reasonable answers to
these questions.  These realities exist, no matter how ludicrous they may
be, and that's the end of it.  We just need to accept it and move on.
So with that open frame of mind, I went to see the new "Psycho".  And as I
left the theater upon the film's conclusion, only one thought continued to
haunt my mind: why?  I know, I know, it's pointless to even ask.  But for
one who knows the greatness of the original (as so many of us do), I simply
couldn't stop myself from asking it.  In the context of having seen the
original, to see the new one simply warrants asking the question `why?'.
Hitchcock's "Psycho" has earned the right to be elevated as one of cinema's
sacred cows.  To tamper with such greatness is to flirt with cinematic blasp
hemy.  It is only because of a few elements of original creativity that Van
Sant and the rest should be saved from eternal film damnation.
Universal's new "Psycho" has been touted as a `shot-for-shot recreation' of
the original.  And while it does stay about 95% faithful to the original
script, it is not a pure `shot-for-shot' remake.  This is evident in the
film's opening hotel room scene.  Van Sant utilizes more close-ups and
camera movement than Hitchcock did in this sequence.  This is not a gripe on
my part, but simply an observation.  Such liberties in shot selection are
taken throughout this film, but some are unavoidable given that many of the
sets and locations are not exact replicas of the original.
But having said that, the new "Psycho" does contain a bountiful number of
shots that are literal recreations.  It was interesting to see these and
think back to the originals.  The sad part is that I continually found
myself preferring the originals, thus making this new movie going experience
more of a letdown.  As intriguing as the idea of a recreation is, I think
the talented Van Sant should have just opted to do a remake and bring his
own style to the table (that is, if he really had to remake it to begin
with).
Joseph Stefano, the original screenwriter for Hitchcock's "Psycho", was
brought on board to make minor tweaks to his script in order to update the
story to the Nineties.  As a result a few changes were made, one example
being the money stolen by Marion Crane was increased from $40,000 to
$400,000.  Necessary alterations such as these occur from time to time, but
for the most part the story remains intact.  Other changes are also present,
but I tend to think that they were more Van Sant's doing than Stefano's.
For those of you who wish to discover those changes for yourself, I won't
detail them in this review.  But for the curious or indifferent, you can
find a list of those changes with a link provided in the review on my
website (the link to that list can be found in this same paragraph).  It
essentially lists the differences that I observed.  For a link to the review
itself, see the top of this page.
But what I will do here is discuss my take on the film's look as well as its
performances, and I'll begin with the latter.  I do a great deal of
comparing between the two versions and the remainder of this review is
rather lengthy as a result.  Normally I would not do this with your standard
remake.  But given the fact that this is supposed to be a recreation of a
masterpiece, I feel that such comparative analysis is warranted.
Needless to say, the actors in this film certainly had their work cut out
for them.  And while these talented performers do a fine job in their own
right, their characterizations simply pale in comparison to the originals.
I'll start right off the bat with Norman Bates.  Without even taking
characterization into account, Vince Vaughn ("The Lost World", "Swingers")
simply isn't right for this role in my opinion.  Physically, he's just too
big.  The thin, lanky build of Anthony Perkins personified the shy mamma's
boy personality of Norman Bates.  Vaughn is no mamma's boy.  His build and
height tower over the rest of the cast, making him appear stronger than he
should.  Perkins didn't look like a threatening guy, making Norman all the
more creepy.  With the intimidating Vaughn, you almost expect the guy to
haul off on some of these people.  His obvious talent aside, Vaughn was
simply miscast.
Okay, so he doesn't look the part-but can he act it?  Yeah, he did okay.  It
's a fine job of acting to be honest, but one that would have looked better
had it not Perkins's masterful performance to overshadow it.  Vaughn
definitely makes it real, but his Norman Bates is a little too obvious in
comparison to Perkins.  Perkins was meek and child-like.  He was friendly,
but shy.  Vaughn's Bates is too personable.  Also, Vaughn exposes Bates's
psychosis more than Perkins did.  With Perkins you sense that there may be
something odd or different, but it's probably only because his mother
emotionally suppressed him.  To see Vaughn's Bates is to think, `Um, there's
really something wrong with this guy.'  And in the `post shower clean-up'
scene, we really see the difference between the two.  The Vaughn Bates is
genuinely troubled as he cleans up the blood and disposes of the body.  But
the Perkins Bates has a rather disturbing, methodical approach to him.  This
calm, calculated persona is far more troubling and intriguing.  Again, let
me restate that Vaughn does a fine job here.  But the Anthony Perkins Bates,
one of cinema's all-time great performances, is in every regard superior.
The other character prone for extensive dissection is that of Marion Crane.
It is up to the immensely talented and strong actress Anne Heche to fill the
Oscar-nominated shoes of Janet Leigh.  As with Vaughn, Heche ("Return To
Paradise", "Six Days, Seven Nights") does a good job; but she doesn't live
up to the standard set by Leigh.  Heche has a strong, assertive personality
in her acting style.  She brings it to the role of Marion Crane, and I feel
it is to the detriment of the character.  There's almost a sense of a dry
sarcastic attitude with Heche.  Heche's Marion is too confident and
emotionally together to be a person who is having an affair or one who
impulsively steals money and hightails it out of town.  It seems out of
character for her to do these things.  From the very beginning, Leigh's
Marion had an unease and nervousness about her.  She seemed confused and
uncertain.  Heche does not.
This comes into play in two key areas, the first of which is Marion's drive
that eventually leads her to the Bates Motel.  It is during this drive that
Marion imagines what others will be saying about her once they've discovered
what she has done.  Janet Leigh's stark, unblinking eyes revealed a paranoid
heart and guilty conscious.  Her intense stare showed us a mind that was
racing.  The intensity is lost with Heche.  She merely appears to be
thinking these thoughts, but doesn't seem overly troubled by them.  There
was something mysterious about Leigh's Marion, we never quite understand or
know her.  Heche, in comparison, almost seems like an open book.
The other scene is her parlor conversation with Bates.  As Norman discusses
the traps that each of us live in, Leigh's Marion subtly showed increasing
guilt and nervousness about the situation she had gotten herself into.
Again, Heche doesn't quite achieve this.  We see her thinking, but the
emotional aspect isn't there with the same intensity.  As a result, it
almost seems surprising that Heche's Marion would make the decision to
return home in the morning.  She hasn't seemed troubled enough up to this
point, so why does she feel compelled to turn back?  Plot-wise, it's
unavoidable of course.  But there's not enough emotional subtext with Heche
to motivate the change.  The bottom line-Heche's interpretation is simply
too strong and confident.
I will give praise to Heche for one key addition that I thought was very
insightful.  In the ill-fated shower scene, Heche's Marion has a moment of
recognition before she is brutally murdered.  This recognition, I feel,
increases the level of psychological terror in the scene.  Kudos to Heche
for this small but masterful improvement.
Without going into as much depth, I do wish to address some of the other key
characters.  William H. Macy ("Fargo") plays Detective Arbogast, hired by
Marion's employer to track her down.  Macy brings his trademark naturalism
to the role, but like Vaughn, he seems physically miscast.  Martin Balssam's
Arbogast was a husky gumshoe.  And although his demeanor was calm and
unthreatening, his physical presence seemed to intimidate the weaker Norman.
The physical makeup of the actors is reversed here, with Vaughn being much
bigger in comparison to Macy.  Balssam's Arbogast almost seemed like a
threatening male figure to Norman, much like the man who formed a
relationship with Norman's mother.  This subtext is lost by default given
the drastic physical differences between Vaughn and Macy.  Aside from that,
Macy's characterization is right on.
Two of the film's biggest changes are the characterizations of Lila Crane
and Sam Loomis.  Lila Crane was strong in the first "Psycho", but she seemed
to defer to Sam at times.  Julianne Moore's ("Boogie Nights", "The Lost
World") Lila is much stronger here, leading Sam every step of the way.  It's
definitely a 90s interpretation, and given that it fits this film.  Moore's
Lila is very aggressive and assertive.  But my preference is the more
balanced performance by Vera Miles in the original.
Moore's stronger Lila is exemplified best in the film's climactic scene.
Straying from the norm, Van Sant's direction of this scene is drastically
different (and far less effective) than Hitchcock's.  As well as differences
in characterization, great liberties are taken with shot selection and
composition.  There is one shot from the Hitchcock version of this scene
that is imbedded in my mind.  No attempt is made to even come close to
duplicating it.  If Van Sant's goal is to duplicate the original, why does
he veer drastically from one of the film's most crucial scenes?
I greatly enjoyed Viggo Mortenson's ("A Perfect Murder", "Crimson Tide")
take on Sam Loomis, the married man that Marion is having an affair with.
Mortenson's Loomis is a laid back, easy going hick cowboy without much
backbone.  He's not weak, necessarily, but morally indifferent.  John Gavin'
s Loomis seemed to have too much moral character and strength to be a guy
who would cheat on his wife.  With Mortenson, Loomis is exactly the type of
amoral person who would be involved in such an affair.  Mortenson's Loomis
is one of the few examples of where I preferred this "Psycho" over the
original.
The other would be in the character of Dr. Richmond, the psychiatrist who
explains the psychotic motives involved in the killings.  If the original
film had a weakness, it was this scene.  Simon Oakland's psychiatrist was
interpreted completely wrong.  Instead of portraying a doctor who is
examining the delicate psychosis of a disturbed mind, Oakland played it like
an angry police detective or prosecutor detailing the crime.  Emotionally,
Oakland was way off.  I won't expose the identity of the actor who portrays
Dr. Richmond in this new version so that you may discover it for yourself.
But I will say that he delivered one of 1997's top performances.  Given my
immense respect for that performance, I was pleasantly surprised to see him
take on this role that I felt needed much improvement.  This actor delivers
as he takes the softer, more caring approach with Dr. Richmond.  If for no
other reason, Van Sant can possibly justify his recreation in that he
greatly improved this scene.
For all of the missteps and errors that I feel Van Sant made here, I must
credit him for two areas where he changed the original.  These two changes
were elements that Hitchcock wanted to include, but for technological and
cultural reasons was unable to do so.  The first is the opening shot.
Panning across the expanse of Phoenix, Arizona, Van Sant's lengthy take
moves from a wide view of the city and closes in on the window of Marion's
hotel room, traveling through it to reveal Marion and Sam on the bed.  The
shot is continuous and uninterrupted.  This is how Hitchcock wanted to do
it, but was unable to because of technical restrictions.  His slow zoom into
the hotel room was assembled by dissolves, linking the various shots used to
compose this opening sequence.
The other is in the death of Marion.  Originally, Hitchcock wanted to have
an overhead shot of the naked dead Marion draped over the side of the
bathtub, revealing her entire body.  Given that it was a shot of her
backside, Hitchcock believed it is something he could get away with.  The
censors said otherwise.  Van Sant restores that shot to his version,
tastefully lingering on it for only a moment.
The two best elements of this new "Psycho" are the art direction and costume
design.  Although set in 1998, the look of this world is wonderfully retro.
The set pieces favor the late 60s and early 70s, as do the costumes.  But
the colors are modernly pastel, instilling it with a contemporary feel.
Props and clothing have an air of thrift store quality that is fun and
uniquely original.  Credit Tom Foden's production design and Beatrix Aruna
Pasztor's costumes for giving this recreation its most original elements.
I also took great joy in two of the film's more faithful efforts.  First and
foremost is Danny Elfman's loyal re-recording of Bernard Herrmann's
masterful score.  I must admit, a smile came across my face as the film
opened and the theater was filled with Herrmann's eerie composition.  Fifty
percent of the film's impact is found in the music, one that is frightfully
full while only using string instruments.  This is one of the most
recognized and best film scores of all time.  Thankfully, Elfman keeps in
intact.
The other element is that of the mysterious highway patrol officer that
Marion runs into on her way to the Bates motel.  I nearly did a double take
when I saw him.  The guy is a virtual clone of the actor in the 1960
original.  It really captivated me to see this.  I can only imagine the
giddy glee expressed by Van Sant and producer Brian Grazer when they came
across this actor.  It was, perhaps, the film's best element of homage to
the original.
Arguably the worst aspect of this recreation is the use of color.  The black
and white photography was such an integral element in the overall mood and
effect of the original.  The dark shadows and lifeless gray's created a
palpable sense of foreboding evil.  It also allowed Perkins and Leigh to
remain subtle while bringing out the subtext so evident in their eyes.  The
color makes the visuals too busy and distracting.  The imagery doesn't
arrest you as it does in the original, therefore exposing some of the story'
s slow pacing.  The original's black and white images enrapture you as the
compensate for the plot's few tedious moments.
The bottom line may be this: as I watched the new "Psycho" (less than two
hours, just like the 1960 version) it actually seemed to drag.  It didn't
captivate me like the original did.  Conversely, I could watch Hitchcock's
version tomorrow and be completely drawn into it from beginning to end.  It
has a psychological power that is missed in Van Sant's recreation.  If you
do see this new version, my recommendation would be this: watch Hitchcock's
version first, even if you've seen it before.  But if you haven't, then
without question you should see it prior to watching the recreation.  Do not
taint your initial viewing of Hitchcock's masterpiece with this plodding
remake.  Then shortly thereafter, like say within the next day or so, go see
the new one.  I think the greatest enjoyment one could have with Van Sant's
version is to view it comparatively.  Sure, it will most certainly result in
some level of disappointment, but there is something uniquely entertaining
in watching the film from this context.
Finally, let me just say this.  Van Sant, Grazer, Vaughn, Heche and the rest
were in an admittedly no-win situation.  The collective gifts that this
immense talent pool brings would have been better spent on an original
collaboration.  But instead, they are wasted on this doomed venture of
trying to meet expectations that are simply impossible to achieve.  Given
that, I commend them for their courage in tackling this daunting effort.  I
don't doubt their bravery or love for Hitchcock, but it is their wisdom that
I question.
(if you would like to read other reviews by Jeffrey Huston, visit his film
review website "Believe Me" at:
http://www.impactprod.org/people/huston/core.htm )

Title
Review for Bug's Life, A (1998)
Directed by John Lasseter.  Co-directed by Andrew Stanton.  Produced by
Darla K. Anderson and Kevin Reher.  Screenplay by Andrew Stanton, Donald
McEnery and Bob Shaw.  Original story by John Lasseter, Andrew Stanton and
Joe Ranft.  Distributed by Walt Disney Pictures.  Running time:  93 minutes.
Release date:  November 20, 1998 in NY/LA; November 25th nationwide.
(to read this review complete with pictures from the film, visit Jeffrey
Huston's website at: http://www.impactprod.org/people/huston/abugslife.htm )
Great family entertainment is rare nowadays.  Many films and TV shows like
to present themselves under the guise of being entertaining for the whole
family, but most are not.  `Family Entertainment' is an abused expression by
studio marketers that are trying to peddle films or videos that really only
appeal to kids.  They say their product is `for the whole family', but as
the kids laugh and giggle, Mom and Dad find themselves nodding off.
As I define it, `Family Entertainment' is something that literally everyone
in the family can enjoy, no matter how young or old they may be.  "A Bug's
Life" is family entertainment at its absolute best.
Walt Disney Pictures and Pixar Animation collaborated on one of this decade'
s most revolutionary films, 1995's "Toy Story".  It was the first film to be
animated entirely by CGI (Computer Generated Imagery).  This holiday season,
Disney and Pixar give us their second effort, the energetic and highly
entertaining "A Bug's Life".  Also animated by CGI technology, "A Bug's
Life" is a sumptuous visual treat that takes the look of "Toy Story" to
another level.  And whereas it may not have quite the level of character
depth as its 1995 predecessor, "A Bug's Life" is a smart, fun adventure that
is as pleasing to the sense of sight as it is to the sense of humor.
"A Bug's Life" is the story of an ant colony oppressed by a gang of
grasshoppers.  Using their superior strength, the scary grasshoppers strike
fear into the ants, threatening them with their very lives if they do not
give the grasshoppers all of the food they have harvested through the summer
and fall.  Feeling powerless to do anything, the ants hopelessly give into
this demand.  Except one.
Flik, a simple worker ant with aspirations of being an inventor, is viewed
by most of the colony as eccentric, high-minded and foolish.  Yearning to
redeem himself, Flik ventures out of the ant colony in the hopes of
recruiting other insects as defenders of the ant harvest.  Through a
hilarious sequence of mistaken identity, Flik enlists a group of carnival
insects for this battle, believing them to be warrior insects.  This
alliance-by-misunderstanding evolves into a fable which shows us that belief
and faith in oneself and others enables us to achieve feats that reach
beyond our perceived limitations.  It is a wonderfully affirming morality
tale in the grand tradition of Disney's best animated features.
The story for "A Bug's Life" succeeds where so many family-oriented movies
fail.  It tells an exciting story with interesting characters that is
entertaining to adults while being fascinating to children.  The story is
very well structured; it displays excellent character development and
legitimate dramatic tension that challenges the resolve of its characters,
all building to an exciting climax.  It also employs a sharp wit with quick
barbs and observations that are uproariously funny.  In today's sex obsessed
culture, this is a shining example of truly great humor.  It is comedy that
makes you laugh out loud without relying on easily concocted sexual
innuendoes.  This is a smart, funny script with a positive, heartwarming
message.
"A Bug's Life" may very well be the most perfectly cast film of the year.
Boasting an impressive list of actors, the voices and characterizations
simply could not have been better.  Actors such as Dave Foley, Julia-Louis
Dreyfus, David Hyde Pierce and John Ratzenberger could be classified as
`Must See Voiceovers' as they are mostly known for their work on popular NBC
sitcoms ("NewsRadio", "Seinfeld", "Frasier" and "Cheers", respectively).  As
familiar and perfect are the voices of Pierce and Ratzenberger for their
characters, Dreyfus does well as Princess Atta in that she is appropriately
straight-forward instead of being the overly extroverted Elaine, all the
while maintaining her hallmark energy.  And while Foley doesn't do anything
that is necessarily spectacular, his performance of Flik is both exuberant
and tender.
Kevin Spacey has one of the film's juiciest roles as the maniacal Hopper,
leader of the oppressive grasshopper clan.  While being aggressively angry
at the appropriate moments, the greatness that Spacey brings to Hopper is a
quiet, calm, but fear-inducing authority.  He doesn't always explode with
hot rantings.  But rather, he pierces each ant with a cold look and a
chilling whisper.  Spin City's Richard Kind plays Molt, Hopper's hilarious
suck-up of a sidekick.  Kind's loud brashness provides much of the film's
humor.
My favorite performance would have to be that of Joe Ranft.  As well as
being one of the film's screenwriters, Joe Ranft provides the voice for
Heimlich, the shy and naďve chubby caterpillar with the voice of a
seven-year-old Arnold Schwarzenegger.  The combined talents of Ranft and the
animators make Heimlich a funny and endearing character.
Kids and adults alike will gaze in awe at the artwork in this film.  With
its bright colors, three-dimensional textures, and smooth flow of movement,
"A Bug's Life" is a visual marvel.  There is a great deal of movement in
this picture with so many things going on at once.  It is a complex
orchestration of moving images that is utterly impressive.  The colors burst
off of the screen with rich greens, blue hues, and even a foreboding sunset.
The array of insects in the story led to vastly different character designs
and creations.  It is a veritable smorgasbord of creativity, presenting us
with little creatures that range from the stout and round to the tall and
thin, and virtually everything imaginable in between.  Perhaps the best
character designs are the grasshoppers.  With scaly, rough detail and
precise nuances of movement, the grasshoppers really come to life.  The
multi-legged anatomy is clearly on display as the grasshoppers move around
effortlessly.  The grasshoppers are, in my opinion, the best creatures I've
seen created using CGI technology.
Randy Newman, who delivered one of this year's best film scores with his
compositions for "Pleasantville", has broken new personal ground with his
work for "A Bug's Life".  Newman hasn't broached full-fledged adventure
territory before, but proves himself more than up for the task.  Newman's
score is a rousing one that captures and accentuates the action and
excitement of the story.  It's so good that I'm willing to forgive him for
the annoyingly typical Randy Newman song that plays under the film's end
credits.
It's hard to avoid comparisons with the DreamWorks CGI film "Antz" that was
released less than two months prior to this movie's release.  But I believe
it is unfair and pointless to compare the two for it would be an `apples and
oranges' scenario.  "Antz" is a great film in its own right, as is "A Bug's
Life".  And although there are a few unavoidable similarities between them,
they really are two different films at heart.  Whereas "Antz" has an adult
sophistication to it, "A Bug's Life" is a childlike magical adventure.  In
fact, I can't remember the last time a film has genuinely made me feel like
a kid again as "A Bug's Life" did.  Perhaps it is for this reason that I
personally give an edge to "A Bug's Life", but not necessarily because it is
(in technical cinematic terms) a better film.
As an added treat, last year's Academy Award winner for Best Animated Short
Film, "Geri's Game", is shown in front of "A Bug's Life".  Also made by
Pixar Animation Studios, it is the oddly fun story of an old man playing
chess-against himself.  Thank Disney for this fun bonus, an Oscar winning
film unseen by a wide audience until now.  And on the other side of the
spectrum, there's fun to be had after the conclusion of the film as well.
Make sure to stick around for the end credit roll to enjoy some of the film'
s funniest moments.
With films like "What Dreams May Come", "Antz", "Dark City", and
"Pleasantville", 1998 has been a banner year for breathtaking cinematic
imagery.  Now you can add "A Bug's Life" to that list.  Like those films, it
is a true work of art that ultimately comes to life through its hilariously
enchanting insects and adventurous story.  And if you're not careful, the
story may even eventually move you as its brave characters exemplify the
story's moral of having faith in oneself and those around you.  "A Bug's
Life" is pure, unadulterated fun that is also spectacular filmmaking.  For
great family entertainment, the surefire bet presently in theaters is Disney
's "A Bug's Life", a rousing animated adventure that is destined to become a
classic.
If you would like to read more reviews by Jeffrey Huston, please visit film
review page "Believe Me" at:
http://www.impactprod.org/people/huston/core.htm

Title
Review for Enemy of the State (1998)
Directed by Tony Scott. Produced by Don Simpson and Jerry Bruckheimer.
Screenplay by David Marconi. Distributed by Touchstone Pictures.
Running time: 130 minutes. Release date: November 20, 1998.
(Jeffrey Huston's URL for this review, complete with pictures:
http://www.impactprod.org/people/huston/enemy.htm )
As with a delicious gallon of Grade-A milk, it's sad to see a good movie
turn sour. Okay, maybe that's not the best analogy, but you get the picture.
A movie draws you in. It excites and intrigues you. Then it lets you down.
That, in a nutshell, is producer Jerry Bruckheimer's ("Armageddon", "Con
Air") latest film "Enemy of the State".
It is a promising re-teaming of Bruckheimer and director Tony Scott who
collaborated previously on such entertaining and engrossing hits like "Top
Gun" and "Crimson Tide". But the promise is broken after the film's first
hour, resulting in a conspiracy thriller that is ultimately lacking in
suspense.
"Enemy of the State" tries to create a sense of "X-Files" governmental
paranoia minus the UFO's and paranormal. The story involves a lawyer named
Robert Clayton Dean (Will Smith) who is unknowingly thrust into a
high-stakes game of governmental cover-up. A chance encounter with an old
college acquaintance results in Dean obtaining possession of a videotape
that shows the murder of a U.S. Senator.
The catch is that the senator was murdered by a group of renegade FBI agents
led by a top official at the National Security Agency, Thomas Brian Reynolds
(Jon Voight). The problem is that Dean is unaware that he possesses this
videotape. So when Dean becomes the focus of an unrelenting manhunt by
Reynolds and his cronies, he naturally runs from this pursuit with paranoia
surging through his veins. Dean's only hope for survival is an ex-NSA agent
named Brill (Gene Hackman), a renegade patriot who is keen to Reynolds and
his crimes.
The main problem with "Enemy of the State" is that it shows all of its cards
way too soon. After about an hour, we the audience are made aware of every
bit of necessary information concerning the plot and its characters. Robert
Clayton Dean and Brill are still in the dark, but we aren't. We know exactly
what they're running from and why they are in this situation.
Because of this, virtually all suspense is eliminated. By knowing
everything, it disables us from completely feeling Dean's paranoia.  As a
result, the film's final hour ends up being just a series of chases and
cloak & dagger rendezvous.
These scenes are tense for the characters, because they don't know what they
are dealing with. We do, however, and as such most of the tension is
eliminated.  "Enemy of the State" goes from being a taut, exciting,
suspenseful thriller to one that simply plods along as a technical cinematic
exercise.
The cast is solid, with good performances being turned in by most of the
leads. Will Smith makes up for his minimal acting range with charisma and
sincerity. His fear and determination are very believable and he never seems
out of his league around the likes of Oscar winners Gene Hackman and Jon
Voight. Hackman is solid as always, effortlessly finding the right emotional
level for every line and scene. It's too bad he doesn't show up until about
an hour into the film, and then only sporadically until the end.  Voight is
good as the film's bad guy.  But having played the heavy in such recent
films as "The Rainmaker" and "Mission: Impossible", this performance by
Voight is beginning to feel a little redundant.
The two lead actresses fare rather well in their roles.  Regina King ("Jerry
Maguire") brings her trademark energy to the role of Dean's opinionated wife
Carla.  Lisa Bonet (TV's "The Cosby Show") resurrects her career as Rachael
Banks, an informant for Dean.   Bonet's subtle yet vulnerable turn here is a
very pleasant surprise.
While suspense in the story may be lacking, the filmmaking is not. Dan
Mindel's photography mixes classic Bruckheimer visuals with fast dollies and
jerky zooms. This adds a flavor of high-tech espionage and covert
surveillance that is necessary to the mood of the film.
Chris Lebenzon's editing is jarring and uneven, but only when it needs to
be.  "Enemy of the State" is well produced from a technical standpoint, but
it doesn't have a suspenseful story to support it.
Screenwriter David Marconi and director Tony Scott did the film a disservice
in revealing everything about Dean's plight within the film's first hour.
They would have better served the story (and its audience) by doing one of
two things:
For the suspense that "Enemy of the State" lacks, blame should not be
assessed to Will Smith. He does a fine job as an innocent yet frightened and
paranoid man who is thrust into the overwhelming, lethal world of
governmental espionage. His character doesn't know until the final quarter
of the film why they are after him. Unfortunately for us, we pretty much
know after the first scene.
URL for Jeffrey Huston's film review site "Believe Me":
http://www.impactprod.org/people/huston/core.htm

Title
Review for Babe: Pig in the City (1998)
Directed by George Miller. Produced by George Miller, Doug Mitchell and Bill
Miller.  Screenplay by Judy Morris, Mark Lamprell and George Miller.
Distributed by Universal Pictures. Running time: 96 minutes.  Release date:
November 25, 1998.
(to read the full text of this review complete with pictures from the film,
go to: http://www.impactprod.org/people/huston/babe2.htm )
Making a sequel to a widely beloved film is a weighty proposition indeed,
especially when the first film is considered by many to be a masterpiece.
When it comes to living up to expectations, a filmmaker is almost doomed to
some degree of failure. For a sequel to live up to or even surpass the
original's greatness is very rare indeed.  And whereas "Babe: Pig in the
City" misses equaling the greatness of its Best Picture nominated
predecessor Babe, it is a worthy companion piece. More than that, it is a
spectacular work of art that deserves to stand alone in its own right.
"Babe: Pig in the City" warrants the classification of being recognized with
such classics like "The Godfather: Part II" and "The Empire Strikes Back" as
being one of the greatest sequels ever produced.
"Babe: Pig in the City" picks up precisely where "Babe" left off. Having won
the sheep herding competition, Farmer Hoggett (James Cromwell) and his pig
are elevated to fame status. A series of unfortunate circumstances and
hilariously freakish events leads to Mrs. Hoggett taking Babe from the small
country farm into the big city. In doing so, the film transports us into a
wonderfully imaginative world that simultaneously mirrors and exceeds the
creative design seen in the original.
"Babe: Pig in the City" flourishes where so many sequels fail. Most sequels
simply rehash the events of the first film. Not "Babe: Pig in the City".
This is a completely original tale that offers up a story drastically
different than the first. Also, by not being content to utilize most of the
old characters, this film gives us many new ones to enjoy. In essence, it
doesn't attempt to copy itself. Instead, it strives to achieve an
originality of its own. And it succeeds.
That's not to say the familiar is absent. "Babe: Pig in the City" retains
some of the best core elements and characters from the first film. Along
with Babe himself, Ferdinand the Duck comes along for the ride, as does Mrs.
Hoggett (one of this decade's best and most underappreciated comic
characterizations, hilariously performed by Magda Szubanski). The three
singing mice also make the journey, chiming in with their cute high-pitched
vocals.  The story structure is also similar as each segment is introduced
with title cards read by the aforementioned mice. From there, we are guided
once again by Roscoe Lee Browne's soothingly deep narrative.  Composer Nigel
Westlake also returns with his whimsical music style that is perfect for
cinematic fables such as these.
But these elements are simply the frame that surrounds an entirely new
painting. While staying at the Flealands Hotel, Babe encounters a veritable
Ark-full of new animals. Monkeys, kittens, and dogs of various breeds and
sizes are some of the new "urbanites" that Babe befriends, as well as some
wonderfully comical Pelicans that Ferdinand the Duck happens to encounter.
Each character is distinctly unique, some of which are imbued with personal
human-like struggles that are endearing and touching.
And while this world focuses largely on these animals, we are introduced to
two new human characters as well. Mary Stein plays the owner of the
Flealands Hotel, an animal-loving young spinster who harbors these lost
creatures much to the dismaying anger of her fellow neighbors. Stein's
landlady is a wonderfully odd caricature. We also meet Fugly Floom, an old
soft-spoken clown who owns many of the animals in The Flealands Hotel,
utilizing them as a part of the act that he performs at different parties
and functions.  Not having known who portrayed Fugly Floom prior to seeing
the film, it came as an unexpected pleasant surprise to see who it was. So
as not to ruin this well-kept secret, I won't reveal the actor's identity
here. It was a treat indeed to see one of cinema's legends grace the screen
again in what was a superbly gentle and heartwarming performance.
The greatest triumph of "Babe: Pig in the City" is the art direction. Simply
put--it bleeds creativity, taking the look of the original film to a whole
new level. Restricted primarily to a farm the first time around, this second
installment creates an entire city, dazzling us with unique fable-like
architecture.  But the stroke of pure genius by Production Designer Roger
Ford is his use of our world's architectural landmarks. Designing a skyline
that includes the Statue of Liberty, the Sydney Opera House, the Brooklyn
Bridge, the Hollywood sign and the Eiffel Tower, Ford has created a singular
city that encompasses all of our cities (as seen in the film photo and
pre-production drawing to your right).  Added to that, many of this city's
streets are the twin siblings of Venice's gondola-trekked rivers. The
Metropolis that has sprung from Ford's vision is a wondrous sight to behold.
It is a world that you want to walk around in.
Norma Moriceau's costume designs belong in this world, vibrant in color and
style equal to that of the Ford's landscape. Most of the costumes are
imaginatively cartoonish, with the most exotically grand design going to
that of Fugly Floom's clown outfit. Andrew Lesnie's photography captures
these elements with various lighting moods that are beautifully effective in
creating the film's multiple emotional tones.
Much press fodder has been made over the weeks leading up to the release of
"Babe: Pig in the City". Reports stated that its original cut was branded
with a PG-13 rating. These reports were discovered to be false as it was
assigned a PG rating. But even so, to be anything harsher than the original'
s G rating had many parents and fans up in arms. By deleting a minimal
number of shots, "Babe: Pig in the City" was eventually given the coveted G
rating.
Although appeased, many fans were still concerned that it would be too dark,
fearing that the film may have come to be possessed by Tim Burton himself.
Well, to coin a phrase, the reports of "Babe: Pig in the City"'s death at
the hands of a dark, scary, Felliniesque interpretation have been greatly
exaggerated. Granted it has its moments of pseudo-morbidity, but all-in-all
"Babe: Pig in the City" is the funny and charming adventure that everyone
was hoping it would be.
Whatever "dark" moments it may have can be attributed to director George
Miller (the "Mad Max" trilogy, "The Witches of Eastwick", "Lorenzo's Oil").
Having served as a producer and co-writer on the first film, Miller moves
into the director's chair for this one, putting his own unique sense of
style into this budding franchise.
The story of "Babe: Pig in the City" is an enchanting yarn, but one that
doesn't achieve the emotional or character depth of the original. Missing
here is the attempt to broach such heady themes as personal identity, an
individual's worth, challenging conformity, and one's purpose in life.
"Babe" dealt with this weighty subject matter, creating a timeless fable.
"Babe: Pig in the City" should not have rehashed these themes, but I do wish
it would have attempted to explore new ones.
This film is not bereft of moral or message as it parallels such issues as
urban strife, class differences, sacrificial courage, and so on. But this
film's goals aren't as lofty as the first's, instead choosing to take a more
straightforward approach, allowing its themes to take a back seat to an
exciting, sometimes intense, fable adventure that is undeniably clever and
inventive.
"Babe: Pig in the City" also decides against developing a relationship to
the level of which was present in the first film, specifically the one
between Farmer Hoggett and Babe. Hoggett's love for Babe, which grew ever so
gently, is what gave that film its charming and endearing quality. Best
exemplified in Hoggett's dance for Babe, this moving relationship was truly
unique. It is something that I wish would have been present again (and could
have through Fugly Floom), but was not.
Please understand, these are not negative criticisms, per se', but simply
statements of what I see as the differences between "Babe: Pig in the City"
being a very good film and the original being a great one.  But having said
that, these observations are minor critiques at best. As an overall piece,
"Babe: Pig in the City" is a thoroughly enchanting and entertaining fable
from beginning to end. Sure, it isn't a great film, but it is an excellent
one that possesses elements of greatness. It is a film that is magical with
its charm and humor, exciting in its adventurous exploits, funny with its
dry wit and cute voices, and breathtaking in its presentation.
"Babe: Pig in the City" may not be moviemaking at its absolute best, but it
is on level of cinematic quality that is rarely achieved or seen in cinema.
As a result, if you choose to let this film pass you by, you will be missing
of the year's best cinematic treats.
(to read other reviews by Jeffrey Huston, visit his film review page
"Believe Me" at: http://www.impactprod.org/people/huston/core.htm )

Title
Review for Meet Joe Black (1998)
Jeffrey Huston's "Believe Me" URL: http://www.impactprod.org/people/huston
Believe Me's "Meet Joe Black" Review (complete with pictures) URL:
http://www.impactprod.org/people/huston/meetjb.htm
Produced and Directed by Martin Brest.
Screenplay by Ron Osborn, Jeff Reno, Kevin Wade and Bo Goldman.
Distributed by Universal Pictures. Running time: 176 minutes.
Release date: November 13, 1998.
Why is it that whenever Brad Pitt and Anthony Hopkins team up in a movie,
the film ends up being a saccharine Harlequin romance novel? It sounds
weird, doesn't it? Granted, the characters that Pitt and Hopkins play are
never romantically linked (that would be too weird). But for some strange
reason, this trait has been a core aspect of their two collaborations.
"Legends of the Fall" was nothing more than a tawdry, melodramatic paperback
romance in film form. Now comes "Meet Joe Black", a completely unrealistic
romantic fantasy that tries to manipulate our emotions as opposed to
actually challenging them.
Loosely based on the Fredric March classic "Death Takes A Holiday", "Meet
Joe Black" has a unique premise. Corporate mogul William Parrish (Anthony
Hopkins) is about to celebrate his 65th birthday. But a couple of days prior
to the elegant bash being thrown by his eldest daughter, Parrish is visited
by none other than Death himself (Brad Pitt). Using the body of a recently
deceased man, Death wishes to take a break from his normal duties and be
given a tour of life on earth. After being guided by Parrish for a brief
time, Death will take him into the afterlife after his birthday celebration.
Assuming the name Joe Black, Death becomes Parrish's shadow, following him
into virtually every area of his life. But conveniently, he takes enough
breaks from this partnership to strike up a love affair with Parrish's
forlorn youngest daughter Susan (Claire Forlani). It is a romance complete
lacking in chemistry or motivation as they fall in love almost
instantaneously without even knowing anything about each other. They just
"connect". This may appeal to an idealistic teenager, but for the average
adult it may prove unsatisfying to see a woman fall in love with a guy whose
greatest passion is peanut butter. If the reasoning is "But it's Brad
Pitt!", then that is a truly shallow and meaningless reason indeed.
Running at just a hair under three hours, "Meet Joe Black" long overstays
its welcome. Scenes go on far past the point of which they should end.
Schmaltzy lingering looks and lengthy dramatic pauses are present in
virtually every scene. This is such a quiet film, one where you could hear a
pin drop about every two minutes. The pacing plods along ever so slowly,
unlike any film that I've ever seen before. You could trim about a
half-an-hour off of the film's length by simply making the dialogue and
action tighter.  But director Martin Brest wallows in pregnant pauses, ones
that suck the life out of the story, the characters, and eventually the
viewer.
I mean, how many times do we have to cut back and forth between two
characters "reacting" to one another before another word is eventually said?
Must they deeply contemplate everything that they say? This is easily Brest'
s worst film. If you want to see his best, rent the engaging and powerful
"Scent of a Woman".
The script wants so badly to be about ideas. It yearns to provoke thought
about death, life, and what we should value. But for the most part we are
bludgeoned with speech after speech that simply waxes poetic about life and
love. These diatribes are based in the ideal, but are rarely tested by
issues of reality. Because of this, much of the film comes off as preachy
instead of challenging.
Most of this enlightenment is communicated through Death of course, or at
least when it's convenient for him to do so. Joe Black is a contradictory
enigma who is all-knowing and wise in one scene, then simple and naďve the
next. In this film, Death is the most tender and sensitive entity that one
could imagine. This New Age characterization of Death as simply being
misunderstood may be appealing to some, but I had a hard time believing that
the Grim Reaper didn't have a dark side.
Most of the performances are annoying and one-dimensional. As Death, Brad
Pitt is uncharismatic and stilted. Early on there is a scene where he
discovers the unique taste of peanut butter. According to his dialogue, he
seems to be quite taken with it. But his inappropriate understated manner
simply says, "Huh, that's nice." For peanut butter being something that he
can't seem to get enough of, he emotes little (if any) excitement about it.
This example is characteristic of Pitt's entire performance. It makes sense
for him to be in this zombie-like trance at the beginning. But to see no
change in his emotional state for the entire film simply doesn't make sense.
He says that his experiences are changing him, but they seem to have no
affect on his countenance or personality. Brad Pitt has yet to live up to
the promise that was shown in 1995 when he was nominated for his supporting
turn in "12 Monkeys", as well as delivering the best performance of his
career as the naďve police detective in "Seven".
Claire Forlani is unimpressive in her debut as a leading ingenue. If she has
range as an actress, you certainly don't see it here. Like Pitt's
characterization, Forlani's performance of Susan is a one-note portrayal
that stays the same from beginning to end. This character reeks of pandering
to a female audience. Susan is shy and vulnerable, prone to cry at the drop
of a hat. She is a soft-spoken waif just waiting to be swept off of her
feet. Forlani never balances Susan's vulnerability with any sense of
strength, unintentionally creating a character that comes off as weak and
borderline co-dependent.
One look from Pitt's blue eyes (that at times hide behind his golden bangs)
and she's a goner. This may make some women swoon, but it certainly does not
equate substance or depth in the characterization of Susan Parrish.
The first scene in which she meets Pitt's character is embarrassingly
"scripted". This good-looking blonde just happens to hit on her and, in the
period of five minutes, expresses his innermost feelings about how love
should be. This is, I am led to believe, every young woman's dream. Too bad
it's something that will never happen. The best kind of fantasy has some
basis of reality because it gives the illusion that the fantasy might
actually be possible. But even though this fantasy is set in reality, it has
no basis in it.
Jake Weber is burdened with the duty of playing the bad guy. As Drew, Weber
plays the young hotshot climbing the corporate ladder. The story begins with
him having both William Parrish's ear as well as the affections of his
daughter. But as the film progresses, we see him for the cut-throat selfish
tycoon that he really is. If William Parrish is supposed to be such a shrewd
businessman, how does a jerk like Drew pull the wool over his eyes for so
long? Characters like Drew are formulaic plot devices that create
inconsistencies in the characters that choose to associate with them. There
isn't a shred of humanity in Drew; he is simply an unscrupulous evil
character who has no business being in a film that aspires to be mature.
The picture is visually lush in both its art direction and cinematography,
but at times too lush. The love scene in particular is overly beautified as
it looks like a perfume or lingerie commercial. The soft golden light shines
off of our two lovers as they strike sensual poses for the camera. These
constructed shots belong in a magazine ad or on a billboard, but are out of
place in a dramatic film.
Thomas Newman's music score is beautiful, albeit excessive. Particularly at
the films end when we are assaulted with multiple orchestral crescendos that
are supposed to really make us cry. This music bombards us as characters
either contemplate or cry. Then a short exchange occurs between two people,
immediately followed by more sweeping woodwinds and strings. Of the many
adjectives one could use to describe the use of music in "Meet Joe Black",
subtlety isn't one of them.
In a film so tediously boring, Anthony Hopkins provides the one jolt of
life. His William Parrish seems to be the only character with emotional
levels. At times he can be withdrawn and mysterious, but he also has his
moments of frustration and explosive anger.
He is also the only character that actually expresses challenging ideas.
Just when I was about to throw-up after yet another feel-good platitude,
Parrish chimed in with a statement that actually made me think. In a film
with few bright spots, Hopkins's performance stands out as the brightest.
The other actor worthy of praise is Jeffrey Tambor (TV's "The Larry Sanders
Show") who plays Quince, William's son-in-law and business partner. Quince
is gentle and loyal, but never weak. Though not a person who is prone to be
confrontational, Quince never lacks conviction. Tambor is to be credited for
giving more depth to his character than was provided him by the script.
This film fails in one key area. Until the very end, the only person who
knows of Joe Black's true identity is William Parrish. As a result, the film
sidesteps a conflict that could have been truly dramatic and intriguing.
Ponder for a moment with me, if you will. Imagine if, say, at the beginning
of the film's final hour, Susan discovers that Joe is Death. Think of the
potential complication that this would pose. The man she loves is the same
man who has come to take her father away from her. This would have created a
very challenging personal struggle for all three characters involved.
Instead, by keeping Joe's identity hidden, Susan is not challenged in any
way, leaving us to sappy expressions of love and romance that have no basis
of substance or motivation.
"Meet Joe Black" wants to have its cake and eat it to. It takes the heavy
and complicated subject of death and tells a fable where virtually every
plot line (save one crucial story element) is tied up ever so nicely with
the ribbon of audience satisfaction. The film gives us virtually everything
we "want". William Parrish and Joe Black are the only ones who know that he
is about to die. But somehow, virtually every character has a moment with
Parrish that ends up being a deathbed confessional and expression of love.
The only problem is that they have no idea he is on his deathbed. So why,
all of a sudden, do they finally feel the need to pour out their soul? I can
believe it coming from Parrish, he knows what's about to happen. But from
everyone else it seems horribly forced. These people are living on an
exhalted emotional and spiritual plain the likes of which I have never seen.
The film doesn't have the courage to challenge us with the thought that, if
we're not careful, those that we love may pass on before we have the chance
of expressing all that we really feel. Had Brest not been so concerned with
making us happy, he would have been more successful in communicating the
themes that he was hoping to address. But instead of being given something
to think about, we are appeased with the relief that everything worked out
in the end. When you choose to tackle the reality of death in a story, I
think you cheat the subject matter by having everything end so conveniently.
"Meet Joe Black" may very well be the oddest film released in 1998. It is a
film that is guilty of (what I consider to be) virtually every artistic
crime known to cinema. And yet for some truly odd reason, for as bloated and
indulgent as Martin Brest's film is, I never found myself losing interest.
Don't get me wrong; aside from Hopkins and Tambor, my interest wasn't
sustained because the film was good. I think what kept me in it was how
uniquely awful it was. I've never seen bad filmmaking quite like this
before. Dare I say that Meet Joe Black, in regards to bad filmmaking, is
revolutionary. I found a perverse entertainment in discovering brand new
ways to make a film bad. For me, this may be a singular appeasement. But for
the public at large, you're best to steer clear of this boring mess.
The thoughts and opinions of Believe Me are expressly Jeff Huston's
and not necessarily shared by Impact Productions
[Believe Me]    [Impact Productions]
[Comments -- "What do you think?"]

Title
Review for Vita č bella, La (1997)
Directed by Roberto Benigni. Produced by Gianluigi Braschi and Elda Ferri.
Screenplay by Roberto Benigni and Vincenzo Cerami. Distributed by Miramax
Films. Running time: 120 minutes. Release date: October 23, 1998 in NY/LA;
wider over the coming weeks.  (Italian film with subtitles)
(to read this review complete with pictures from the film, go to:
http://www.impactprod.org/people/huston/life.htm )
The idea: a comedy set in a World War II concentration camp. Sounds like
"Hogan's Heroes", but it's not. In fact, nothing could be further from the
truth. "Life is Beautiful (La Vita E' Bella)", from acclaimed Italian
filmmaker and comedic actor/director Roberto Benigni, achieves the
unthinkable. It uses comedy to tell a deeply moving story set against the
backdrop of this century's greatest horror, the Holocaust. With the haunting
memories of "Schindler's List" still fresh in the psyche of our culture,
Benigni's approach first appears to be potentially tasteless and offensive.
That's why it is all the more impressive that this is a film that is
reverent, honorable, and inspiring. Through Roberto Benigni's joy of spirit,
"Life is Beautiful" powerfully reaffirms life itself.
Like all great films, "Life is Beautiful" is best viewed without prior
knowledge of key plot elements. One of my greatest pleasures in watching it
was that I knew nothing of the film's story aside from its basic premise.
Therefore I will not detail a synopsis here, but rather discuss the story's
structure, the film's performances, as well as its themes.
The first and second halves of "Life is Beautiful" are as different from one
another as they are necessary to each other. The first half is a charming,
magical romantic fable (filled with moments of glorious color) that could
have been pulled straight out of Hollywood's Golden Age of the 1930s and
40s. There is a sweetness about it rarely seen in modern cinema. It isn't
until the film's second half that the concentration camp comes into play.
Some may watch it and feel that it is two different films put together. I do
not feel that would be an accurate view. Rather, "Life is Beautiful" has a
defined two-act structure. Within the first act's joy and romance, there are
moments of subtle foreshadowing that hint at the elements to come. And
without the first act's charm and humor, the film's second act would seem
peculiar and oddly inappropriate. The two halves feed off of each other; one
is not complete without the other. It is by seeing the first half that we
can view the second half in a proper emotional context. It is an extremely
difficult weaving of vastly differing moods, but it is done masterfully by
Benigni. The mixture of humor with evil is a precarious balancing act, one
that seems virtually impossible to achieve. It is Benigni's deep
appreciation and sensitive understanding of humanity that enables him to
make this film work.
Roberto Benigni, along with being the film's lead actor, also serves as
writer and director. Needless to say, this film is Benigni in every sense of
the word. Among the film's strengths, it is Benigni's performance that is
the strongest. He evokes memories of Charlie Chaplin, virtually the only
actor since that era who has done so. His gift for physical comedy is rooted
not in the situation but the character. He also uses the props around him,
as Chaplin did, in a very unique and entertaining way. Benigni is nothing
short of a comedic genius.
But perhaps more than anything, the trait that really makes Benigni so
special is the joy he exudes. It seems to just pour out of him. His
portrayal of Guido truly is one of a person who takes great pleasure in
always finding life's beauty. It is through him that we are able to see
beauty, even when the circumstances are helacious.
The film is blessed with superior, at times transcendent, performances by
its supporting cast. Nicholetta Braschi plays Dora, Guido's love interest.
She is a woman who seems to have it all. But it is through Guido that she is
awakened to life's true blessings. It is a subtle, heartfelt performance by
Brashci, one of the better female performances of the year. Giustino Durano
plays the District Attorney, a man of power who befriends Guido. His
character arch is a unique one with a subtle evolution. Just when you think
you know him, you realize that you don't.
There must be some international law that all good foreign films must have a
great performance by a child actor ("Ponette", "Cinema Paradiso", "Kolya").
If there is such a law, then "Life is Beautiful" sure has abided by it.
Giorgio Cantarini plays Giosue', Guido's son. He becomes an integral part in
the film's second half. Unaware of the real reason why he and his father are
at the concentration camp, Giosue' believes and trusts the reasons as to why
his father says they are there. Cantarini's innocence is sweet and loveable.
He makes you yearn for that innocence to not be lost.
The script, by Benigni and Vincenzo Cerami, is one of the year's best
efforts. They find unexpected but magical ways to interweave various plot
elements and characters. Two story lines that seemingly have nothing to do
with each other eventually intersect. These are soft, tender moments that
take you pleasantly by surprise. It's what gives the film much of its charm
as well as its depth.
The moments of foreshadowing in the film's first half are particularly
strong. I think of one scene in particular where Guido's horse is painted
bright green with various racial slurs (Guido is Jewish). He playfully
brushes this off, finding humor even in this. His thinking is, of course,
that it is ultimately harmless. Certainly things could not get any worse,
right? Of course our hindsight tells us otherwise, making this scene all the
more sad.
Benigni displays great talent as a director in this scene with his use of
the film's score. Up to this point, Nicola Piovani's music is playful and
bright. But as Guido laughs about this incident with the horse, we hear the
first use of music that is somber and foreboding. It is in direct contrast
to Guido's mood. The music represents what we, the audience, already know of
what is to come. It also begins the transition between the film's first and
second half. This is expert direction by Benigni, using music to add depth
and develop the story's dramatic build.
There is a powerful aspect to "Life is Beautiful" that doesn't make itself
overtly apparent. It is something that, while I caught it during the course
of the film, I did not fully comprehend until afterward. It was immediately
after seeing the film that as I began to meditate on the character of Guido,
it hit me in the pit of my soul. What I realized is that in the character of
Guido was one of the most powerful examples of courage that I had ever seen
in film.
The reason it is not obvious is because humor is not commonly associated
with bravery, particularly in cinema. It is not humor "per se" that is brave
here, but Guido's underlying motivation for using it. Benigni instills Guido
with a deep fatherly love for his son. It is this paternal instinct which
will do all that is possible in order to protect one's child. It is what
Guido uses to shield Giosue', even at the risk of his own life. Every day,
Guido must go through grueling physical and psychological abuse. But the
instant he sees his son, Guido is somehow able to summon the strength to
appear as if he has not a care in the world. It is a display of courage that
occurs in the most unlikely of ways; an act of selflessness that made an
indelible impact on my life.
In profound fashion, Guido personifies the axiom "Life is what you make it".
It is an unexpected, oddly passionate yet deeply emotional portrayal of a
father's sacrificial love for his son. Parents in particular will be moved
by Benigni's wholly original performance, one that I found to be both
humbling and inspirational.
While the film does take place in a concentration camp, there is not
excessive or graphic visual content. The hardships are portrayed and the
threat of evil is always present. But as Guido guards his son from the camp'
s horrors, director Benigni visually guards them from us as well.
"Life is Beautiful" is arguably the best foreign film to be released in the
United States since 1995's "The Postman (Il Postino)". Both released by
Miramax, "Life is Beautiful" warrants the promotional support given to "Il
Postino", which went on to receive Oscar nominations for Best Picture,
Director, Actor, Screenplay and Original Dramatic Score (which it won).
"Life is Beautiful" deserves to be embraced in the same manner.
At this year's Cannes Film Festival, Benigni and his film received a
ten-minute standing ovation from the audience that attended the screening,
an event unprecedented in the Festival's fifty-plus year history. It is no
wonder that it went on to win the Grand Jury Prize at Cannes. "Life is
Beautiful" is one of the most unique film experiences of the year. It is
also one of the best. What Benigni's film so poignantly show us is that in
the midst of the dark ugliness of death, the light of life shines at its
most beautiful.
(to read other reviews by Jeffrey Huston, visit his film review website
"Believe Me" at: http://www.impactprod.org/people/huston/core.htm )

Title
Review for Elizabeth (1998)
Elizabeth I: Cate Blanchett
Sir Francis Walsingham: Geoffrey Rush
Lord Robert Dudley, Earl of Leicester: Joseph Fiennes
Duke of Norfolk: Christopher Eccleston
Sir William Cecil: Richard Attenborough
Mary of Guise: Fanny Ardant
Queen Mary Tudor: Kathy Burke
The Pope: John Gielgud
Directed by Shekhar Kapur. Produced by Alison Owen, Tim Bevan and Eric
Fellner. Screenplay by Michael Hirst.  Distributed by Gramercy Pictures.
Running time: 124 minutes.  Release date: November 20, 1998 in limited
release; November 25th nationwide.
(to read this review, complete with pictures from the film, go to:
http://www.impactprod.org/people/huston/elizabeth.htm )
It is refreshing to see a film made from a slightly different perspective
from what is usually seen in its given genre. It may not be completely
different, but it stands out amongst similar efforts. "Elizabeth" is such a
film. It takes the art house, period costume piece and skews a dark edge to
it. This is not a revolutionary feat by any means, but it is a unique vision
that sets it apart from many historical dramas of recent memory. This dark
look, in coercion with a gripping story and bold performances, makes
"Elizabeth" one of the more enthralling cinematic ventures of the year.
Set in mid-1500s England, "Elizabeth" is the dramatization of Queen
Elizabeth I's rise to power and the daunting opposition she faced once
having ascended to the throne. It is a cloak-and-dagger tale where loyalties
are always in question; one that climaxes to a conclusion that could be
classified as Britain's version of "The Godfather". Director Shekhar Kapur
has assembled an impressive piece of cinema here with his keen artistic eye
and restrained, suspenseful character exposition.
The story of "Elizabeth" is essentially a power struggle with a ribald
streak. In spite of threatening enemies, Queen Elizabeth chooses to rule and
abide by Protestant teachings as opposed to the Catholic reign that preceded
her. As a result, a potential Holy War looms over England as influential
members of the Catholic Church join forces with coup-minded Royal advisors
in an attempt to overthrow Queen Elizabeth, whom they see as heretical and
blasphemous.
Coupled with this, there are foreign countries that look to capitalize on
what they see as weakness in England, creating a truly daunting wall of
opposition that surrounds Elizabeth on all sides. It is a tricky endeavor as
people tend to say one thing while meaning another, with every conversation
depending not on truth but rather the company of people assembled. With the
exception of a few individuals, director Kapur keeps the motives of his
characters veiled and uncertain. From this uncertainty rises gripping
suspense and surprising revelations that keep the viewer glued in
anticipation.
The cast is first-rate, displaying some of the year's best performances.
Leading the way as Queen Elizabeth I is Cate Blanchett ("Oscar & Lucinda",
"Paradise Road"). Blanchett commands the screen with power and nobility. It
is a multi-layered performance as Blanchett allows us to see Elizabeth's
weaknesses and fears; but while in the company of both loyal subjects and
threatening foes, she only reveals an intimidating resolve and
uncompromising strength. Blanchett excels in every regard. Expect to see her
name on next spring's Oscar ballot.
Oscar winner Geoffrey Rush ("Shine") is the other standout with his turn as
the mysteriously sinister Sir Francis Walsingham. A security advisor
assigned to protect the Queen, Walsingham is the story's greatest enigma.
Rush's subtle portrayal is chilling and ominous.  From one scene to the
next, we never really know where his loyalties lay. Are they with the Queen?
Her enemies? Or just himself?  Walsingham's actions eventually tell the
tale, but the fact that we don't have a clue prior to those actions is a
testament to Rush's performance and Kapur's direction. Walsingham is the
polar opposite of Rush's frenetic portrayal of trouble pianist David
Helfgott in "Shine", making his Oscar win for that performance seem all the
more worthy.
Joseph Fiennes is impressive in his American debut. Over-shadowed in the
past by his more famous brother Ralph Fiennes ("Schindler's List", "The
English Patient"), Joseph puts himself on the cinematic map with his
portrayal of Lord Robert Dudley, the charming Earl of Leicester who has won
the heart of Elizabeth. Like his brother Ralph, Joseph has a strong screen
presence as he exudes romantic passion and quiet strength through Lord
Robert. These walls eventually give way to vulnerability, allowing Fiennes
to showcase his range in this complex role.
Acclaimed director Sir Richard Attenborough ("Gandhi", "Shadowlands")
moonlights as an actor once again (with previous roles including the
"Jurassic Park" films) with his portrayal of Elizabeth's most trusted
confidante Sir William Cecil. His is the only character whose moral
uprightness is apparent throughout. Attenborough's Cecil is a noble servant
who humbly submits all that he is to the Queen and her Kingdom. Christopher
Eccleston's Duke of Norfolk is a rare cinematic villain in that he actually
acts from personal conviction, not caricaturized hatred or anger. He is
intense without being over-the-top as he allows his passion to rise from his
beliefs, not mere prejudices. Eccleston's performance adds a level of depth
to the story that could have been so easily missed.
"Elizabeth" is a sumptuous visual spectacle. The costumes designed by
Alexandra Byrne (Kenneth Branagh's "Hamlet") are arguably the best seen all
year. Rich in color and astounding in detail, Byrne's elegant costumes are
truly impressive creations. John Myhre's ("Immortal Beloved") production
design is a medieval gothic realm. High arches of cold gray stone embody the
castles seen here, also replete with strong pillars and ornate decoration.
All of this is captured quite well in Remi Adefarasin's ominous photography.
With sweeping overhead shots and candid close-ups, the camera work by
Adefarasin (assistant DP on "The English Patient") creates moods of
oppressive power and mysterious darkness. The combination of these talents
result in the most visually breathtaking period film since 1995's
"Restoration".
Composer David Hirschfelder ("Shine", "Sliding Doors") provides a music
score that is powerful and haunting. With full classical orchestrations and
spiritually dark choral voices, Hirschfelder's bold compositions are as much
of a force as the film's passionate performances and arresting imagery.
Michael Hirst's screenplay is an excellent mix of historical overview and
dramatic complexity. As alluded to in earlier segments of this review, Hirst
's screenplay never shows its full hand until the very end. This poker face
storytelling always keeps us guessing.  People's loyalties and motives
seemingly change from one scene to the next without their actions ever
appearing disjointed or out of character. One scene we may think a person is
good, then we're not so sure the next (with the converse also being true).
This mysterious complexity of characters makes up for the few lulls within
the story itself.
Shekhar Kapur has shot and assembled this story to near perfection. Most
directors forecast a characters motives right off the bat, holding on
lengthy close-ups so that we can "tell" if a person is bad or not. Kapur
doesn't stoop to this amateurish level, therefore we cannot label most of
the characters as "good" or "bad" until the film's final quarter.  But even
so, Kapur shows wisdom with his inclusion of the ethically sound Sir William
Cecil. In doing so Kapur doesn't leave us completely adrift, giving the
story a moral center as well as someone solid and trustworthy for us (the
audience) to look to.
"Elizabeth" is an epic film that showcases one of the most courageous
heroines to be seen on film in many years. It is a stirring account that is
sure to engross those far beyond its core audience. To flippantly
characterize this as "middle-aged Girl Power" would be to sorely
misrepresent this film and the moral challenges that Queen Elizabeth faces.
With depth, ambiguity, visual spectacle and sheer emotional power,
"Elizabeth" is one of 1998's most captivating experiences.
(to read other reviews by Jeffrey Huston, visit his film review website
"Believe Me" at: http://www.impactprod.org/people/huston/core.htm )
