Authors
dsassoc@neponset.com (D&S Associates)
Number of Reviews
17

Title
Review for Mars Attacks! (1996)
Director Tim Burton, who brought us such celluloid treasures as
"Beetlejuice" and "Edward Scissorhands", now stepa into the
extravaganza spotlight with his science fiction spoof, "Mars Attacks!"
Starring just about everyone in Hollywood from Jack Nicholson to
Natalie Portman, "Mars Attacks!" is base on the Topps trading card
series of the same name from the early 60's.
Burton, using the card series for his basic story, pays homage to the
grade B alien invasion films of the 50's, but, with a major difference
- a $70 million budget lavishly spent on the truly spectacular special
F/X!
While "Mars Attacks!" is not the out-and-out hoot that I had high
hopes for, it IS a high calibre homage, by Burton, to those campy
sci-fi alien invasion classics we grew to love in the 50's and after.
(I watched a marvelously bad example of the genre, recently, call
"Robot Monster". It is so jaw-dropping bad that I found it impossible
not to watch. I understand and embrace the decades-long affection we
have for this kind of film and why Burton would want to do such a
project.)
"Mars Attacks!" does capture the campiness of the originals pretty
well. The quality of the cast is many notches above thos in the films
"Mars Attacks!" spoofs, but, they get down and dirty, anayway, and
have a hell of a good time with their roles - particulary Annette
Bening as the ditzy, new-age, 12-stepper, Barbara Land, who believes
in the ggodness of Martian-kind, and Jim Brown as an
ex-boxer-turned-Las-Vegas-casino-greeter, who goes one-on-one
with a Martian leader, and WINS! 
Glenn Close give an amusing, but brief, turn as the First Lady.
Everyone else appears to be there for the fun of it.
But, the real star of of "Mars Attacks!", and the thing that dulls the
camp edge Burton strives for, are the collection of absolutely
fabulous special F/X.  They are so seamless and eye-popping
outstanding that the rest of the film takes a back seat. The homage
that Burton intended is lost on the razzle dazzle of the effects. The
studio, to say the least, overdid it by giving Burton way too much
money. I would rather he had a smaller budget and used
that brilliant imagination that has brought Burton so far.
Prior to the appearance of the Martians, the movie builds slowly for
the first 30 minutes. But, once the bug-eyed, big-brained, little
green men arrive on screen, you can expect a wild and wooly
rollercoaster ride that lasts right up to the end.
The evil aliens are great and their presence represents some of the
best melding of live action and animation to date.
This may not be the best or funniest effort by Burton. It is his
biggest, and a lot of fun, too.
"Mars Attacks!" isn't great, but good, and I give it a B.
"Mars Attacks" is a big goofy spoof of 1950's B Sci-fi movies given
the megabudget treatment by quirky, childlike director Tim Burton ("Ed
Wood", "Batman", "Edward Scissorhands").  Burton also handily manages
to skewer some of this past summer's blockbuster films such as
"Independence Day" and "Twister" and wastes no time doing it - when a
couple of farmers think they smell barbeque, the approaching glow on
the horizon turns out to be a stampeding herd of cattle fully ablaze!
It looks like everyone in Hollywood wanted to be part of the fun.
"Mars Attacks" stars Jack Nicholson in dual roles of the President of
the United States and a sleazy Las Vegas hotel developer, Glenn Close
as the Nancy Reganish first lady, Annette Bening as a new age flake,
Pierce Brosnan as a clueless scientist, Danny DeVito as an obnoxious
gambler, Martin Short as the on-the-make President's press secretary,
Sarah Jessica Parker as a ditzy talk show host, Michael J. Fox as her
journalist boyfriend, Rod Steiger as a Dr. Strangelovish general,
Lukas Haas as a doughnut shop worker (and savior of the human race),
Sylvia Sidney as his grandmother, Natalie Portman as the President's
daughter, Jim Brown as an ex pro fighter, Pam Grier as his ex-wife,
Lisa Marie as a Martian woman and Tom Jones as himself.  This isn't a
film about great acting, it's more a chance to watch a huge cast
having a great time, but there are a few standouts. Annette Bening is
particularly amusing as the new age wacko who believes the Martians
are coming to save earth.  Pierce Brosnan is perfect as the alien life
specialist - he does a terrific parody of his own image. Glenn Close
has perfect timing in her second comedy outing of the season.
Technically, "Mars Attacks" is first rate, boasting top notch special
effects (the Martians were entirely computer generated).  Tim Burton's
regular scorer, Danny Elfman, offers suitably retro music.  Costume
designer Colleen Atwood produces eye-popping outfits and production
designer Wynn Thomas provides the perfect locales for the action to
take place.
Screenwriter Jonathon Gems has written a script that keeps things
moving along at a brisk pace accented by weird bursts of humor (a
Martian ship zaps the Washington Monument and then nudges it in
several directions in order to get it to land on a boy scout troop)
and a truly bizarrely satisfying method of defeating the Martians
(let's just say that it involves yodelling).
This is a good bit of fun, but I wonder if it was sound filmmaking
judgement.  Tim Burton was able to run free in a $70 million dollar
playground which had another $30 million of marketting dollars thrown
at it, but I suspect "Mars Attacks" will draw mostly the core cult
audience of "Ed Wood".

Title
Review for Preacher's Wife, The (1996)
Penny Marshall updates the 1947 holiday film, "The Bishop's Wife",
which starred Loretta Young, Cary Grant and David Niven, with her
latest effort, "The Preacher's Wife", starring Whitney Houston, Denzel
Washington and Courtney B. Vance.
The Reverend Henry Biggs, played by Vance, is the pastor of a small,
urban church which has seen better days. Henry, living in the shadow
of the church's former pastor, the father of his beautiful wife Julia,
played by Houston, has doubts about his ability to save his little
parish from its downward spiral. Finally, in desparation, Henry asks
the big guy himself, God, to lend a hand.
Help does arrive in the guise of Dudley, played by Washington, an all
too down-to-earth angel sent to assist the skeptical preacher in
turning things around for the church and community.
I have a very strong affinity to the original film, "The Bishop's
Wife", mainly because of a decades-long crush on Loretta Young as the
luminous Julia. Young gave a deeply charming performance, exuding
warmth, love and beauty, making the film a poarticular holiday
favorite of mine.
Penny Marshall, with "The Preacher's Wife", does a competent job in
remaking and updating the original film, catching the spirit of "The
Bishop's Wife", if not the more palpable magic of the first.
Whitney Houston, not a particular favorite of mine, is far more self
assure than her earlier outings, dominating the screen when singing,
especially the gospel tunes. Her acting is still stilted, but getting
better. The many songs she sings takes attention from her developing
acting skills.
Dudley, the angel, as played by Cary Grant, always struck me as a
vacuous, if suave, character, in the film for the face. Denzel
Washington lends the character the necessary charm and wit, with a
hint of randiness, that it needs.
Courney Vance, of the principle cast, fares best ast the beleaguered
preacher, Henry, who is trying to hold his church and his marriage
together, while also trying to cope with the dealings of the
ubiquitous Dudley. Where David Niven played Henry as a straight-laced
prig, Vance gives the Reverend more dimension and nuance.
There are some theological problems about Dudley's origins that go
against the teachings of Christianity, but, what the hell, we'll let
it slip by.
"The Preacher's Wife" is a kind-hearted holiday flick with lots of
gospel music and decent performances, and a fair rtelling of the
original.
I give "The Preacher's Wife" a B-  (I give "The Bishop's Wife" a B)
Director Penny Marshall and screenwriter Allan Scott have done a fine
job of updating "The Bishop's Wife" for the 90s with "The Preacher's
Wife." Whitney Houston stars as Julia Biggs, the wife of Reverend
Henry Biggs (Courtney B. Vance), a man trying, but failing, to walk in
the footsteps of Julia's inspiring father and keep his poor New York
City parish from going under. Their son Jeremiah (Justin Pierre
Edmund) is about to lose his best friend Hakim to child welfare, the
church boiler is near collapse, a young parishioner is falsely accused
of a crime and developer Joe Hamilton (Gregory Hines) has purchased
the church's mortgage with pricey condominiums in mind.
Denzel Washington is Dudley, the angel who's been waiting to be sent
to earth to good deeds and eat pizza.  While Washington doesn't quite
embody the charm of the original's Cary Grant, he comes fairly close.
At least the women, including Julia's mom Marguerite (Jennifer Lewis),
don't find him too tough to take even though Reverend Biggs views him
with suspicion.
"The Preacher's Wife" is obviously a Whitney Houston showcase, though.
She's the church's choir leader, giving way for ample opportunity to
let her belt out a few numbers.  I usually find her singing grating,
but here, singing mostly Gospel numbers, she's just fine.  This is her
most natural and relaxed performance.  You believe she's as good
hearted as she's supposed to be, even if she indulges in a little
'window shopping' with Dudley. 
The real standouts in the cast are Jennifer Lewis, a still beautiful
and devillish older woman with a solid moral core and Courtney B.
Vance's beleagered Henry (he's beginning to show a real chameleon-like
acting ability - his character here is SO different from those of
"Dangerous Minds", "The Last Supper" and "Panther").  Also amusing in
a supporting role is "Waiting to Exhale"'s Loretta Devine as Bigg's
single mother church secretary.
I have a couple of complaints with "The Preacher's Wife."  For one
thing, Whitney's wardrobe is largely inappropriate.  During the
skating sequence she's wearing a hat that looks like an expensive
designer number. In fact, the struggling family seems to lack for
nothing - Jeremiah's bedroom is strewn with toys.  The costumes used
for the church's nativity play look Hollywood professional as well.
Also, the running time is padded out to a full two numbers because of
all the musical numbers, not all of which are necessary.
Overall, though, "The Preacher's Wife" is a fine holiday family film.

Title
Review for People vs. Larry Flynt, The (1996)
(This review is an excerpt from Reeling, a movie review show hosted by
Laura and Robin Clifford, running on Boston Cable TV. Note that the
film descriptions vary in completeness due to the fact that they're
actually intros for running film clips.)
"The People vs. Larry Flynt", directed by the great Czech filmmaker
Milos Forman, stars Woody Harrelson as the title character - a sleazy,
flesh-peddling strip club owner who parlayed raunchiness into the
multi-million dollar Hustler empire and became, through circumstance,
a major proponent of the First Amendment right to the freedom of
expression.
Alternative rock star Courtney Love makes her starring debut as Althea
Leasure, the underage stripper who became Flynt's lover, wife and
business partner before succumbing to AIDS in 1983.
The film follows Larry Flynt's beginnings as an adolescent moonshiner,
through his rather amazing career as sleaze-meister,  a redeemed
Christian, and, finally, a crusader of the Constitution, ending in his
Supreme Court victory against the Reverend Jerry Falwell and the
so-called Moral Majority.
Any film about pornography and sleaze, directed by Milos Forman,
starts off with high points from me. "The People vs. Larry Flynt" does
not disappoint, almost, at all.
Up front, I have to say that this an actors movie. All the trappings
of First Amendment rights and the battle to maintain these rights in a
reactionary, self righteous society takes a back seat to the
performances of Woody Harrelson, Courtney Love, Ed Norton and a bevy
of supporting characters.
Woody Harrelson (who would have thunk it when watching him on Cheers)
is proving himself to be one capable actor, possibly only under
capable directors such as Forman and Oliver Stone ("Natural Born
Killers"), possibly because he CAN act. Here, as Larry Flynt,
Harrelson starts off slowly, but builds steadily Flynt's character
until the line between the actor and the character blurs. In the last
half of the movie, I believed I was watching the man, not the actor.
Damn good job by Harrelson that may or may not garner an Oscar nom. He
will get more serious attention in the future.
Courtney Love gives a truly outstanding performance as Althea Flynt.
In the hands of a master such as Forman, Love delivers a powerful and
believable performance as a young woman drawn to the sleaze of Larry
Flynt, mainly because he is her kindred spirit in that sleaze. Altheas
dedication to Flynt, the man and the business, is well drawn and
without any falseness. If Madonna is nominated, for "Evita", over
Courtney Love, it will be one of Hollywood's grander screwups.
Edward Norton, who blew me away in his debut as the psycho in last
years "Primal Fear",  plays a composite of lawyers involved with Flynt
over the years, including the real Alan Isaacman. Nortons boyish looks
belie the inherent acting ability portrayed here. He is convincing as
Flynt's longtime friend and legal advisor and gives a very effective
speech before the Supreme Court in the film's climax. Edward Norton is
an actor to watch for in the coming years.
Other supporting cast, such as "Good Day, New York" correspondent,
Donna Hanover, in a terrific debut as evangelist Ruth Carter Stapleton
, who briefly turned Flynt toward Christ, and political consultant
James Carville, making his acting debut as Simon Leis, Flynt's
opponent in early legal battles, are examples of exemplary casting.
Also notable is Harrelson's real-life brother, as Larry Flynt's
brother and business partner.
 The rest of the supporting cast, such as a Vincent Schiavelli and
Crispin Glover, were not only miscast, they hurt the scenes they are
in. A mixed bag of support, some very good, some not.
Milos Forman ("One Flew Over The Cuckoos Nest", "Amadeus") is a
masterful filmmaker and it shows here. He draws terrific performances
from much of his cast and deftly conveys the screenplay to the screen.
The screenplay, by Scott Alexander and Larry Karaszewski, is rich in
detail and dialogue. Alexander and Karaszewski also showed an
adeptness with biographies with their script for Tim Burton's "Ed
Wood".
I have one not-so-minor problem with "The People vs. Larry Flyn"t: it
doesnt go far enough in conveying the utter sleaziness that Larry
Flynt and Hustler magazine represented. Some of you may have seen
Hustler, but I can safely bet that most have not. For the uninitiated,
Larry Flynt is portrayed as a working class Hugh Hefner, with a
working class version of Playboy.  He was anything but a Hefner clone.
The purification of raunch that represented Flynt takes the edge off
of what could have been a terrifically edgy film.
Because of this, I give "The People vs. Larry Flynt" an A-.
Czech director Milos Forman ("One Flew Over the Cuckoo's Nest,"
"Amadeus") has directed an American classic with "The People vs. Larry
Flynt."  I must state right up front, however, that this should not be
considered a Larry Flynt bio-pic, but a piece of American Pop - at
least that's how I'm viewing it.  Screenwriters Scott Alexander and
Larry Karaszewski, whose  last script lionized another oddball
outsider, Ed Wood, have portrayed Flynt almost as a naif who happens
to be a shrewd businessman faithful to his friends, madly in love with
his wife, Althea Leasure, and a crusading proponent of free speech.
I'm sure there are plenty of people (the Reverend  Jerry Falwell
aside) who would love to air a sleezier, darker, nastier more
self-serving picture of the man (as is the case with a former security
man and brother-in-law in the February issue of Penthouse).
"The People vs. Larry Flynt" is essentially about two things - Larry
Flynt's fight for his first amendment rights and the love story
between him and Althea.  Flynt's head for business is established in
1952 Kentucky where he was a child moonshine bootlegger.  The grown up
Flynt (Woody Harrelson) enjoys running a strip club and the employees
who dance there.  He decides to promote his Hustler club via
newsletter consisting of nude shots of his dancers, but the printer
informs him that without any textual content, he'd be arrested for
distributing pornography. Voila - the birth of Hustler magazine.
There are three terrific performances from the three principals in
"The People vs. Larry Flynt."  Woody Harrelson loses himself in the
role, particularly in the latter part of the film after Flynt's
paralyzed by an attempted assassin's bullet.  I found myself watching
Larry Flynt, not Woody Harrelson.  Courtney Love is as good as all the
hype around her performance says - she's a either natural actress or
Althea Leasure's soulmate.  Edward Norton ("Primal Fear") impresses
again as Flynt's lawyer - a very mature performance from a very boyish
looking young actor.  All three performances are strong contenders for
an Oscar nomination.
Also of note is Donna Hanover, a newswoman, as the strangely seductive
Ruth Carter Stapleton, helping Flynt be born again.  James Cromwell
("Babe") appears as Flynt adversary Charles Keating (later of the
savings and loan scandal) and Bill Clinton's campaign advisor James
Carville debuts as a county prosecutor.  Flynt himself appears as
Judge Morrisey, who presided over Flynt's first obscenity trial.
The film is funny, epic, tragic and brashly colorful in a 70's period
way.  The film's locations include Flynt's actual Hollywood mansion
and publishing offices.
My one small nit with "The People vs. Larry Flynt" is that there are
several scenes which are too abruputly editted throughout the
midsection of the film which broke me out of the movie experience.
Otherwise, I was totally wrapped up in Forman's American fable.
Visit Reeling at http://www.neponset.com/reeling.

Title
Review for Portrait of a Lady, The (1996)
(This review is an excerpt from Reeling, a movie review show hosted by
Laura and Robin Clifford, running on Boston Cable TV. Note that the
film descriptions vary in completeness due to the fact that they're
actually intros for running film clips.)
Continuing with the 19th century literature onslought begun with 3
Jane Austen film adaptations in the past year, Australian director
Jane Campion ("The Piano") brings Henry James' "The Portrait of a
Lady" to the screen.  Nicole Kidman stars as American Isabel Archer an
independent young woman with a large inheritance who's moved to Europe
to experience more of the world.  Her curiousity allows her to be led
by a manipulative friend with a shady agenda, Barbara Hershey's Madame
Merle, into the arms of a dark dilettante, John Malkovich's Gilbert
Osmond.
"The Portrait of a Lady" is a complex story, gorgeously shot, moodily
symbolic and erotic.  Jane Campion is proving that she can stand
easily in the pantheon of world class directors, and I, for one,
would love to see her nab a second Best Director Oscar nod.
I'm a bit perplexed why this film hasn't received more accolades -
I've seem some negative response based on comparison with the source
material.  I'll state right here that I've never read the book
(although my appetite to do so has now been whetted), so I'm judging
the film simply on its own merits.
The film begins oddly, with an opening credit sequence of modern women
shot in black and white, as well as color, in sisterly groups of
staring into the camera - there's almost a hint of lesbian overtones.
Here Campion announces that her interpretation of the story will bear
her distinctive mark.
Isabel Archer, in an attempt to mark her independence, makes a
perverse choice that will bring her nothing but unhappiness.
Nicole Kidman is fine as Isabel, but I doubt this role will garner her
an Oscar nomination even though she was unjustly overlooked last year.
James Malkovich is typecast as the perversely dark charmer who revels
in emotional abuse, but he is good at these types of roles and plays
this one quietly.  
The standout in the cast is Martin Donovan as Isabel's sickly cousin
Ralph, one of her three, more upstanding admirers.  He's a Victorian
embodiment of the 'if you love them, set them free' school of thought.
He reminded me of Jeff Bridges at his most haunted best - maybe even
better!
Barbara Hershey does some fine work as the duplicitous Madame Merle,
who finally sinks into despair as she witnesses the pain brought about
by her actions. 
John Geilgud is also outstanding - he makes a strong impression in two
small scenes.  When left alone with his son Ralph, he immediately
indulges himself in a forbidden cigarette (Gielgud's pale face and
white hair framed in smoke - a beautiful, haunting image).
Another brilliant scene takes place at a ball.  While the black-clad
matron Isabel politically juggles her stepdaughter's two suitors,
plump Italian women in lavish costumes pass out to her left and right
- the coldness of an arranged marriage juxataposed against the fever
of passion.
The film wraps with triumphantly, if obliquely, in a gothically
bleak snowy England after the false sunshine of Italy.  The film's
beautiful cinematography and locations are complimented by a
hauntingly romantic score.
Normally, as a film critic, I can divorce the guy in me and just watch
a film on the critic level. Sometime, as in "Portrait of a Lady", I
watch the film as both a critic and a guy, which causes me great
confusion.
As Robin, the film critic, I watch "Portrait..." and note the detail
and attention given to costume, set design, photography, writing,
acting and direction, and see a finely crafted work with solid credits
all around.
The acting is uniformly first rate from top to bottom - especially the
performance given by Martin Donovan as Nicole Kidman's cousin and
admirer, Ralph. Very subtly, he builds on the viewer's and cousin
Isabel's (Kidman) affections so that, by the end, you're rooting for
him to get the girl. Too bad he dies. Blame the Henry James novel for
that.
The key actors, Nicole Kidman, John Malkovich (making a career as a
slimy sex symbol) and Barbara Hershey, are very good. Not great,
through no fault of their own, but still very good.
My only problem with the film, as Robin, the film critic, is that the
story is too involved for the acting. The actors are trying so hard to
do justice to the story that I never was able to get too deep into the
motivations of the characters they portray. I think its the wealth of
information being conveyed that overshadows the actors efforts.
Technically, especially the photography alluded to in the title - some
of the shots are, in fact, as visually stunning as genuine portraits -
this is a top notch affair.
Again, as Robin, the film critic, I find Portrait of a Lady to be one
of the years best and give it an A-.
Now, to Robin, the guy: its over two hours long, theres no gratuitous
violence or nudity (nudity is symbolic here, at best - guys don't do
symbolic). No guns. No good guys/bad guys. No explosions. No
shootouts. Just a lot of talking. Hey, this isn't the kind of movie
for A Guy to see, is it? Decidedly not.
Robin, the guy, gives it a C+, but that doesn't count. Robin, the
critic, still gives "Portrait of a Lady" an A-.
Visit Reeling at http://www.neponset.com/reeling.

Title
Review for Evita (1996)
(This review is an excerpt from Reeling, a movie review show hosted by
Laura and Robin Clifford, running on Boston Cable TV. Note that the
film descriptions vary in completeness due to the fact that they're
actually intros for running film clips.)
is the long awaited movie version of the 70's Andrew Lloyd Webber
musical starring Madonna as Eva Peron, a small time actress who slept
her way to the top by finally seducing Juan Peron, the dictator of
Argentina, played here by British star of stage and screen, Jonathan
Pryce.  Once established as Argentina's first lady, Eva Peron became a
self-serving champion of the downtrodden masses before succumbing to
cancer at the age of 33.
Directed by Alan Parker, "Evita" is narrated by Antonio Banderas as
cynical everyman Che.
"Evita", the movie, has been a long time coming to the big screen, and
has made its journey amidst much controversy, especially the one in
casting Madonna as Eva Peron.
Well, after years in the making, "Evita" has finally made it and it is
not shabby!
Alan Parker brings us a lavish screen production of the 1979 stage
play, with brilliant costume (88 costume changes for Madonna), art
direction, photography and music.
The music is mostly effective, keeping the songs in sync with the
period feel of the film. A couple of electric rock numbers are out of
place with the period and would have best been dropped. Two of the
numbers - "Look Out, Buenos Aires", a flashy and colorful piece, and,
what Laura calls "So Sad When A Love Affair Dies", which chronicles
Eva's efforts to sleep her way to the top - are good examples of how
the music fits the film.
Madonna, as Eva Peron, does a first rate job with the songs, but isnt
an experienced enough actor to use non-lyric expressions to convey
emotions. It makes me wonder what would have happened if Meryll
Streep, a much more accomplished actor, were cast as Eva. Madonna is
not that impressive as an actor, despite her entreaties for Academy
recognition.
Antonio Banderas, on the other hand, impressed the hell out of me. He
has a natural singing voice, with a slight gravelly quality, that
lends to his role as the everyman narrator, Che. His presence as both
actor and character help to make him the best thing in "Evita".
Jonathan Pryce, as Juan Peron, does not really have much to do but be
a figurehead character. His singing is fine.
My problem with the film, and the thing that hampers it from being
better, is that there is little attempt to educate the viewer about
the Argentine politics of the period and Eva's place in that world.
There's more shadow than substance to the story. Mainly, the film
tells me that Eva Peron was little more than a conniving opportunist -
not the image I would expect the filmmakers want to put forth. 
A particularly favorite lyric from one of the film's songs, which sums
up Eva Peron, is "The people, they need to adore me. So, Christian
Dior me." It gave me a hearty chuckle.
I think its funny that I rate "Evita" the same as I do "Beavis and
Butt-head Do America". I give "Evita" a B.
Alan Parker has co-produced, co-written (with Oliver Stone) and
directed a lavish musical film version of the smash stage musical
"Evita."  The 15 history of this coming to the screen approaches the
story of the casting for "Gone With the Wind," with the likes of Meryl
Streep vying for the role of Evita and directors such as Ken Russell,
Francis Coppola, Michael Cimino and Oliver Stone attached to the
project.  Parker ignored the play's screenplay and went back to the
original concept album's score and lyrics (which preceded the actual
stage production) along with historical research in order to write his
film's screenplay.
The film looks great.  It was shot on location in Argentina, England
and Hungary.  The "Don't Cry for Me, Argentina" scene was filmed at
the actual balcony of the Casa Rosada, where Eva Peron addressed the
people.  The art direction and costume very successfully evoke the
1920s and 1940s periods that the film takes place during.
Cinematographer Darius Khondji ("Seven," "Delicatessen," "The City of
Lost Children") also lends an appropriate period glow to the film.
"Evita" is told entirely by musical numbers (with the exception of a
very few spoken lines by minor characters).  Madonna (who passionately
fought for this role) does a fine job - at times I even forgot it was
Madonna I was watching, although not entirely.  She's publically
stated that she expects an Oscar nomination for this role.  While
she's good (surprisingly so in a few scenes, such as her death bed
scene), I don't think she's quite up to the competition this year.
The big surprise for me is Antonio Banderas as Che - he sings with
conviction and provides many of the film's laughs with his sly asides
and wry commentary.  Jonathan Pryce (English stage and screen star and
Lexus pitchman) doesn't fair as well as Juan Peron - his character is
never fully realized and I never understood his motivations.  At one
point in the film, we're given the indication that by the time he
marries Eva, the romance has been entirely replaced by politics.
Later, he stands up for her against political adversaries.  How did he
feel about her?  This film remains vague on that subject. 
There are some terrific musical numbers, smartly choreographed.  A lot
of history is covered as Eva begins sleeping her way to the top,
dumping each lover with the refrain "isn't it sad when a love affair
dies" while Che steps in and informs the dumpee that he's been had in
particularly colorful ways.  The seduction duet between Madonna and
Jonathan Pryce ("I Could Be Good for You") is very effective and one
of Pryce's best scenes.  The rousing "New Argentina," a number which
was cut from the stage production, attempts to fill in some of the
political history of the time.  As Madonna remakes herself as the
first lady she sings "the people adore me, so Christian Dior me!" as
we're presented with a montage of costume and makeup tryouts.  There's
also a nice fantasy sequence where Madonna tangos with Banderas as she
counters his everyman's accusations of how she's ultimately let her
people down. 
"Evita" isn't entirely successful, however.  It's opening sequence,
where we're presented with Eva's funeral cut back and forth with the
7-year old Eva attempting to attend her father's funeral (she was
illegitimate and refused entry) is a bit confused.  The film also gets
very repititve in its last half hour - a judicious trimming of 10-15
minutes would have tightened the film considerably.  The film also
fails in its depth.  As I already mentioned, Juan Peron isn't well
fleshed out and we're never entirely sure of Eva's sincerity either -
the filmmakers show both angles but never attempt to come to a
conclusion.
Visit Reeling at http://www.neponset.com/reeling.

Title
Review for Beavis and Butt-head Do America (1996)
(This review is an excerpt from Reeling, a movie review show hosted by
Laura and Robin Clifford, running on Boston Cable TV. Note that the
film descriptions vary in completeness due to the fact that they're
actually intros for running film clips.)
is MTV's second foray into feature films with their dynamic idiotic
adolescent duo who we're used to seeing commenting on music videos.
None of that here as the film begins with the theft of their beloved
TV. As they search for a replacement, they're mistaken for the hitmen
sent to 'do' somebody's wife in Las Vegas.  Thinking that they're
being paid to score for the first time with the buxom blonde, they
excitedly take off only to end up as dupes in a plot to steal a
germ-warfare device, become named the most dangerous men in America
and wreck havoc with nuns and senior citizens across the U.S.A. 
While I've only caught Beavis and Butt-head on MTV a few times and was
barely just slightly amused, I must admit that "Beavis and Butt-Head
Do America" made me laugh (in fact, I'm still giggling)! 
The animation for the feature length film is a cut above what's used
on TV - in fact, it reminded me of Ralph Bashki's animation ("Fritz
the Cat", "American Pop").
What's appealing about the film isn't stylistic tough - it's the
dumber than a plug humor.  Beavis and Butt-Head are intellectually
stunted adolescents who look for sexual innuendo in everything that's
said (i.e., translating 'entertain us' into "He said 'anus'."
heh-heh-heh. Just imagine Butt-Head's delight when a commercial
jetliner pilot tells him to 'get out of his cockpit'!
Beavis had me in stitches when, after consuming a vast and varied
amount of pills from a senior citizen's handbag, he freaks, wears his
t-shirt over his head and jammers "I am Cornholio - give me teepee for
my bunghole."  Silly?  Vastly.  Funny?  Well, at least I though so...
Besides this idiocy we also get our two lads mistakenly thinking
church confessional stalls are porto-potties (with hilarious results),
an FBI agent (voiced by Robert Stack) with a penchant for full cavity
searches and a couple of old-timers with a camper who never avoid
crossing paths with their nemeses.
It should be noted that Beavis and Butt-Head are all about sex and
drugs and rock and roll and, while there is no animated nudity or bad
language used, they may not be suitable for small children.
"Beavis and Butt-Head Do America" is good dumb fun and a movie that
definitely does not suck.
"Beavis and Butt-head Do America" creator, Mike Judge, may not have
aimed very high with the brand of humor used in this film, but he sure
succeeds in hitting his comic target a very high percentage of the
time.
The humor put forth in "B&BDA" consists almost entirely of body parts
(mostly female), being naked (all female), sluts (the female kind),
boobs (guess which gender), poop, anti-authority, and TV. You can see
that this is not the kind of film intended to appeal to the art-house
crowd. 
BUT, if theres a side of you which appreciates extraordinarily
low-brow humor, done successfully to excess some of the time, then
"Beavis and Butt-head Do America" will attract you.
I have only seen a few minutes of the MTV series, but what I saw
turned me off from seeing the movie. Biting  the bullet, I went, I
saw, I laughed.
The B&B characters are so clueless that Mike Judge is able to draw two
completely different worlds - our normal world, and the one lived in
by our duo. Judge parallels these worlds well, with collisions - all
B&B instigated - of these worlds taking place all along the way.
Beavis and Butt-head, in their overwhelming desire to score, succeed
in breaking the Hoover Dam, blacking out Las Vegas, causing a massive
traffic accident on the Washington D.C. beltway, taking over the US
Senate PA system, and forcing the Strategic Air Command to go to
DEFCOM 4. All this in 80 minutes!
Technically, the animation is of surprisingly high quality - beyond
B&B, that is. Mike Judge populates his story with a number of colorful
characters, such as Dallas and Buddy (voiced by Demi Moore and Bruce
Willis), a couple of gun-runners; a lunatic ATF agent (Robert Stack)
who demands that everyone, victims included, be given a full body
cavity search; and, a nice old couple, whose camper B&B commandeer
from time to time for privacy when the urge to whack off comes upon
them.
The repetitive nature of B&Bs low-grade humor works pretty well here,
especially when Beavis gets jeeped up on caffeine stimulants and
sugar, turning in to his alter ego, Cornholio. Judges pushed
Cornholios hijinks far past the point of good taste, but still gets
consistent laughs.
The music video numbers, from Isaac Hayes' rewriting the "Theme to
Shaft" for our boys, to the Red Hot Chili Peppers "Love
Rollercoaster", are a good melding of music and animation. Very
entertaining.
"Beavis and Butt-head Do America" is a solid, comic film, filled with
humor and wittiness at a gutter level rarely achieved in film.
No sequel, please, but, I still give "Beavis and Butt-head Do America"
a B.
Visit Reeling at http://www.neponset.com/reeling.

Title
Review for Breaking the Waves (1996)
"Breaking the Waves" is Danish writer/director Lars von Trier's odd
fable about a simple Scottish woman who marries a Swedish oil rig
worker and tries to save him after he's paralyzed in a work accident
by sleeping with other men and telling him about it, at his request.
It was recently awarded Best Actress and Best Director by the New York
Film Critics.
"Breaking the Waves" is a truly unique film - it's concept and
execution are completely original, but once the story gets going
everything that happens is just what I expected.
Stage actress Emily Watson plays Bess in a star-making turn.  She's a
saintlike naif with big emotions and strong love and lust for her
husband. Yet an other Oscar calibre performance (it's that time of
year). Stellan Skarsgard is Jan, Bess' husband who looks upon her with
bemusement, adoration and concern.  Katrin Cartlidge is the dour Dodo,
Bess' best friend who has suffered through the death of her husband
with Bess' help and who now stands by Bess as she suffers the decline
of her man and the community turns against her.  Sandra Voe ("Local
Hero") is Bess' mother, a woman who cares for daughter but is too
caught up in the Calvinist church to turn against it in defense of her
daughter.
"Breaking the Waves" is divided into 8 chapters, beginning with "Bess
Gets Married".  Each chapter begins with a static shot of the Scottish
coastal scenery and a different classic rock tune ("Life on Mars"
anyone?). von Trier seems to be regressing in the technical aspects of
his style. His first internationally released film, "Zentropa", was
sharp black and white with splashes of red.  His television miniseries
"The Kingdom", was shot on video and transferred to film, giving it a
grainy quality. "Breaking the Waves" mostly employs hand held camera
that frequently (and annoyingly) goes out of focus - a strange choice
for a production this ambitious.
Bess runs to embrace her final destiny and joyously sacrifice all
for the love of her husband and we witness what can only be described
as a miracle.  von Trier rapturously provides a second miracle at the
conclusion of his oddly affecting film.
I was hoping for that "Breaking the Waves" would be what I call a
'movie rush' film (the last one I experienced was "Red" in 1995), but
it didn't quite achieve that masterpiece level for me - the technical
glitches and predictability of the story held it back.  But "Breaking
the Waves" is anything but unoriginal and features a truly noteworthy
character and performance in Emily Watson's Bess.

Title
Review for Some Mother's Son (1996)
(This review is an excerpt from Reeling, a movie review show hosted by
Laura and Robin Clifford, running on Boston Cable TV. Note that the
film descriptions vary in completeness due to the fact that they're
actually intros for running film clips.)
Using the 1981 hunger strike and subsequent election to Parliament of
IRA martyr Bobby Sands as its core story, "Some Mother's Son" stars
Helen Mirren as Kathleen Quigley, an apolitical teacher and mother in
Northern Ireland whose son, Gerry, has fervently embraced the cause of
the IRA.
Gerry's terrorist activities, and subsequent arrest, conviction and
imprisonment in the notorious prison, The Maze, thrusts him, and
Kathleen, into the thick of the things surrounding the British
government's revised policy of treating IRA inmates as criminals, not
political prisoners, in an attempt to defuse their popular influence
outside.
Irish actress, Fionulla Flannigan, appears as Annie Higgins, a pro-IRA
mother whose son, Frankie, is also embroiled in the strike. Unlike
Kathleen, Annie is dedicated to the cause, no matter what the cost -
even the life of her son.
Dealing with similar circumstances as last falls film, "Michael
Collins", "Some Mother's Son" thrusts the viewer into the political
fray of the 70's Northern Ireland conflict. "Some Mother's Son" shows
a deeply felt conviction to the real politics, then and now, in
Ireland, and does it better than the more ambitious "Michael Collins".
Helen Mirren and Fionulla Ferguson, as the mothers representing two
sides the same political coin, are outstanding. Mirren is powerful in
her role as the apolitical one whose sole concern is the safe, healthy
return of her son to his former freedom. Fionulla Ferguson is, if
anything, even more powerful in her role as the activist mother
willing to sacrifice her son for the IRA cause. I'm surprised Ferguson
has not garnered more award attention.
"Some Mother's Son" also benefits from the thing that hurt "Michael
Collins": the depth and breadth of the supporting cast is full and
rich, right down to the sneaky little English toady working behind the
scenes to screw things up for the prisoners. It's this attention to
character detail that make a film like this worth seeing.
The subject matter is selective in its appeal. For me, it appeals.
"Some Mother's Son" doesn't try on as grand a scale as Michael Collins
but it succeeds just as well. I give it a B, the same grade I gave
Collins.
"Some Mother's Son" is an effective film to make one think about the
'Irish problem.'  Are the IRA freedom fighters or terrorists, heroes
or hoodlums?
Told through the eyes of an apolitical Belfast mother (the splendid
Helen  Mirren) who is horrified to discover her son's involved with
the IRA and  was involved in the shooting of a British soldier ('he
was trying to kill ME, Ma'), "Some Mother's Son" makes a nice
companion piece to 1994's "In the Name of the Father."  The film uses
the historical context of the Bobby Sands hunger strike to present its
story.  Mirren's character is contrasted by another mother played by
Fionulla Ferguson, a heart-on-her-sleeve IRA supporter who's son was
arrested with Mirren's son.  The two become friends even though just
about everything they stand for is in conflict.  One of the strenths
of "Some Mother's Son" is how believable this friendship is.  The two
womens' acceptance of each other underscores the conflicting emotions
the view has while watching the film.
All in all, I thought "Some Mother's Son" was a much more effective
film about Irish/British politics than the earlier, more publicized
and more overrated "Michael Collins."
Visit Reeling at http://www.neponset.com/reeling.

Title
Review for Michael (1996)
(This review is an excerpt from Reeling, a movie review show hosted by
Laura and Robin Clifford, running on Boston Cable TV. Note that the
film descriptions vary in completeness due to the fact that they're
actually intros for running film clips.)
Nora Ephron, who showed mixed talents in "Mixed Nuts" and "Sleepless
in Seattle," takes advantage of the rejuvenated career of John
Travolta in "Michael" the story of the earthly visit by the archangel
and his 'discovery' by the tabloid press.
Also starring William Hurt, Andie MacDowell and Robert Pastorelli as
the reporters for the Weekly World News-like Daily Mirror, "Michael"
is a not-so-heavenly story of the journey by the four principals from
the Milk Bottle Motel in Stubbs, Iowa, to the glass and glitter of
Chicago. 
Along the way, Michael performs miracles, both minor and major.
As you can tell from her filmography, Nora Ephron has proven herself
to be a hit-or-miss director.  Fortunately, mainly on the strength of
Travolta's on-screen charm and humor, "Michael" is a good-natured,
rambling little film that has its heart in the right place, even
though its point is muddled. 
Travolta, who must have jumped at the chance to do a film where he,
mainly, gets to smoke buts and grin a lot, brings such a relaxed
quality to the screen that you can't help but like him.
Andie MacDowell gives her second best performance, yet - her best
being "Unstrung Heroes" - and shows no small talent as a county &
western singer.
Robert Pastorelli does yeoman's work as a second-banana character,
lending some light humor to the light screenplay.
Speaking of screenplay, aside from the not-so-original concept of an
angel come to earth, the story is a cliched road/buddy film, with a
cute dog who is the focus of some cheap sentimentality.  Cheap enough
to hurt the otherwise entertaining little story.
I'm still not a Nora Ephron fan, but had a pleasant little meandering
visit with "Michael" and give it a C+.
Yet another unoriginal piece of product from Nora Ephron and the
Hollywood machine, "Michael" still manages to charm due to Travolta's
star wattage as an angel who drinks, smokes, has sex, likes a rumble
and piles obscene amounts of sugar and salt on everything he eats
(which strangely does not seem to include meat - maybe a
non-vegetarian angel was just pushing things too far :-).
Of the supporting cast, Robert Pastorelli ("Murphy Brown's" Eldon) is
the most appealing as a tabloid journalist who manages to keep his job
because his boss (Bob Hoskins) loves Pastorelli's dog Sparky. 
William Hurt and Andie MacDowell are both serviceable as the bruised
characters gently nudged to try love again by Michael.  In fact,
MacDowell has one of her most appealing roles in "Michael" (although
she shone brightest in "Unstrung Heroes"), and even trots out quite a
lovely singing voice.
Jean Stapleton is whimsical as the Iowa motel owner who harbors the
angel. Bob Hoskins is gruffly clueless as the editor of the Daily
Mirror.  And there's a delightful turn by an actress whom I am unable
to name from the information given in the press kit as a pie-serving
waitress who gives in to Michael's charms.  Terri Garr also makes a
surprise appearance as a judge whose verdict is swayed by Michael in a
most unusual way.
There is some clever dialogue to bolster the stale story line,
particularly Michael's witticisms.
However, we get to see yet another dog saved (is this becoming a trend
or what?) and I'm afraid Ephron's just another safe Hollywood
hitmaker.
         Visit "Reeling" at http://www.neponset.com/reeling.

Title
Review for Crucible, The (1996)
(This review is an excerpt from Reeling, a movie review show hosted by
Laura and Robin Clifford, running on Boston Cable TV. Note that the
film descriptions vary in completeness due to the fact that they're
actually intros for running film clips.)
I find it odd that Nicolas Hytner's first two films both deal with mob
hysteria in less enlightened times - what a strange theme.
"The Crucible", like "The Portrait of a Lady," is very well acted, but
the standout performances come from the supporting cast.  Daniel
Day-Lewis and Winona Ryder are both solid in the lead roles.  Joan
Allen, however, could very well score another Best Supporting Actress
nomination (after last year's recognition for her Pat Nixon) as
Elizabeth Proctor, a  devoutly religious woman whose sexual coldness
has left the door open for her husband's infidelity.  Paul Scofield
turns out another finely shaded performance as the judge sent in from
Boston to attend to the witchcraft trials.  Rob Campbell (the young
gunslinger in "The Unforgiven") is a surprise as the investigator who
is the audience's representative - he's one of the few that begins to
devine the truth amid accusations.  Elizabeth Lawrence is Rebecca
Nurse, the community's conscience.  Peter Vaughan is strong as Giles
Corey, a neighbor and friend to the Proctors. Karron Graves makes an
impressive debut as Mary Warren, the teenage girl who dares to tell
the truth about Abigail Williams and her followers.
"The Crucible" was shot on Hog Island off the coast of Massachusetts
and painstaking attention has been paid to period detail, right down
to dental cosmetics.
Although Arthur Miller originally used the story of the Salem
witchcraft trials to criticize the McCarthy era, "The Crucible" is a
timeless story of corruption, greed, suspicion and religious
fanaticism.
I'm not a big play fan, but "The Crucible" is one of those few plays
that I have read a number of times. I love Arthur Miller's metaphor of
the Salem witch hunt for the other, Red-tinted, kind of McCarthyesque
witch-hunting that strangled the United States at the time of the
play's writing in the early fifties.
I was pleased to see, with Miller adapting his own play, that the
integrity of his indictment against misled tyranny, no matter how
just, remains intact in director Nicolas Hytner's telling.
Complementing  the excellent screenplay of "The Crucible", are a
number of good and better performances, especially in supporting
roles, excellent period costume and set design - an entire 17 century
Pilgrim village was built on location on Hog Island, about 45 minutes
from Boston - and photography. The tremendous attention to historical
detail is right up there on the screen and is some of the best I have
seen.
Stars Winona Ryder and Daniel Day-Lewis are solid, but not
outstanding.
Joan Allen gives a great performance as a woman who loves her husband,
but cant overcome her Puritan upbringing to give him the physical love
he desires, driving him, John Proctor, briefly into the arms of the
conniving Abigail Williams, played by Ryder. Allen, as she overcomes
her hurt and understands her husband's  love, gives ranges of emotion
and understanding that are palpable to the viewer.
Paul Scofield, as Judge Danforth, does a notable job as the jurist
assigned responsibility for stamping out the devil across "every inch"
of Massachusetts. He portrays an honestly religious, if misguided, man
of the cloth.
"The Crucible" is a solid, entertaining period piece that gets top
tech credits and has some exceptional acting, earning it a deserved
B+.
Visit Reeling at http://www.neponset.com/reeling.

Title
Review for Jerry Maguire (1996)
Tom Cruise is Jerry Maguire, a hot shot sports agent with 72 clients
who's yanked back to humanity by the son of a hockey player suffering
his 4th concussion.  Jerry writes a mission statement for his company,
SMI, recommending providing more care for client's welfare by serving
fewer clients and bringing in less money.  This action, while secretly
admired by many, promptly gets him fired.  One accountant, single mom
Dorothy Boyd played by newcomer Rene Zellweger, is inspired to follow
him.  Only one client, Cuba Gooding Jr.'s Rod Tidwell, a second tier
wide receiver for the Arizona Cardinals, remains.
Simply put, "Jerry Maguire" is the best commercial Hollywood film I've
seen so far this year.  Cameron Crowe has written and directed a story
that operates on many levels and rings 100% true on every one of them.
"Jerry Maguire" is a romance, the story of a man going to the bottom
from the top professionally and back again, the story of a man finding
himself, a view into the building of a friendship and those friends
teaching each other life lessons and the story of a single mom
following her heart while raising a son.  It IS a comedy, but it's a
comedy based on real human emotion.
Tom Cruise gives his best performance to date here - he hasn't been
this appealing since "Risky Business" broke him into our
consciousness.  I haven't seen all his competition yet, but I hope he
gets Academy recognition for this role  - he really deserves it.  He's
sexy, charming, frustrated, caring, conflicted, passionate and
honorable.  Rene Zellweger is a find as Dorothy, the woman who
believes she's 'taken advantage' of Maguire at his low point.  The two
have real chemistry together.  Bonnie Hunt is fun as Laurel, Dorothy's
sister, who provides unwished for practical advice all the while
knowing that love is blind.  Cuba Gooding Jr. matches Cruise
toe-to-toe as the washed up footballer needing an attitude adjustment.
Regina King is wonderful as his loving (pregnant) wife Marcy - the two
have a great marriage and it shows (glows?).  Newcomer Jonathan
Lipnicki as Ray Boyd, Dorothy's son, is quirkily adorable, although
also responsible for one of the film's few shortfallings.  It's so
obvious that Lipnicki adores Tom Cruise that he's clearly not acting
and it draws one out of the film.
Technically, this is a quality production all around.  I particularly
liked the soundtrack, which uses snippets of many varied songs to good
effect.  When Cruise cruises the radio dial trying to find something
to
match his mood and settles in with and bellows along with "Free
Falling", it's infectious!
Cuba Gooding Jr.'s motto is 'Show me the money!'.  Well, I've been
shown - I've seen "Jerry Maguire."
It stuns me that I'm saying that "Jerry Maguire" is the best thing to
come out of Hollywood (with the exception of my personal favorite "The
Hunchback of Notre Dame") in 1996. There. I said that about a film
starrung Tom Cruise.
Cameron Crowe has written a first-class screenplay and couple it with
a professional and talented cast and crew. His "Jerry Maguire" is an
old-fashioned romantic and sports comedy, with a multi-threaded story
that dovetails nicely in its several directions, coming nicely
together in the end. I haven't seen this kind of crafting, except from
the independent film arena, in a long, long time. Especially from
Hollywood.
Tom Cruise give his best performance, yet, as the sports agent who
develops a conscience and heart. Jerry Maguire learns the qualities of
loyalty, integrity, friendship and love and Cruise does an admirable
job of portraying this man. Both Maguire and Cruise are charmers.
Cuba Gooding JR., as pro footbal jock, Rod Tidwell, is funny and
flashy and is a major contributor to the humor and quality of "Jerry
Maguire". When he gets, finally, what he wants, you feel good for him
and his wife, played strongly and effectively by Regina King.
Newcomers Renee Zellweger and Jonathan Lipnicki as Cruise' romantic
interest, Dorothy and her little boy, Ray, are solid, if not
exceptional. Crowe uses little Jonathan Lipnicki to very good
advantage, while avoiding overwhelming you with overt cuteness. (For
example, one of the lines to come from the moppet is, "Do you know the
human head weighs eight pounds?" Not typical cute kid dialog.
The rest of the cast, led by Bonnie Hunt, do a good job of keeping the
background characters full and three dimensional. Like real people.
My only complaint is that, toward the end, as Jerry and Dorothy face
their romantic crisis, things drag a little. Fortunately, it picks
itself up quickly and finishes with a flourish.
"Jerry Maguire" is my first place recommendation for your holiday
movie going.

Title
Review for Turbulence (1997)
(This review is an excerpt from Reeling, a movie review show hosted by
Laura and Robin Clifford, running on Boston Cable TV. Note that the
film descriptions vary in completeness due to the fact that they're
actually intros for running film clips.)
In "Turbulence", it's Christmas Eve and only a handful of passengers
are on board the 747 bound for LA from New York. I t looks like an
easy flight for the crew, until four federal marshals, accompanying
psycho serial killer, Ryan Weaver, played by Ray Liotta, and psycho
bankrobber, Stubbs, played by Brandon Gleeson (Mel Gibsons sidekick,
Hamish, in "Braveheart") arrive on board, dampening any holiday cheer.
As the flight approaches a Level 6 (on a grade of 1 to 6) storm,
things get interesting in the passenger cabin as Stubbs decides to
change the order of things. The ensuing melee results in the death of
Stubbs, the four Feds and both pilots, leaving Weaver to stalk the
kind of prey he likes - the frightened, confused flight attendant,
Teri Halloran, played by Lauren Holly.
A cat and mouse suspense story follows  with Teri desperately trying
to land the plane, while Weaver, just as desperately, trying to crash
the 747 into LAX and go out in a blaze of glory.
Well, there are bad films and there are "bad" films. The former kind,
films like "Jingle All The Way", "Dear God", "High School High" or
"Mixed Nuts" are just plain bad. If you saw them, unless I warned you
first, I feel sad for you. You wasted your time and money.
Then there are "bad" films, such as "Turbulence" and last year's "The
Substitute", starring Tom Berringer. These movies stack implausibility
upon implausibility in such a god-awfully groaning way that you simply
have to laugh. Coupling the real humor the filmmakers were injecting
into the story and dialogue  with the silliness of the scripts
stupidity makes this a not bad bit of mindless entertainment.
To its credit, "Turbulence" spends a good amount of the on-screen cash
on the terrific special effects, from the computer derived external
shots of the 747 flying through a most violent storm, to the giant
gimbals used to turn a life size 747 passenger cabin a full 360
degrees - with actors on board!
With the exception of Ray Liotta, who seemed to have a hell of a good
time mugging it up for the camera, there really is not a lot of
substance to the acting here. Lauren Holly, too often, gives the image
of a deer caught in the headlights on the road - her performance will
be compared with Karen Black's from "Airport '75".
"Turbulence" is a no-brain hoot if you have absolutely nothing of
worth to do as an alternate choice. Go to a matinee to see it on the
big screen, or wait for rental.
Teri Halloran, in the end, does find her man, you'll be glad to know.
This film's been panned, but I thought it was a hoot!  "Turbulence" is
one of those so-bad-it's-almost good kind of entertainments.  In fact,
it's far funnier than most of the so-called comedies that ended the
year ("Dear God," "Jingle All the Way").
The stage of unbelievability is set when a Christmas Eve 747 flight
from New York City to L.A. has only about a half dozen passengers.
Until, that is, a convicted armed robber and a lonely-hearts serial
killer (Ray Liotta) are brought on board by four federal marshalls.
Flight attendant Lauren Holly, just dumped by her fiance, is
vulnerable and only wants to meet a nice guy - why, just the type of
woman Liotta's serial killer preys on!
The dumb-as-a-post pilot and co-pilot are killed in short order while
the plane's heading into a level 6 storm with a serial killer who
means to thumb his nose at the autorities by ensuring the plane will
crash into a heavily populated area.  This, of course, results in
officials making a decision to send out a jet fighter to shoot the
commerical airliner down.  As if she doesn't have enough problems on
her hands, Lauren Holly must attempt to land the plane safely with the
radio assistance of a noble and handsome British pilot played by Ben
Cross.
The special effects are pretty good for such a silly plot, especially
during the hilarious climax when Holly's first landing attempt is
aborted after a low swoop over a parking garage gets a Ford truck
stuck to the plane's landing gear.  
Ray Liotta chews scenery and swills Mumm Cordon Rouge throughout!
Lauren Holly looks terrified!  The ground crew is conflicted!
It may have been dumb, but it was a guilty pleasure.
Visit Reeling at http://www.neponset.com/reeling.

Title
Review for Ridicule (1996)
Director Patrice Leconte's ("Monsieur Hire") "Ridicule" is France's
submission to the Academy for this year's Best Foreign Language Film.
It stars stage actor Charles Berling as Gregoire Poncludon de Malavoy,
a country engineer who travels to Versailles to get funding to save
the local peasants from fatal fevers by draining swampy mosquito
infested land.  He's taken under the wing of the Marquis de Bellegarde
(Jean Rochefort) and given instruction on how to play the
evil-intentioned wits who make up the court of Louis XVI.  Ponceludon
is also torn between the Mathilde, the ravishing daughter of
Bellegarde (Judith Godreche), who's engaged to a much older man in
order to fund her research, and the worldly Madame de Blayac (Fanny
Ardant), who pulls puppet strings and manipulates favor at court.
"Ricidule" is a lush costume drama where the main character must
navigate through the shark-infested waters of Louis XVI's court 6
years before the inevitable revolution.  This is a very smart drama
with a great central conflict (the lure and dazzle of the court and
its denizens vs. the simplicity and beauty of Mathilde and the
country) and an unfortunately unsatisfying conclusion.  Ponceludon
eventually 'wins', although not in the manner he had been striving
for, I wondered what took him so long to make his final point that
"children will die tomorrow because you ridiculed me today."  Of
course then we wouldn't have been able to enjoy all the nefarious
scheming along the way!
Jean Rochefort is marvelous as the Marquis who's not able to keep his
wits about him as he had in his youth.  In fact, he keeps a notebook
where he writes down the great barbs and comments that make their
utterer the talk of the court until the next great one comes along.
Bernard Giraudeau is gleefully wicked as 'wit of the moment' Abbot de
Vilecourt and lover of Madame de Blayac - he's like a malicious child
whose actions cause tragedy.  Charles Berling, in his screen debut, is
sympathetic as the simple man who gets in over his head but manages to
remain uncorrupted. Urbain Cancelier is wonderfully cast as a Louis
XVI who constantly seeks entertainment but provides none.  He reminded
me of Jon Lovitz' emperor in "Mom and Dad Save the World."
"Ricidule" is solid, intelligent adult entertainment, a good, but not
great, film.

Title
Review for Mother (1996/II)
In albert Brooks' latest film, "Mother", science fiction writer John
Henderson (Brooks), suffering from two failed marriages and a severe
case of writer's block, decides to confront his demons - one of whom
may be his mother!
John sets out to find his true self and disprove the old adage, "You
can't go home, again," when he decides to move back home with his
mother, Beatrice, played by Debbie Reynolds. John feels his mother is
the key to what went wrong with his life and career.
What John discovers is unexpected by both him and Beatrice.
Aside from a wonderful performance by Debbie Reynolds in the title
role, I didn't find the premise of "Mother" to be particularly
compelling. Brooks' character John is very flat, with little
development over the course of the film. He starts as a schlemeil, he
ends as a schlemiel with a date.
Debbie Reynolds, on the other hand, is the saving grace of the film
and give a terrific performance and a decent character study of
Beatrice. She displays the kind of logic and sense that only a mother
can show. That's the strength of her performance - she reps all moms
to some degree. Reynolds als develops Beatrice all through the movie,
so, by the end, she is a complete different person, in your eye, than
at the start. This is mainly through the strength of the actor. I look
forward to her getting notice.
This is the least manic of Brooks' films, seeming that he has some
sort of internal ax to grind than audience entertainment as the goal
of the film.
I can't recommend seeing "Mother" at the theater, unless you take your
mother! Otherwise, leave it for video rental or cable.
I give "Mother" a C+, and loved Debbie.
Debbie Reynolds makes an amazingly impressive comeback after 27 years
as the title character of Albert Brooks' thoroughly amusing and
easily-identified-with "Mother".
Albert Brooks is John Henderson, the older of Beatrice's two sons.
His brother Jeff (Rob Morrow) is unusually close to his mother and
John feels he's much less liked.  After his second divorce, Sci-fi
writer John decides to go live with Mom for a while to discover if the
basis their relationship is why he can't connect with women.  The
mother he discovers is an eye-opener!
Brooks not only stars, but also wrote and directed.  His screenplay is
thoughtful, poignant and funny and his direction compliments the
production. Brooks' adventures with Mom include a visit to her 'food
museum' where ice crystals 'protect' the shebert and cheese comes in
frozen 3 lb. blocks, grocery shopping with strongly conflicting
economical philosophies and having Mom tell complete strangers his
life story everywhere they go.
Debbie Reynolds' performance is Oscar nomination calibre.  She
manages to appear rather clueless when she, in fact, is independent,
modern and artistic - the wonderful thing about the subtlety of her
acting is that you completely accept the her hidden capabilities and
talents as they're revealed.  Brooks is fine as the slightly pathetic
John.  Rob Morrow gives his best big screen performance as the whiny
mummy's boy who's initially presented as a successful sports agent and
eventually revealed as a selfish, needy child.
Go see "Mother" and I suspect you'll see something of yourself.

Title
Review for Evening Star, The (1996)
(This review is an excerpt from Reeling, a movie review show hosted by
Laura and Robin Clifford, running on Boston Cable TV. Note that the
film descriptions vary in completeness due to the fact that they're
actually intros for running film clips.)
the sequel to "Terms of Endearment" starts 15 years after Aurora
Greenaway (Shirley MacLaine, who won the Best Actress Oscar for the
previous film), lost her daughter Emma to cancer and was left to raise
3 grandchildren. 18-year old Melanie's (Juliette Lewis) battles with
Aurora echo Aurora's love-hate relationship with Emma; while older
brother Tommy glowers in jail on a drug charge and Teddy happily
drives a tow truck and lives with a woman Aurora despises and his
illegitimate son.  Faithful housekeeper Rosie (Marion Ross) silently
observes and supports Aurora as Aurora juggles lovers old and new,
jealously wars with Emma's best friend Patsy (Miranda Richardson) and
prepares for the departure of Melanie with her two-timing boyfriend
Bruce.
"The Evening Star" is far too episodic compared to the
better-strutured first film which concentrated on the mother-daughter
relationship between Aurora and Emma.  In this one, we get Aurora's
relationship with each of her grandchildren, her relationships with
past lovers, her relationship with her new lover, her relationship
with her deceased daughter's best friend, her relationship with her
friend/housekeeper and her relationship with her great-grandchildren.
Sheesh!
MacLaine's still in fine form as Aurora, but we've been watching her
do shadings of this character too many times in the interim (like
"Madame Sousaztka" or Tess in "Guarding Tess") to find any freshness
here.
Marion Ross may receive a Best Supporting Actress nomination and she's
fine, especially in the scene where she tells Aurora why she's leaving
her employ.  But the standout performances for me were Miranda
Richardson's hilarious and complex Patsy and Donald Moffat's sweetly
affecting performance as retired General Hector Scott.  Ben Johnson
also had his last performance as Aurora's neighbor who gives Rosie her
last hurrah.  I normally love Juliette Lewis' performances, but here
she never seems to rise above sitcom level acting - loud and obvious.
When Jack Nicholson finally makes his appearance, looking Aurora up
after all these years and now a family man, I was relieved mainly
because I thought I could now see the end of "The Evening Star" in
sight.  But no, it continues to meander on far too long past its
logical conclusion.
Some silliness along the way also doesn't help.  Bill Paxton as
Aurora's shrink-lover with a mother fixation doesn't really go
anywhere in the story. Juliette Lewis suddenly becomes a TV star on
the west coast (after her first and only audition).  We also get three
deaths for the price of one in this sequel, which considering the
hankie quotient of the first movie may not have been the wisest
choice.
"The Evening Star" is mostly just plain irrelevant, but some fine
performances raise it slightly over it's storyline.
Aside from giving Shirley MacLaine a chance to mug up to the camera, I
don't see the point of "The Evening Star."  Anything that may have
been compelling in "Terms of Endearmeant" is lost in this charmless
and stilted effort.
Writer/director Robert Harking renders a flat story with caricatures
rather than characters taking up screen time.  With the exceptions of
Marion Ross, who is quite wonderful as Aurora's housekeeper and
friend, and Donald Moffat as Aurora's former lover and friend, I
didn't give a hoot about any of the other "people" in the movie.
Aurora's grandchildren should  poster children for birth control.
Bill Paxton, as her much younger lover, is two dimensional, at best.
Also of note is Miranda Richardson, a fine actress, wasted heres,
although she tries to lend what depth and humor she can to the film.
The story is episodic in nature, woodenly moving from one incident to
the next, with the only interesting thing, for me, being to guess as
to when Nicholson will make his cameo.  I figured his arrival would
signal the end of the movie - boy, was I wrong.
Thinking about the original, I realize how shallow a cast and
character-writing effort was made or "The Evening Star."  No one
delves below the surface of their characters.  It ends up as a
hodge-podge of stories about people you don't care about.  And, they
all live happily ever after. Sort of.  I was going to talk about this
more, but why bother?
I don't like "The Evening Star" and I don't know why it was made.
Aside from its ties to "Terms," there is nothing about this movie that
recommends it.  Shirley MacLaine, as Aurora, is less likeable than in
the first.  With the exceptions noted above, no one else is likeable
much either. 
I give "The Evening Star" a D (for DUD).
Visit Reeling at http://www.neponset.com/reeling

Title
Review for Citizen Ruth (1996)
(This review is an excerpt from Reeling, a movie review show hosted by
Laura and Robin Clifford, running on Boston Cable TV. Note that the
film descriptions vary in completeness due to the fact that they're
actually intros for running film clips.)
In a surprising first feature, director and co-writer Alexander Payne,
stabs straight into the heartland of America with "Citizen Ruth", a
satire using the abortion issue as its focus, but  really striking at
fanaticism in all forms as its target.
Laura Dern plays Ruth Stoops, a hopeless drifter who has a penchant
for "huffing", inhaling the aerosol propellants in things like spray
paint and driveway sealer. When she is arrested for this abuse for the
16th time, AND she's found to be pregnant, she is charged with
endangering a fetus and is to serve a hefty sentence - that is, until
the judge offers clemency if she gets rid of her "problem".
Here begins the satire as the fanatical fringe elements on both sides
of the abortion issue do battle, with the brain damaged, but not
stupid, Ruth at its center.
This is a very impressive feature debut for Alexander Payne that
benefits from a tremendously talented cast, with an Oscar caliber
performance from Laura Dern.
Dern, who looks a wreck through most of the film, puts it on the line
as the totally self absorbed, selfish, and really screwed up substance
abuser, Ruth. Like Harrelson does in "Larry Flynt", Dern gives a
performance that has you believing that a Ruth Stoops can exist in our
world. She is funny, conniving, pathetic, smart and stupid at varying
times and degrees. Her dives into substance abuse are strikingly
handled both through Dern's acting and the notable camera work.
Supporting cast, headed by Swoosie Kurtz, Kutwood Smith, Mary Kay
Place, Kelly Preston, Tippi Hedrin  and Burt Reynolds all lend good
comic turns as the fanatics vying for Ruths fetus, if not her soul.
The script, written by director Payne and Jim Taylor, takes its
satirical shots at a whole spectrum of politics, from the homophobic,
right wing reactionary pro-lifers to the ultra left femi-Nazis
pro-choice faction. It puts the fanatical fringes in their deserved
light, showing just how absurd mindless causes can be.
Placing Ruth at the center of this maelstrom helps take the edge of
the extremists, showing how meaningless their causes really are. If
Ruth, the focus of their beliefs, doesn't care, how can they,
possibly, justify their cause? Ruth walks out of the picture while
both sides do battle, and it doesn't matter - its not he object of the
cause thats important, just the cause.
"Citizen Ruth" is an amusing, thoughtful satire and a very good effort
for a feature debut. Laura Dern shines out in a solid film. She's one
of my favored contenders for a best actress nomination. Its her best,
hardest hitting work to date.
We get another standout female performance from Laura Dern as
Ruth Stoops in "Citizen Ruth."  What a crowded field for Best Actress
consideration this year - I could nominate 10 worthy performances!
Dern gives one of the best even of those, though, as the painfully
clueless, totally irresponsible and selfish Stoops.  The most amazing
thing about her work is that you'll be routing for her by the end
of the film, as she rejects both the pro-lifers' and pro-choicers'
attempts to use her to 'send their messages.'
The directorial and screenwriting debut of Alexander Payne is a witty
look at how fanaticism turns well intentioned people into raving
lunatics who eventually lose sight of their cause in their campaign
to 'win.'
Mary Kay Place and Kurtwood Smith are the falsely sunner pro-lifers
(baby savers in this film's lingo).  Their faction is led by Burt
Reynolds as Blaine Gibbons in an oily performance that recalls
his work in "Striptease."  In an uproariously jaw-dropping display
of ego and bad taste, Gibbons keeps as his flunky a suspicously
effeminate adolescent, Eric, who Gibbons saved from an abortion.  Eric
tests the temperature of Gibbons' massage oil by shaking a few drops
from a baby's bottle onto his wrist before applying it to the back
of Blaine's neck!
Swoozie Kurtz and Kelly Preston are the liberal, moon goddess
worshipping lesbian pro-choicers.  Their leader is Tippi Hedren as
Jessica Weiss, a woman so shallow, she describes Ruth as heroic upon
meeting her.
Dianne Ladd makes a surprise and uncreditted appearance as Ruth's 
Mom (Ladd is Dern's mother).
"Citizen Ruth" is a very original comedy highlighted by beautifully
odd comic accents.  When Ruth is first brought into the home of
the baby savers, she relaxes in a bath and entertains herself by
enjoying alternating eye views of her toe in the bathtub faucet, a
scene that's not only funny, but defines just how much of Ruth's brain
has been destroyed by her chemical inhalations.
Unfortunately, the very well-realized satire comes to its end a bit
weakly.  You know where Payne's headed and it's the right way to go,
but it could have used a sharp punchline to wrap.
Visit Reeling at http://www.neponset.com/reeling.

Title
Review for Shine (1996)
(This review is an excerpt from Reeling, a movie review show running
on Boston Cable TV, hosted by Laura and Robin Clifford. Note that the
film descriptions vary in completeness due to the fact that they're
actually intros for running film clips.)
"Shine" is the incredible story of Australian pianist David Helfgott,
a man pushed by his father and his love of music to excel, then held
back by that same man when his success results in scholarships to
study in America, then London's Royal Academy of Music.  Armin
Mueller-Stahl is the Holocaust-scarred Peter Helfgott whose pain at
having seen his family destroyed causes him to react with abusive
behavior when his own son wishes to leave the family nest.  David is
played from his teen years until his breakdown in his twenties by Noah
Taylor ("Flirting") and in his forties, when he's saved by the love
of Gillian (Lynn Redgrave) by Geoffrey Rush.
"Shine" is the best feature film I've seen so far this year (although
I'm still totally enamored of the documentary "Paradise Lost" in my
number 1 slot).  Scott Hicks, an Australian director more known for
his documenaries, has done a masterful job presenting the life of a
tortured pianist to the screen.  He's assembled his film as a three
movement concerto, first taking his time to establish the very young
David Helfgott and David's family background, then going into
overdrive as David Helfgott as a young man suffers through the
conflict of how his success and the pursuit of his dreams tears him
away from his family and finally slowing the pace again as the older
David is brought back into real life from an institution by the love
of several women.
Armin Mueller-Stahl is Peter Helfgott, the sterm family patriarch who
urges his son to excellence, only to become abusive when his son
yearns to take advantage of a scholarship to London's Royal Academy of
Music leaving his family behind.  Mueller-Stahl manages to walk a fine
line and remains sympathetic as a Holocaust survivor who's seen his
family destroyed and will go to all lengths to keep his own family
intact even as he destroys his own son's sanity in the process.  Hicks
underscores Peter's character strongly visually - when David does
leave, Peter burns his scrapbooks chronicalling David's success and we
see the flames in Peter's glasses echo the Holocaust.  Peter's wife is
first presented silent and in shadow, where she remains for the most
part due to the power of his conviction.
Geoffrey Rush is astounding as the eldest of the three David Helfgott
portrayers.  The strange rhythms of his language (both verbal and
body) are right on target - he's still communicating at a very
intellectual level - one just has to adjust to where he's coming from.
He works well with Lynn Redgrave to adjust the hyper quality down a
knotch at a time.  Rush also learned how to key the piano (although
it's the real Helfgott we're hearing on the soundtrack) correctly so
that a double wouldn't have to be used!  That's applying oneself for a
role.
Noah Taylor is also fine as the troubled younger man whose attempt at
independence results in an emotional breakdown because of guilt.  His
intensity and nerdiness gradually drop away as he becomes accustomed
to college life under the tutilage of John Geilgud.
Lynn Redgraves comes into the film very late but still manages to make
a strong impression as the woman whose curiousity and concern allow
her to see beyond David's strangeness.  Her Gillian is a strong woman
who delights in life's pleasures.
British actress Goggie Withers adds a nice grace note as the younger
David's friend who supports his decision to break away from his
father.
"Shine" has a masterfully complementary score that accentuates the
story and the classical highlights of the film.  The scene where David
plays Rachmaninoff's "Piano Concerto No. 3" is simply one of the most
powerfully editted sequences I've seen in a film this year.
Laura and I saw "Shine" a few weeks ago, so I have had the opportunity
to ponder this film and the rest of the movies we've seen this year.
We still have a number of films to see before the year's end, but,
even so, I declare "Shine" to be the best film of the year!
Start with a fascinating true story of the live of pianist David
Helfgott. Add an intelligent screenplay by director Scott Hicks and
terrific performances by Geoffrey Rush as the elder David, Noah Taylor
as David the younger, and especially Armin Mueller-Stahl as David's
father - my hands down choice for best supporting actor for 1996; a
bevy of strong supporting characters, the likes of Lynn Redgrave and
Sir John Gielgud; and the best classical music I have seen/heard in a
film, ever.
What you get is a powerful character study of a musical genius nearly
destroyed by the good intentions and misguided love of his father.
Following the life of Helfgott as a young piano prodigy up through the
emotional break with his beloved father, his fall into madness from 
guilt over the break, to his recovery and subsequent return to music,
"Shine" is an extraordinary example of top notch filmmaking.
Praising the three who played Helfgott at various stages is easy.  The
threes, Alex Rafalowcz, Taylor and Rush are beautifully cast as the 
genius at the various life stagess.  The transition from one to the 
next is seamless because it feels like the same person.  Geoffrey
Rush, especially, stands out as the elder Helfgot.  He is on screen
for only 20-30 minutes of the film, but makes such a strong
impression, his performance feels like a starring role.
Armin Mueller-Stahl is, in a film steeped in brilliance, the best
thing in this movie, and that's saying something.  As Peter Helfgott,
David's father, he displays such a range of emotion - love, jealousy,
pettiness, selfishness and confusion - so effectively, that I can't
think of a better performance this year.  You, the viewer, end up both
feeling sorry for and loathing the man at the same time.  This is no
small feat for an actor.  Mueller-Stahl pulls it off brilliantly.
The musical selections, especially Rachmaninoff's Piano Concerto No. 3
as the film's focal point, are magnificent.  The Rach piece, played as
David falls into madness, is the singularly most stunning visual and
audio music experience that I have had watching a film.  The music is
played by Helfgott himself, but the actors are the ones who appear to
be playing.  It is as beautiful a crafting of movie magic as I have
ever seen.
For award purposes, "Shine" deserves, right now, best picture,
direction, screesnplay, supporting actor and, maybe, best actor for
Geoffrey Rush. High praise for a film, but deservedly so.
After much thinking, I have to agree with Laura and give "Shine" an
A+, my first for 1996!  Would I say it's worth it?  Yeah.

