Authors
Justin K. Siegel
Number of Reviews
9

Title
Review for Contact (1997)
As a devout Atheist and an avowed believer in aliens, I have some idea
of how Ellie Aroway (Jodie Foster) feels. But because my reasons for
not partaking in religion are different than hers, I can't say that I
do exactly. Her reason is that she needs solid proof: there is no
proof that God existed, so therefor she does not believe.
Ellie also believes in aliens, and has spent most of her life trying
to prove they exist. How can she say she doesn't believe in God
because of the lack of proof, and then say she believes in aliens,
which are gereally less believed in than God without sounding like a
hypocrite? That's the Catch-22.
When aliens from the star Vega fax her some plans for a device to
transport someone to them (Okay, well, they didn't really *fax*
them...) Ellie wants to be the one to go, but because of her Atheism
she is denied the position. How dumb is that? She discovers the
transmitions, then she isn't allowed to go.
Well, because of a bomb and a psychopath (Jake Busey), she *does* end
up going, but not in the way that we would've thought.
CONTACT is based on a novel by Carl Sagan, who died during the
filmmaking. It is the best alien movie since CLOSE ENCOUNTERS OF THE
3RD KIND, and will end up being the best film of the year. Its views
of science and religion will no doubt aggrivate some, but will
stimulate more. I'm glad at least one movie of the '90s can portray
aliens in a psitive light, rather than a bunch of slimey beasts who
will eat your insides and then put on your body.

Title
Review for Spawn (1997)
Hey, I'm a hip guy; I like comics. How come I didn't like this movie? It could have 
something to do with the fact that I don't like Todd McFarlane's comic of the same name, 
on which the movie is based. SPAWN is a gorgeous-looking, but intellectually numb 
science-fiction soon-to-be-cult film that, like all dark, dank, depressing action-films, 
contains balsa-wood acting, a script thay would earn the writer a C- on any 10th Grade 
creative writing assignment, and about a gazillion dollars worth of special-effects.
What do I _really_ think og this movie? That's a mystery, even to me. While I enjoying 
looking at it, I was bored with the storyline.
Michael Jai White plays Al Simmons, a trained assassin who, after being set up in North 
Korea and burnt to a crisp by bad guy Martin Sheen, goes to hell. Then he comes back (?) 
as Spawn, a superhero. Albeit an ugly, badly scarred superhero with a bad additude. He is 
befriended by a sadistic little demon named Clown (John Leguizamo), who wants him to lead 
the Army of Darkness in a war against Heaven. The movie portrays Satan as an "overgrown 
Gecko," and he, uh, it, is the most interesting character in the movie (not to mention 
the best looking, although Theresa Randle, as Simmons' estranged wife, comes close).
As the plot plods along, Spawn's old wife (Randle), her new husband, and their daughter 
are all put in danger, and Spawn has to save them. Of course, Spawn doesn't die or turn 
back into Simmons or anything crazy like that, since there has to be a sequel, according 
to Law no. 442 in the Superhero Movie Code.
SPAWN runs long at only an hour and 34 minutes. I enjoyed looking at some of the 
eye-popping special effects the film has to offer, but, as far as plot, story, or 
character development goes, look elsewhere.

Title
Review for Cop Land (1997)
COP LAND -- a movie review by Justin K. Siegel
Over the past 20 years, we have seen Sylvester Stallone rise... and
fall. And rise. And fall again. Now, 21 years after his underdog-hero
in ROCKY made him a blue-collar hero, Stallone has decided that he's
ready to try a little "serious" acting. All that at the tender age of
50. In COP LAND, an ultra-low-budget crime-drama from indie darling
James Mangold (who directed HEAVY, one of 96's better films), Stallone
gives the best performance of his chronically spotted career (yes,
even better than in STOP! OR MY MOM WILL SHOOT).
Mangold is on his way to being a _serious_ player in Hollywood. HEAVY
flirted with brilliance on more than one occasion, and COP LAND is the
flat-out best film I've seen since 1995's THE USUAL
SUSPECTS. Mangold's direction plays a part in it, but what brings COP
LAND over that mountain are the performances. Keitel? De Niro? Liotta?
Michael Rapaport? One interviewer called it the "Method All-star
Team." And then, in what I was sure would be the film's downfall,
Stallone puts his heart and soul into into his portrayal of a
painfully shy man who, like the leading man in HEAVY, just stares at
life.
Harvey Keitel plays Ray Donlan an New Yourk City police-officer, who,
sick of living _and_ working in NYC, has cut a deal with the mob: the
mob buys some NYPD guys a bunch of land in Jersey, and the NYPD turns
a blind eye to the mob.
Stallone plays Freddy Heflin, a Garrison, New Jersey sherrif, who,
because of a hearing-problem occured while rescuing a girl from
drowning as a youth, could never become NYPD. The girl he saved as
grown up (Annabella Sciorra) and has married a _real_ cop; a New York
cop. A dirty cop. He is played rather dully by Peter Berg.
After a young cop, fresh off saving a bunch of children (Michael
Rapaport), shoots two black youths, Donlan says he saw him jump off
the George Washington Brigde, but actually is hiding him out. After
Internal affairs officer Moe Tilden (De Niro) comes sniffing around
looking for the body, Donaln knows he messed up, and tries to kill
Rapaport.
COP LAND is a wonderful, fresh, and naturally exciting thriller,
which, as I said before, is a worthy companion piece to THE USUAL
SUSPECTS. After all, they're both about thwarting crooked cops.
I'm sure this review seems scattered and poorly written, but that's
because I'm still under the power of this magnificant film. I'm sure
glad I found those "COP LAND ADVANCE SCREENING INVITATION" tickets on
a park bench last week. You have to wait till Friday to see it.

Title
Review for Crash (1996)
Cars are sexy. They have been sexy since they have been cars. People
have sex in cars all the time. At your average drive-in movie, the ratio
of people having intercourse in their cars to people actually watching
the movie is about 12-1 (I should know -- I did an essay on this in Gr. 7.)
Crashing cars, however, are not generally considered to be sexy. But to
the select group of perverts and sycophants who populate the world of
David Cronenberg's new film, CRASH, they are. Their leader is man named
Vaughan (Elias Koteas), who makes his living by recreating famous
car-crashes (Jayne Mansfield, James Dean). One of his "followers" is
Dr. Helen Remington (Holly Hunter), whose husband has just been killed
by James Ballard (James Spader), in a gruesome car-crash. Helen is
surprisingly indifferent about her husband's passing, and she recruits
Ballard and his beautiful wife Catherine (Debarah Karah Unger) into
Vaughan's little psycho-sexual orginization.
Rosanna Arquette plays Gabrielle, a crash victim still in leg braces,
whose vaginal leg-scars become the epitome of sexual excitement for
James. The scene in which he administers oral sex to the scars is one
of the most repulsive in recent memory. More repulsive than the boy/boy
kiss between Spader and Koteas, which sent one of my friends fleeing the room.
I've never seen a movie with this many sex-scenes that was less sexually
exciting (even SHOWGIRLS). CRASH seemed like it was just one
interesting-to-watch, ten-minute sex-scene after another, but it was shot
in a fashion that did its best not to be, um, _uplifting_.
If you are an intelligent human being looking for 100 intriguing,
disturbing minutes, I would highly reccomend CRASH. On the other hand,
if you are a horny teenager hoping to worship Onan while viewing, I
suggest you look elsewhere.

Title
Review for Ulee's Gold (1997)
ULEE'S GOLD -- a movie review by Justin Siegel
Bee metaphors -- there are lots of 'em. I know; I've seen ULEE'S GOLD.
Living in a small city, most offbeat, indie, or small features don't
get shown here until a month or two after they've proven themselves
worthy. And then they only usually stay about a week, since nobody in
this town appreciates good films. ULEE'S GOLD will suffer this fate,
and it's a pity. Everyone is out enjoying that insipid Jennifer Aniston
comedy PICTURE PERFECT.
I saw ULEE'S GOLD on its opening day. Everyone in the theater loved it.
All six of us.
ULEE'S GOLD is a magical and inspirational new film from RUBY IN PARADISE
director Victor Nunez, and it caused quite a stir at Sundance this year.
It is the story of beekeeper Ulee Jackson (Peter Fonda), who lives with
his two grand-daughters: Penny (Vannesa Zima), 10, and Casey (Jessica Biel),
15. He is a widower and is more comfortable consorting with bees than with
human beings.
He has a son in prison, who he hasn't heard from since forever. Then he
gets the call. His son, Jimmy (Tom Wood), wants Ulee to go to Orlando
and bring Helen (Christine Dunford), Jimmy's wife, back to Ulee's home.
Ulee is none too excited about this, and neither are her daughters,
especially since she's a major druggie.
But, with the help of neighbor Connie (Patricia Richardson, from tv's
HOME IMPROVEMENT, proving that at least one star from that show can
make a _good_ movie), they get Helen through withrawal and try to steer
her in the right path. Not so easy with her old roommates coming back
to collect some money they think they're due.
ULEE'S GOLD, like Nunez's other film RUBY IN PARADISE, is about lonely,
tortured souls who just want a little peace and quiet. Fonda, eerily
resembling his father Henry in both looks and acting ability, is virtually
a shoe-in for a Best Actor nomination next March, and don't be too
surprised if both Nunez and the film itself get recognition too.


Title
Review for Air Force One (1997)
AIR FORCE ONE -- a movie review by Justin Siegel
Harrison Ford is the president of the United States.
No really, Harrison Ford _is_ the president of the United States. If I 
were an American citizen and was of legal age and woke before noon one 
day, I'd vote for him. He's my hero, man. I mean, when he's up there 
battling terrorists, being a family-man and fighting tooth-decay, I don't 
worry about him. He'll be A-Okay! If it were Bill Clinton up there, then 
I'd be scared, but come on, this is Harrison Ford. They should've handed 
out little buttons that say "Vote for Harrison Ford this July!" after the 
movie.
Ford is one of the many good things AIR FORCE ONE (or AFO to those who 
are too cool for their own good) has going for it. Others are Glenn 
Close, William H. Macy (the guy from FARGO), director Wolfgang Petersen, 
and a great script. One thing going against it is the 
impausability-factor. While it's not as high as that of FACE/OFF, where 
two men swap faces, it's easily as high as CON AIR, in which a handful of 
prisoners highjack an airplane.
What is it with all the implauable movies this summer?
After giving an emotional speech about how the USA will not negotiate 
with terrorists and locking up some sort of Russian comrade, President 
Harrison Ford heads back to Air Force One in a limo, looking forward to 
watching a football game and spending some time with his acting-impared 
12-year-old daughter.
Not so easy, because this time, loyallist to the aformentioned Russian 
comrade Gary Oldman has, with the help of someone who is supposed to be 
on President Ford's side, hijacked Air Force One. He will kill one 
hostage (there are like, 50, including the first lady, first daughter, 
and first monkey) every half-hour until the Russian comrade that they 
locked up is released.
Silly Russian. Didn't anyone ever tell him not to mess with Harrison 
Ford?
President Bill Clinton has said he's seen this film twice. _Twice_. This 
is the busiest, most powerful man in the world and he's seen this film 
_twice_. Then he goes home and has a nice long jacuzi. It's funny -- I 
can just imagine him swinging from a cable dangling from a diving plane. 
He's lucky he let Harrison Ford do that for him.

Title
Review for Conspiracy Theory (1997)
CONSPIRACY THEORY -- a movie review by Justin K. Siegel
Scenario: Alice Sutton (Julia Roberts) walks into the office of one Henry Finsch, a man who she needs to get in contact with due to the fact that his life may be in danger.
"He'll be with you in a moment," his secretary says.
Then I, Justin K. Siegel, viewer, turn to my viewing companion and
whisper, "it's the guy with the nose."
She tells me to shut up and watch the movie.
Predictability is often frowned upon by movie critics and civilians
who like to think they're movie critics, but in a lot of cases,
CONSPIRACY THEORY being one of them, predictability can can be a
welcome thing.
Mel Gibson plays Jerry Fletcher, a freaked-out cab-sriver who
publishes a quarterly newsletter entitled "Conspiracy Thery." In it,
he includes newspaper clippings and his beliefs on everything from
flouride in drinking water ("It turns you into a robot unable of
creativity or free thought") to the cinema of Oliver Stone ("do you
think he'd still be alive, knowing what he knows, if he weren't
working for them?"). It is safe to say that Jerry _is_ a wild and
crazy guy.
He is also stalking Alice Sutton, a lawyer whose father was murdered
about six months ago. Jerry, I don't think, is in love with her per
se, but the conspiracy surrounding her father's death. She should hate
him, but something draws her to him. It could have something to do
with the fact that he looks like Mel Gibson.
When Mel prints something in his newsletter that has a slight ring of
truth to it, the aforementioned "guy with the nose" (Patrick Stewart,
from "ST:TNG") kidnaps him, drugs him and almost gets him murdered. He
is called the guy with the nose because Jerry, in the process of
defending himself, bites this guy's nose off.
Now, I would be lying if I said I fully comprehended the gist of this
film, but I understood enough to know I liked it. My viewing
companion, in fact, believes that Mel Gibson should be nominated for
Best Actor for his performance. I tended to disagree, as Peter Fonda's
heartbreaking turn in ULEE'S GOLD is still too fresh in my mind, but
who knows what I'll think come next Febuary when the nominations are
handed out? Not me.
I do know one thing, though: I'm tired...

Title
Review for Picture Perfect (1997)
PICTURE PERFECT -- a film review by Justin K. Siegel
Of course I knew this going in. Why is it that whenever a TV-star
makes a movie it's always a romantic comedy, and then they say on
Entertainment Tonight or something, that they were "attracted to the
characters. They were really original."
Original?! Let me give you a run-through of PICTURE PERFECT: Character
A) Kate (Jennifer Aniston, from tv's FRIENDS), a smart, beautiful,
professional woman wants two things she can't have: a new job-title
and the love of her co-worker Kevin Bacon. Her boss will only give her
the job if she gets married and gets a mortgage and gets a lease on a
German sportscar, and Kevin Bacon pnly sleeps with married or involved
girls. WHat does she do?  She invents a fiance! Then when everyone
wants to meet him, she tells some poor schmoe she met at a wedding
that she will pay him $1000 to pretend to be in love with her for a
company dinner, and pick a fight with her at the end, thus breaking
the engagement but still being able to keep her job, since the guy
ends up looking like a jerk and she is the poor, defenceless
female. He, of course, goes along with it.
Gee, I wonder if they get together in the end. I've seen more original
stuff on the WB.  And better stuff too. PICTURE PERFECT also makes the
mistake of being _wayyyyy_ too long at 100 minutes, and expecting us
to like Aniston's character, who comes off as a cold, spoiled bitch.

Title
Review for Twin Town (1997)
F#!KIN' A!
Two f#!kin' Welsh sociopaths f#!k s#!t up in f#!kin' TWIN TOWN
--A review by Justin Siegel
TWIN TOWN is the story of two brothers: Julian and Jeremy Lewis (Llyrs 
Ifans and Rhys Evans), who aren't twins but are thought to be by just 
about everyone. They a little bit poorer than TRAINSPOTTING's Mark 
Renton, but a little bit crazier, so it works out even. When their 
father, Fatty, falls off a roof and breaks his leg while working for 
Brynne Cartright, the "twins" want a little compensation. It doesn't take 
a genius to figure out that they aren't going to get it.
So what do they do? They urinate on Brynne's daughter's head while she 
sings at a Karaoke bar. And what does Brynne then do to get back at the 
twins? He gets a crooked cop to beat them up. And what do the twins then 
do to--well, the list goes on. Let' just say that decapitated poodles, 
sheep-molesting farmers, and exploding trailor parks all make cameos 
along the way.
TWIN TOWN really wants to be TRAINSPOTTING. In fact, TRAINSPOTTING's 
director and producer exec-produced TWIN TOWN, and director Keith Allen 
had a supporting role in TRAINSPOTTING. TWIN TOWN is considerably funnier 
than TRAINSPOTTING, but not as powerful -- not by a longshot.
