Authors
James Blackford
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Nero veneziano (1977)
This fascinating movie is an Italian is a horror/giallo taking
narrative influence from the Omen which tells of a blind kid in his
teens who predicts a series of brutal deaths and the birth of an
demonic child which he eventually kills in a horrible sequence by
impaling him on a spiked sculpture (!!!!). As a reward for his
troubles he gets his sight back however in an end sequence hinting at
the invulnerability of evil we learn the demonic baby has returned
from the dead.
What really makes this film for me is the Venetian setting. It
seems this location perfect for the Baroque tone of Italian movies of
this type. As in WHO SAW HER DIE a wintry Venice is presented but
whilst that film concentrated on the claustrophobic maze elements of
the Venetian Renaissance-esque buildings and alleyways (as did DON'T
LOOK NOW) contrasted against the huge spaces of water. DAMNED IN
VENICE for me has an agoraphobic quality dwelling exclusivly on the
misty stretches of water and vulnrability of the blind kid in these
circumstances. However the interior shots have more of a
claustrophobic feel. The film has a real emotional punch to it mainly
due to Pino Donnaggio beautiful score. 'Damned.....' also has a kind
of surreal quality to it as the film seems to have a 'white light'
about it. This is most aparrent in the flash back sequences but I also
remember one other scene when three people are standing in a room and
there is a  window in the
background from which a really bright shaft of light forces its way
through the shutters. This is also a movie of considerable gruesomness
and the effects are convincing. Of course I could not right a review
of  this
film without mentioning the scene where the baby is thrown into the
spikes. This is truely shocking yet almost a bit comical as it is not
incredibly graphic. Its certainly unexpected! Yes the film does have
its downsides the main being the narrative is poorly developed in the
way on screen characters seem to know things about these evil goings
on without being explained just so they can direct the audiance. This
leads to the plot being very artificial. In the end the film succeeds
though......
