Authors
Neal Richardson
Number of Reviews
3

Title
Review for Phantoms (1998)
Principal Cast:  Peter O'Toole, Rose McGowan, Jennifer Going, Ben Affleck,
Liev Scribner
I'll be the first to admit it.  I think Dean Koontz is a fabulous writer.
But translating the work to the screen will never measure up to a
novel's standard.  That said, this is the best adaptation of a Koontz
novel that has been produced by Hollywood.
The plot, in brief, is fairly simple.  Two sisters come home to a small
mountain town only to find that it's deserted.  A few surviving deputies
are left, but the force that took the town is still there.  And it starts
to toy with them.  The military gets called in and is wiped out and only
an old man with an unusual theory has any idea as to what is going on.
Major subplots get thrown out but most of the book's spirit remains
intact, despite major cuts to the story.  The action gets streamlined as
does the character development.  The suspense, however, remains intact.
There's a marvelous use of sound to put people on edge.  
Joe Chapelle does a good job with the material.  Confronting the monster
unfolds a lot like John Carpenter's "The Thing."  In fact there are shots
that are obvious homage's to that scarefest.  That's perfectly fine.  
I haven't had much experience with the movie horror genre and I imagine
that more experienced critics have ripped this movie apart with some of
its cliches.  I got my entertainment.
Koontz has said that he won't allow anymore of his books to be made into
movies unless he's writing the screenplay and producing in some fashion.
If this is an indication of the work that gets produced, then I'm looking
forward to more.

Title
Review for Deep Rising (1998)
Principal Cast:  
Treat Williams, Fammke Jannsen, Kevin J. O'Conner, Wes Studi
Written and Directed by Stephen Sommers
Let's remember what movies were primarily made for.  Entertainment.  
That remembered, does Deep Rising succeed?
For those of you who don't know the plot, I'll paraphrase something I
read.  Pirates, Sea monster, you figure it out.  Have we seen all of this
before?  Done Better?  Well, yeah, but who cares?  This movie is a fun
ride that resembles a carnival haunted house.  A group of disposable
people run, swim and run some more from tentacles with teeth.  They have
guns that never run out of ammo (Cool!).  Some of the action sequences
are quite innovative actually.  There are even a few laughs in here
(especially that final shot).  The actors aren't taking themselves or
the movie seriously, so why should we?
If you're a Sam Raimi fan, you'll probably have a good time here.  I kept
waiting for the Treat Williams character to say "Groovy."

Title
Review for Face/Off (1997)
Principal Actors: John Travolta, Nicolas Cage
Written by: Michael Colleary and Mike Werb
Directed by: John Woo
Imagine what it might be like to wear the face of the person you hate the
most.  What would that do to you? 
This is the dilemma at the heart of John Woo's latest action thriller,
"Face/Off."  The premise the screenwriters use to make us believe that the
two leads "swap" faces is ludicrous but when this occurs we aren't really
concerned with suspending our disbe lief.  This movie has already sucked
us in. 
What makes this movie work is the intensity that Travolta and Cage bring
to their roles as they play themselves and then switch roles a quarter of
the way through the film.  The scenes become more poignant as the audience
knows who's really who and everyo ne else does not.  A very interesting
human drama unfolds as the best in these characters is brought out due to
the role reversal. 
If none of this grabs you as you watch this in a multiplex, John Woo's
direction and outrageous stunts will.  This is without a doubt his most
Hong Kong like of his American films.  Those who are familiar with Woo's
style will undoubtedly smile knowingly at some of these shots throughout
this picture. 
This is an action movie with a lot of heart.  You'll be hard pressed to
find a better action film this summer. 
