Authors
Craig Franck
Number of Reviews
2

Title
Review for Amateur (1994)
"Amateur" is filled with deadpan humor that might be missed if one isn't 
on the lookout for it. "Amateur" also shows what it is like for a man to 
see himself as others do, and not at all like what he sees.
It opens with a scene of a man laying face down on the street. He comes 
to having no idea of who he is. He is befriended by a woman (Isabella 
Huppert) at a dinner who acts as if she may have just landed on her head, 
as well. He quickly learns that she writes erotic fiction for a living. 
She invites this total stranger to stay at her apartment. (Her trustful-
ness may come from the fact that she has lived in a convent for the last
15 years, something she went ahead and did even after the Mother of Christ
herself appeared to her in a vision and told her not to become a nun.)
Thomas (Martin Donovan) did not fall from the window by accident; he was 
pushed by his wife, the lovely Sophia (Elina Lowensohn). She has had 
enough of him. He got her hooked on drugs at age 12 and used her for his 
porno films. He also tells her that he will disfigure her if she leaves 
him. 
Sophia believes he died in the fall and contacts an associate who tells
her that Thomas was trying to blackmail the person fronting the money to 
make the XXX movies. Sophia herself becomes mixed up in this when she
contacts this person about having some floppy disks with delicate 
information on them. Some men are dispatched to find her, the disks, and 
anyone else involved. 
One of the striking things is the casualness with which all these 
characters come across. The two men who are sent to get the disks strike 
up a conversation about cell phones right before they are about to torture
the accountant Sophia contacted with a live electrical cord. Sophia also 
manages to retain a childlike innocence, even in the face of such an 
abusive relationship. Isabella and her quest to lose her virginity has an
"it can wait another day" feel to it.
Thomas finds it frustrating that people are so fearful of him when he 
hasn't a clue as to why they should be. Gradually, he discovers that he 
really would rather not know the person who he was and wishes to be 
accepted for who he is now. 
The film's eccentric characters keep things interesting as the plot is 
allowed to unfold.

Title
Review for Truth About Cats & Dogs, The (1996)
Janeane Garofalo plays Abby, the host of a call in talk show about
pets. She gives advice to people about cats and dogs and other
creatures, great and small.
When a caller asks to meet with her, insecurity about her appearence
causes her to lie about her looks and stand up the man. She describes
Noelle (Uma Thurman), who lives down the hall from her, when asked
what she looks like because she never plans on meeting the caller.
The caller, Brian (Ben Chaplin), is persistent; he shows up at the
station. As luck would have it, Noelle is seated at the mike and the
die is cast on the deception: on the phone or radio, it's the real
Abby; in person, it's Noelle standing in for her.
This Cyrano de Bergerac-like scheme just sort of naturally unfolds,
but it can hardly be the basis for a real relationship. Ben isn't
stupid and senses something is up with the two women; this feeds
his interest in Abby. He has most in common with the real Abby,
and Noelle really can't keep up. When Brian gives her a book or
asks what she thinks about a photograph, she can't relate the way
the real Abby can. Abby and Noelle are different kinds of women.
Abby is independent and is fine with her pets. Noelle can't
imagine herself not being in a relationship and must use a check
list from a magazine to experience the epiphany that, yes, indeed,
her current boyfriend is an abusive loser.
The whole thing is unfortunate because Abby and Brian hit it off
so well over the phone. Also, Brian seems like a nice guy and Abby
is an attractive women with a pretty face and a warm smile, but next
to the tall, thin, and exotic Uma Thurman she must feel short and
dumpy looking. That's sad, because Brain doesn't seem like he is
necessarily looking for a Vogue model for a girlfriend.
What's great about this movie is instead of degenerating into a
farcical romp, the characters are developed and you instantly
want to like all three. Brian connects with these two women at
whatever level he can, which is very different depending on
whether he's got Abby on the phone, or "Abby" in person. There
is a great phone scene in which Abby and Brian have a long talk
culminationg in phone sex. There is also a very erotic scene where
he feeds Noelle -- the goody starved model -- some forbidden desert.
