Authors
Max Scheinin
Number of Reviews
32

Title
Review for Vertigo (1958)
Originally released 1958, rereleased 1996
An Alfred Hitchcock film, "Vertigo".
Starring: James Stewart, Kim Novak, Barbara Bel Geddes, Tom Helmore, Ellen
Corby, Henry Jones, Raymond Bailey, Lee Patrick
Rating: ****
Today I saw what I, and many others consider Alfred Hitchcock's
greatest masterpiece, his crown jewel, the haunting and nearly
transcendent Vertigo for the third time. Though upon previous viewings
I had seen the movie's brilliance, and thought it an extraordinary
film I had never been quite so purely caught up in it's story. It is a
ravishing entertainment, a beautifully acted, carefully constructed,
stunning film about love, deceit, and obsession.
My experience of the movie was different from before though, and for a
most important reason: I saw it on a big screen.  To be fair the
screeen isn't that big. I saw it at the Nickelodeon, a local theater
beautifully furnished, old-fashioned, utterly charming. The room I sat
in had 200 seats, and I am sad to say that only about 17 of them were
occupied ( I suppose everyone else was busy watching Men In Black for
a third time ).  My good friend and fellow film nut Alex agreed to see
it with me ( it's his favorite film of all time ). Together we entered
the darkened theater to hear the distinct strains of Bernard Hermann's
haunting score, munching popcorn, watching a story - not a
film. Vertigo is gripping from the first frame to the last. Do you
remember the first shot? It shows Kim Novak's face, aware and sharp, a
tad suspicious, a bit nervous, thoroughly frightened. Her eyes dart
from one side to the other. Is anyone watching her? Saul Bass did the
teriffic credits sequence. Alone the opening is a tour de force.
Anyone who has never seen Vertigo is in for a wonderful suprise. For
fear of spoiling the plot's suprises I will tread carefully. Scottie
Ferguson ( Jimmy Stewart ) was previously a police man, but his newly
discovered fear of heights, or Vertigo, has made him retire from the
profession. One day, soon after his retirement he is asked by an old
friend Gavin Elster ( Tom Helmore ) to follow his wife whom he
believes is possesed by an ancestor named Carlotta Valdes who commited
suicide when she was twenty six. Guess how old the wife is. Scottie
follows her and finds that he cannot save her because of his
vertigo. She commits suicide. Enter the film's equally gripping second
half.
Vertigo is a haunting film; not once do you check the time and yawn as
you do at your average Batman And Robin ( although I admit that upon
my first viewing of the film I found the second half a tad boring
). By the time the final fade-out comes you have been possesed too;
not by Carlotta Valdes but by Alfred Hitchcock.  Like the works of
Chaplin, Welles and Satyajit Ray, Casablanca, Citizen Kane, Battleship
Potemkin, 2001: A Space Oddessey, and The Godfather part I and II you
do not love movies if you haven't seen this one, nor are you a real
american. Put it on your must-see list.
Vertigo runs 2:06, and if it ran a minute less it would be a crime. It
is truly one of the greatest films ever made,and everone should ake an
effort to see it. My friend Alex seemed to have had my reaction to the
film; we were both spell bound by the events unfolding on the
screen. If you have a chance see it on a big screen if you haven't
already, or at least rent it on tape. You can not be my friend unless
you have seen Vertigo. Anyway see it. There are no flaws in this
film. It accomplishes everything it wants to which is why I am giving
it all ****.

Title
Review for Godfather, The (1972)
Certain films are transcendent -- such a film is Francis Ford Coppola's The
Godfather, his 1972 masterpiece about life in the mafia, and the characters
who inhabit that life. Central to this portrait, is Michael Corleone (Al
Pacino). As the film opens, he is a war hero, a nice kid -- despite the
fact that his father, Don Vito Corleone (Marlon Brando), is head of a
powerful mafia ring, he doesn't want to get mixed up in the family
buisness. In the first shot, black fades to a close view of a face; in the
last, a close view of a face, fades to black. What comes inbetween is like
poetry commited to the screen. It isn't so much a tale of crime, as a tale
of family, and an intamate study of power. The way in which the director
and actors collaborate is magical -- you see the mark of Vito, on the face
of Fredo (John Cazale), Sonny (James Caan), and Michael. You understand the
ties that bind -- loyalty, trust, love. Coppola knows when to cut away, and
how to keep the story moving. This film runs just below a full three hours,
but absorbs us so completely, that never once does it need to pause for
breath. Every time I see it, I become more and more absorbed -- in my last
viewing I actually saw Michael go through all his subtle phases. He moves
beyond his original dreams, when he bends over his father and whispers "I'm
with you now, pop". The way in which you sympathise with the various
characters is almost frightening. When they aren't out strangling one
another, and dealing in dope, they're nice people. When Jack Woltz (John
Marley), the big-shot movie producer, wakes up in bed with the head of a
horse, we move outside and view the building with the muffled sounds coming
from within, and then to Vito,  raising an eyebrow, half in suprise, half
in enjoyment. The Godfather has a level of charm, flash, dazzle, all
suggesting pure American trash. But strip away these feelings, and you will
discover the underlying profundity. With repeated  viewing, you see more
and more of the irony -- Michael is offended that Moe Green (Richard
Conte), would even slap around his brother Fredo in public. But in
companionship with Part II, we see such a strange view of this moment.
Through its superb mix of comedy, tragedy, and all inward feelings, comes a
masterpiece that deepens with reflection, rewatching, and rethinking.
- Max Solovitch Scheinin
Read more of Max's work -- reviews, essays, theories, links -- @
http://www.garfieldlib.com/yanews/july97/max/max.html
To subscribe to Max's work (includes all essays, theories, thoughts) write
him @ solo@cruzio.com with the word "subscribe" in the header. You will
receive e-mail on an irregular basis, considering that Max is a lazy/busy
kid. 
"We all go a little mad sometimes."
- Anthony Perkins @ the Bates motel.

Title
Review for River Runs Through It, A (1992)
Robert Redford's A River Runs Through It is not a film I watch often. It is
a masterpiece -- one of the better films of recent years. Until 1994, it
was my second favorite film of all time. The acting and direction is
top-notch -- never sappy, always touching. A friend of mine once reported
that he avoided it because "I was afraid it would just be really
politically correct, and tick me off." All I could do was tell him to go in
unbiased, and enjoy. It is one of the few movies that has completely
reduced me to tears. But certain memories should not often be rereleased --
in the last few shots, you have to cry. Upon my first viewing I left
bawling. It is not flawless -- but it is so very good, that you can't help
but be effected. The opening is dangerously nolstalgic and sentimental --
watching these shots of people who have been dead so long, gives you a
feeling of perspective and history observation that you will find in very
few other films. Martin Scorsese once described the movies as a dream state
-- like taking dope, and immersing yourself in
an alternative world. That is what A River Runs Through It does. It
exploits the unique power of cinema to engross you and help to forget your
real self. Both times I've seen it, its been hard (again to quote Scorsese)
waking up. But the dream is lovely. 
- Max Solovitch Scheinin
Read more of Max's work -- reviews, essays, theories, links -- @
http://www.garfieldlib.com/yanews/july97/max/max.html
To subscribe to Max's work (includes all essays, theories, thoughts) write
him @ solo@cruzio.com with the word "subscribe" in the header. You will
receive e-mail on an irregular basis, considering that Max is a lazy/busy
kid. 
"We all go a little mad sometimes."
- Anthony Perkins @ the Bates motel.

Title
Review for Star Wars (1977)
What with the special edition out on video ( I snapped up my copy as
quickly as anyone ) I thought I'd make some comments on these films.
Why is Star Wars as charming and graceful as it is? 
Why has it endured as well as it has?
With the exceptions of James Earl Jones and Alec Guiness, the acting is
pretty mediocre. Let's just call it corny. ( Why, oh why, couldn't Lucas
use computers to substitute better performers in the lead roles? ) We never
really feel close to the characters. Why is it my candidate for the finest
pure entertainment ever commited to the screen? ( It's demeaning to Raiders
Of The Lost Ark, Jaws and The Empire Strikes Back to call them pure
entertainments. ) It's not a perfect film, but it's a heck of a good one.
Many of my friends have a respect bordering on a religious obsession with
it. ( My friend Adam - who thinks that ROTJ is the best of the trilogy and
TESB is the worst - owns paperback continuations of the movies and
soundtracks meant to be played along as you read. ) The film certainly has
a place in my heart although I'm not sure I love it as much as they.
Watching it today I feel manipulated. It hold up over numerous viewings and
yet...something is missing. To many remaking Star Wars is what remaking
Casablanca ( they're doing it! ) and The Godfather is to me: sad and
pointless. It would ruin the legend of the movie. Yet...I'll say it against
my better judgment ( and it will anger many people. ) If it's done do it
with a new script. Have Steven Spielberg
direct. Use new music. Set it in the future. Get rid of the first line (
along time ago in a galaxy far far away... ). Cast Jack Nicholson as Darth
Vader and get rid of the clunky outfit. Wait till I get to Hollywood!
Bwa,ha,ha,ha,ha,ha! 
Star Wars is still terrific fun and wonderfully entertaining. It's a really
good movie with a great one inside, struggling to break free.
How good is the second installment, TESB? In a word: magnificent. It's a
glorious film from start to finish. In the first shot it tells you what
it's going to do and then it does it.  A stirring comic book mix of great
acting, wonderful music, mature special effects, and dark thoughts, as
directed by Irvin Kershner - with ravishing gusto - the psychological
tension is so clear. And did I mention great fun? It'll sweep you off your
feet. So many moments, so many sights. A betrayal, a friendship, a great
movie...so good that I think I might call it one of the greatest ever
made.The special edition is truly special.  I could see  it once a week
without growing tired of it.
Sadly this cannot be said of ROTJ, the mediocre conclusion to the trilogy.
It's not bad, but it takes a suprising ( and disarming ) turn towards
mediocre filmmaking. I've always felt that it goes down TOO easily, when
you should hesitate before accepting the conclusion and outcome. Not that
it's bad; it's just not very meaningful. Fans of the film will argue with
me: "It's not even MEANT to be meaningful, you take yourself way to
seriously, blah blah blah, yada yada yada etc. etc.". Hmm...I'm not
entirely sure I agree. The entire Star Wars trilogy revolves around
religion ( the force ), and what can be seen as serious issues (  the
battle between good and evil. ) This is a fun movie but it doesn't quite
capture the sense of awe and excitement the first two do. It's meant to be
seen on a big screen. ( Much like Gone With The Wind, an entertaining but
wildy over-rated and equally mediocre film. ) Both films are esentially
entertainments that could have been alot better then they are.
As seen on a big screen ROTJ is great fun. ( If I had reviewed it after
seeing it on the big screen I would have gave it ***1/2 and B+. ) But I'm
talking little screen here - the video experience. And that ain't all that
great. I still like the film - but I don't love it.
I'm starting to worry that Mr. Lucas will not live up to our expectations
when he releases his new films. Perhaps there is no way he can. ( Of course
such a rule can be defied. I've never like Jurassic Park but I thought the
sequel was well crafted and a heck of alot of fun. ) But whether or  not he
does TESB is a movie to treasure and the other two aren't all that bad
either. 

Title
Review for Beetlejuice (1988)
Over and over again he takes bizzare premises and makes blockbusters. 
Beetlejuice isn't a perfect movie--but it's an entertaining one. It's
uneven and poorly maintained and badly edited and the main character (
Beetlejuice played by Michael Keaton ) should have been completely rooted
out. I love this movie. It's offbeat, but so is all his work. And it has a
genuine sense of wit. 
Here's the movie's outline: Two young lovers who have just been married
move into a house. In these first moments there's a lovely little sense of
whimsy and magic. One day they go to town to pick up some groceries. As
they're riding back they ram into the side of a bridge. Their car is
balanced over the side of a river courtesy of a plank of wood. There's a
dog on the other side, holding them up. Then he hops off and - boom!  -
down they go. Yep, they're dead in an instant and they don't know it.
I don't want to go into detail but this is a marvelous comedy about the
afterlife--a good rental for when you're feeling bizzare.

Title
Review for Dante's Peak (1997)
by Max Scheinin
Read more of Max's reviews at
http://www.garfieldlib.com/yanews/july97/max/max.html
In the last few years, the disaster film has been making a comeback. Last
year we had Independence Day and Twister. Now we have Dante's Peak and
Volcano. Disaster films can be great fun--they can also live up to their
title. For an example of the latter, take Dante's Peak a completely silly
little picture about a volcano. Yep, nobody knows that it is alive, but it
is. It explodes. So, uh, is this movie gonna make sense? No, just watch.
Uh, is it gonna be fun? If you don't think--just watch. But, uh, shouldn't
it require intelligent participation? No, just watch. 
Sound like fun? Judge for yourself--I found this movie completely
disrespectful to my intelligence. The special effects were not very good.
It was never convincing. I wanted to, y'know, walk out. After five minutes.
It is truly ludicrous. I don't mind a movie that isn't "deep", but this
movie fails to "entertain".
Now take Volcano, a simple little film that came a few months later. Maybe
they were doing extra filming--don't ask me. How's it compare? Next to
Dante's Peak, it's Citizen Kane. It's exciting and well-edited and makes
the concept of volcanos seem quite realistic. It does what it wants to. You
might not find yourself cheering, but you'll probably be on the edge of
your seat. Sure I think of the cinema as an art form, and sure, I like to
be challenged by a film--to have my morals questioned--but by no means am I
so
snobbish that I can't appreciate escapist entertainment--and that's what
this film provides. I don't think you should pay more then $4.50 to get
in--but I don't think you'll altogether regret it if you do. 

Title
Review for Lost World: Jurassic Park, The (1997)
Reduced to the video screen, its still a pleasure visiting Steven
Spielberg's The Lost World, a land where dinosaurs roam free, and wreak
havok. In the first few moments, in which a little girl is approached by a
little dinosaur ("What are you?...Some kind of bird?"), I worried that,
reduced to this size, his "popcorn" movie wouldn't work. By the time Ian
Malcom (Jeff Goldblum) reached the fabled island, I was sure of it. But
then, two T-Rexes began to nudge a trailer off a cliff...and I was hooked.
Many of the moments on the island are truly magical -- they don't -- can't
-- live up to anything out of King Kong. But they still engage you with all
your senses. This is a lush land, paradise, but, humans should not be here.
The mechanical creatures sputter out of bushes. And even if they aren't too
real, the atmosphere is so delicious, that you buy it. This film is a
sample of that land, and more. Returning to San Diego, we experience, in an
over-used term, a roller-coaster ride. Sheer exhilaration results from this
action packed hour and a half. By the end, we have learned that man
shouldn't mess with nature -- so, it remains a mystery that this sequel
doesn't suck. 
- Max Solovitch Scheinin
Read more of Max's work -- reviews, essays, theories, links -- @
http://www.garfieldlib.com/yanews/july97/max/max.html
To subscribe to Max's work (includes all essays, theories, thoughts) write
him @ solo@cruzio.com with the word "subscribe" in the header. You will
receive e-mail on an irregular basis, considering that Max is a lazy/busy
kid. 
"Movies are really a kind of dream state, or like taking dope. And the
shock of walking out of the theatre into broad daylight can be terrifying.
I watch movies all the time, and I am also very bad at waking up."
- Martin Scorsese, from Scorsese on Scorsese

Title
Review for Tomorrow Never Dies (1997)
The man in the black suit strides out into the center and looks over his
shoulder. He quickly turns around and fires a few shots. This is James Bond
(Pierce Brosnan), the highly trained super-spy, with remarkable talents,
spontaneous rebukes, and goregous women all up his sleeve. Agent 007,
(thats Double-o seven, not just seven), is among the greatest heros of the
action genre -- right up there with Indiana Jones, he represents solid
morals, ideals, and disguises wrapped into one explosive package. In a
moment, we watch him running through an airport, attaching and detaching
various bombs, hurriedly scurrying onto the back of a truck, leaping into a
plane and shooting into the sky, delayed by another plane's explosion, but
making it through all the same. As I watched, I knew that I was going to
get what I had been promised -- explosive action, goregous women, and lots
of fun. As the film progressed, I started to smile -- the job was being
done with style. Brosnan is a good Bond, probably second best (who can
forget Sean Connery?). He's charming, funny, and you actually believe that
he could perform these stunts, throw himself into the line of fire, seduce
these women. The cold-hearted villains shoot with no hesatation (as the
center villain, Johnathan Price does a good job -- he wants to start World
War III, just to keep his ratings up). The sights are terrific -- the best
scene is a break-in where Bond steals a red box (look, its important, don't
be skeptical), and races through various halls, jumping over balconies, the
whole schtick. He piles on the drinks,  shaken not stirred. Gulping them
down as he goes along, you start to feel somewhat giddy. There are corny
moments ("We seem to have made an attachment to eachother"), and some of
the stunts would never happen. No matter, in the context of the film, you
will believe. The main song ("Tommorow Never Dies"), is dissapointing, a
weak effort, especially after the livelier opening to Goldeneye. Even so, I
continued to enjoy the film, never growing skeptical. after agreeing with
one of my Internet correspondents (you know who you are), that it looked
rather crappy, I went in expecting very little. Instead I enjoyed the
crackling mix that added up into a nice vehicle. The Bond-mobile is the
best car that anyone has ever dreamed of -- it places high above the
Melehan mobile. (Ted Priddge -- I got your MiB joke, but NOBODY will get
this). I couldn't help but think that it was carried a little bit out of
range. Even so, its hard to grow skeptical. My advice: Get up and go see
Tommorow, today. 
- Max Solovitch Scheinin
Read more of Max's work -- reviews, essays, theories, links -- @
http://www.garfieldlib.com/yanews/july97/max/max.html
To subscribe to Max's work (includes all essays, theories, thoughts) write
him @ solo@cruzio.com with the word "subscribe" in the header. You will
receive e-mail on an irregular basis, considering that Max is a lazy/busy
kid. 
"Movies are really a kind of dream state, or like taking dope. And the
shock of walking out of the theatre into broad daylight can be terrifying.
I watch movies all the time, and I am also very bad at waking up."
- Martin Scorsese, from Scorsese on Scorsese

Title
Review for Devil's Advocate, The (1997)
The idea at the center of The Devil's Advocate, which is, thus far, one of
the three or four best films of 1997, is that no matter what decision is
made, evil will triumph -- God is a trickster, Satan is a humanist -- "The
LAST humanist". He appears in many guises, and seduces many men and women
-- in his own words, "Vanity -- by far my favorite sin". Al Pacino plays
this role with relish, and gets to chew some delectable lines ("Lemme givya
a piece o' inside wisdom on God...","I have a million names..."), as John
Milton -- the devil. The main idea -- that he can appear as anyone, in any
form (in this case, a buisness man), harkens mainly back to Terry Gilliam's
The Time Bandits. But the film, is something else, something original. Part
of what makes it so very good, is that it never takes itself too seriously
-- it dabbles with morality, vanity, death, and child abuse, but doesn't
try to become any profound study of power. This is a marvelous confection
-- cocky, funny, thought provoking. It is also entertaining. There is no
way you could possibly predict the ending -- it pulls back upon itself,
drawing purely out of the mind's eye. The final shot is more creative, more
daring, more challenging, then anything in cinema since the white sock in
the Coen's Fargo. The central themes are fascinating (sometimes reminiscent
of James' The Turn Of The Screw, and Oates' Accursed Inhabitants of The
House of Bly), and the product that is built around it really wows. Its
nice to know that things like this are still being made. 
- Max Solovitch Scheinin
Read more of Max's work -- reviews, essays, theories, links -- @
http://www.garfieldlib.com/yanews/july97/max/max.html
To subscribe to Max's work (includes all essays, theories, thoughts) write
him @ solo@cruzio.com with the word "subscribe" in the header. You will
receive e-mail on an irregular basis, considering that Max is a lazy/busy
kid. 
"We all go a little mad sometimes."
- Anthony Perkins @ the Bates motel.

Title
Review for Raiders of the Lost Ark (1981)
Raiders Of The Lost Ark  could be called a perfect film. It begins with a
stretch of virtuoso filmmaking
in which every minute looks polished and perfect but never overdone. ( I
would willingly compare it to the 
opening wedding sequence of The Godfather. ) When I recently saw the video
on sale I snapped up a copy ( for a generous $8.50 ) and watched it that
very night. It  doesn't accomplish what it wants to; it accomplishes MORE
then it wants to. It wants only to  entertain; it becomes, in that much
over-used cinematic term, a roller-coaster ride. In the first scene Indy
must swipe a golden idol from a huge temple; Threats? Alone in that one
scene, we have spiders and pits and snakes - Indy HATES snakes - and
rolling boulders and scheming proffesors and savage indians. You may find
yourself laughing in both suprise ( there's a terrific moment revolving
around Indy's whip ) and relief  ( "Get a backbone" may not sound
particularly funny out of context, but in Lawrence Kasdan's superb script
it's hilarious ). Pauline Kael called it impersonal and, though I'm ashamed
to admit it, she might be right; that is to say there's nobody to identify
with. ( Although all actors are in top form; Harrison Ford, in particular, 
was never any better. ) But I think she might have missed the point. It's a
throwback to old saturday morning serials and it creates an entire unverse
that works wonderfully ( though only when seen on it's own terms. ) I
watched it last night too, and at the same moments I held my breath  and
looked on, spellbound. I think I might watch it again tonight or tommorow.
That's how well it holds up. I could never say this about any of the Star
Wars films. ( I saw Return Of The Jedi twice, within two weeks, and upon
the second viewing it was tedious. ) You leave with a smile in your heart
and a grin on your face. 
In fact it's such a good opening that there wasn't much of  a chance that a
sequel would live up to our high standards. Indiana Jones And The Temple Of
Doom is a movie that inspires powerful reactions. You don't like "like" it.
You love it ( as does my friend Paul ) or you hate it ( there's me. ) I've
seen it twice, and only on a sceond viewing did I realize what a ludicrous
film it is. It's chalk full of men from forgein countries who eat eyeballs
and little forgein boys who drive around yelling things like "Oh no, Indy,
look big slimy snakes" etc. You may leave feeling as if the movie wanted to
entertain you a little too much. Spielberg wasn't willing to let it simply
unspool before our eyes; instead he had to make it clear that he was
working hard behind the camera ( and as far as I know it's the only bad
movie he's ever made. ) You can hear him saying: "Look at me, I'm
entertaining you with all of these daring adventures ( aren't I? ) look,
Indy's crossing a bridge, will he make it (?), oh no." You can hear me
saying: "Damn it Steve, just let me watch the movie, OK?".
As for the conclusion of the trilogy, Indiana Jones And The Last Crusade, 
it returns to the look and feel of the first movie with a string of
adventures that has you hooked from the begining to the end. It's a bit
uneven but after the dud that was the second film who am I to complain? In
fact it's really quite good at times ( although it never can get up there
with Raiders Of The Lost Ark. ) The end is really the problem. It's a
little to jokey. We should leave, still wondering what comes next. Instead
we learn that Indy is named after a dog and that doesn't really let us
ponder over what has just happened. The first film ended with that magical
little shot inside the wherehouse, but I am almost afraid that Spielberg
has lost his magic touch. Both Jurassic Park films were exciting and well
done, but there was never any sense of wonder when we saw the dinosaurs.
Can he ever recover this? I hope so. For now, as we wait, we can rewatch
his earlier projects and pray.

Title
Review for Island of Dr. Moreau, The (1996)
When I was in 5th grade a teacher, speaking to the class, said "F- isn't a
grade; it's sarcasm". The Island Of Doctor Moreau is an F- movie. Watching
it is a painful excperience. It's the most over the top, campy,
ridiculously silly film I have ever seen. As a comedy it's really enjoyable
(ex: A friend and I were both rolling with laughter in the scene where you
first see Moreau's daughter ). I'm not even sure if the filmmakers wanted
you to take it seriously. It's hard to think they did. The embarrasing
camera work, the terrible closeups, the bad monster make-up makes for an
abysmal movie. Earlier that year I was sure no movie could be worse then,
say, Spy Hard.  I was wrong. Moreau does Ed Wood Proud.
 But why? It had potential. The credits are fascinating, the first scene is
terrific. It  has a wonderful cast ( Val Kilmer and Marlon Brando, both in
embarrasing performances ). When did it go over the top? They must have
lost all perspective ( it's hard to not laugth out loud at the "five finger
man" scene ). The movie is, in all seriousness, probably the worst one I
have ever seen. Counting Mortal Combat. Counting WaterWorld. Counting The
Fifth Element, and Spy Hard . Part of what makes it so awful is it's
disrespect for the audience. 
Great movies are never forgotten. I will never forget the sights of
Vertigo, Psycho, The World Of Apu, City Lights, Modern Times, Battleship
Potemkin, Singin' In The Rain, Casablanca or Citizen Kane 
( etc. ). The Island Of Doctor Moreau could have been a great movie.
Instead it settled for being  one of the worst ever. I remember that upon
it's initial release I saw a blurb in the newspaper: "Moreau is haunting!"
it bragged. I agree.

Title
Review for Close Encounters of the Third Kind (1977)
Released 1977
A Steven Spielberg film, "Close Encounters Of The Third Kind". 
Starring: Richard Dreyfuss, Teri Garr, Melinda Dillon, Francois Truffaut,
Bob Balaban, Cary Guffey.
Rating: ****
Near the end of Steven Spielberg's awe-inspiring journey Close
Encounters Of The Third Kind ( CEOTTK ) something wonderful for
humanity is happening; we are coming into touch with aliens. They are
benevolent creatures, interested only in helping us. The contact scene
is truly thrilling. Rarely does a hollywood production come this close
to perfection. CEOTTK is about watching out society grow into
something different from the outside. It's most remarkable.
In the entire history of cinema there have been maybe four great films
about contacting aliens, a suprisingly small amount, considering the
subject matter and what you would excpect hollywood executives to do
with it. when I say a great film I mean a film that accomplishes
everything it wants to, and overcomes all the tasks it sets for
itself. One standard a film of the 'contact' genre must set for itself
is to inspire awe. And thus the four movies: Stanley Kubrick's
remarkable not-so-much-film-as-excperience, 2001: A Space Odessey,
Spielberg's CEOTTK, Spielberg's E.T. The Extraterrestrial, and most
recently, Robert Zemeckis's Contact. Otherwise we see comedies such as
Men In Black and Mars Attacks!, spoofs like Mystery Science Theater
3000: The Movie and dumb "entertainments" like The Fifth Element (
easily the worst film I have seen this year, thus far ).
CEOTTK is a study of our universe.It is a reflection of ourselves: we
claim to be so immensly powerful and big, but if they ever do come
will we be ready?

Title
Review for Liar Liar (1997)
by Max Scheinin
Read more of Max's reviews at
http://www.garfieldlib.com/yanews/july97/max/max.html 
I think we should, as responsible citizens, all get together and stop Jim
Carrey from making another movie. He's changing the cinema as we know
it--and for the worst. I would willingly rewatch Batman And Robin rather
then again sit through this miserable collection of filmic
moments--prologues, epilogues, etc. The premise: A lawyer can't lie for a
day. Ho, ho. Normally a movie made from this premise would be terrible--mr.
Carrey suceeds in making it unwatchable. I laughed once--and I was laughing
at the sight of everyone else laughing. Grinding doesn't begin to describe.
It pounds on your head so forcefully and so unstoppably that, if you are a
normal person, you leave feeling sick. When it's not trying to be funny,
it's trying to be melodramatic--but it's just annoying, stupid and sappy.
At best. This movie is intended to make people laugh, yes, not to be voted
best picture of all time by Sight And Sound. But, it fails on every
possible level. It fails to be funny. It fails to be insightful. It fails
to be suspensful. It fails to be fun. They should pay people to see it.
It suceeds on one level--it makes me want to get down on the ground and
start thanking Orson Welles, for having lived. 
If you go in with the intention of coming out alive, please make sure that
you are overly fond of boob, fart, pimple and fat jokes--otherwise you will
go insane. Yes, literally insane. Stark, raving mad. It is boring, stupid,
melodramatic and in the end ugly. I reccemond it strongly. To Ed Wood.

Title
Review for It's a Wonderful Life (1946)
Near the end of Frank Capra's holiday classic, Its A Wonderful Life, George
Bailey (Jimmy Stewart) is feeling down. He has devoted his life to others,
and never fulfilled his dream of leaving his small supburb town, Bedford
Falls. Standing upon a bridge above stormy waters, he looks down,
contemplating suicide. He has potential he hasn't fulfilled -- yet, he has
done so much for others. As a young chap, his ambition was to leave his
hometown of Bedford Falls. But times and ambitions change. Things happen,
and he's stuck. His guardian angel is there, and shows him that...It's A
Wonderful Life. In a whirlwind tour of the town, George sees what life
would be like without him. He learns the moral lesson, that to live is a
gift. His earthly problems are solved. The climatic scene is a marvel.
Frank Capra's film is a centenial classic -- watched and re-experienced by
every generation. Wonderful Life is one of the few pictures of times gone
by that seems as fresh, maybe fresher, then it did when it was first
released. Many films of the thirties through seventies have aged poorly.
But this one is a near flawless example of how well a perfect script and
timing can mesh with first-rate acting, wit and suspense, glorious music,
and terrific set peices. The only even slightly dated scenes are those at
the begining in which God has a long chat with Clarence, George's guardian
angel. They aren't all that bad, but they remain corny and a little out of
place. Nevertheless, this is one film that deserves its place in time,
cinema history, and our hearts. It can be equally appreciated by anyone of
any age. Here is one genuine masterpeice, a classic that reaches heights
and ambitions near perfection. This crackling good mixture results in a
film which is at once funny, exciting, moving and uplifting. The film
itself is almost a reversal of the life of George Bailey -- there isn't too
much to it, but Capra and the gang (various screenwriters, composers,
actors) plumet the material to its fullest potential. The result is a film
-- though not at first intended to be pigeon-holed as a holiday film --
that will always be remembered, celebrated, and loved. 
- Max Solovitch Scheinin
Read more of Max's work -- reviews, essays, theories, links -- @
http://www.garfieldlib.com/yanews/july97/max/max.html
To subscribe to Max's work (includes all essays, theories, thoughts) write
him @ solo@cruzio.com with the word "subscribe" in the header. You will
receive e-mail on an regular basis, considering that Max is a lazy/busy
kid. 
"We all go a little mad sometimes."
- Anthony Perkins @ the Bates motel.

Title
Review for Singin' in the Rain (1952)
For me, there are certain moments that define what the movies are about.
Apu finding his son in Satyajit Ray's The World Of Apu. The two wedding
scenes in The Godfather. The discovery of Mother in Psycho and the final
scene in Vertigo. The airport scene in Casablanca. The scene in which
Charlie Chaplin is sent to jail in Modern Times. The Cary Grant
impersonation from Some Like It Hot. The burning of Rosebud in Citizen
Kane. The Dagobah scenes in The Empire Strikes Back. The waterfall jump in
The Fugitive. The Poignant ending of The Wizard Of Oz. The final shot in
Jaws. Singing In The Rain in Singin' In The Rain.
 For me Singin' In The Rain is everything a movie should be: funny,
satisfying, well-acted, great music ( lots of it ), real characters, very
real predicaments, and a ( more than ) satisfying conclusion. It's hard to
imagine a better film. I recently read a review of the film that neatly
sums up my feelings for it: "No matter how many times you see it you'll
want to see it a thousand times more". The film is a work of art. There is
no pleasure as reliable as watching Donald O'Connor performing 'Make 'Em
Laugh'. 
My favorite part of the film is the premeire of The Dueling Cavilier. It's
a laugthable movie , the voices go out of sync at the screening and nothing
could be worse. The audience is constantly laugthing at the screen. As the
audience members file out, depressed, one man says loudly "That was the
worst picture ever made".  "I liked it" replies the star, Lina Lamont,
happily.
Of course there is the scene in which we are treated to, perhaps the film's
best number, Good Morning. That is the movie's most optimistic scene.
Debbie Reynolds sings. Gene Kelley sings. Donald O' Connor sings. The scene
sings. 
The last shot is similar to the last shots of The Wizard Of Oz and Alice In
Wonderland; at least it preaches the same message ( I've always felt that
those scenes are a tad arrogant; spend 2 hours convincing a kid it's real,
and then take it back ). In this case it's a terrific conclusion. The film
is a masterpiece, and it's comforting to think that this strip of celluloid
that will never be forgotten. 
Spending two hours with these characters is a bliss-out. You leave content
and happy, knowing you have seen not only the best musical ever, but one of
the best movies ever.
[A Note: Do yourself a favor and rent the 50th anniversery edition. Don't
turn it off when the film is done; it is followed by some great interviews.]
Visit Max And Micah's movie page at
http://www.garfieldlib.com/yanews/july97/max/max.html 

Title
Review for Romeo + Juliet (1996)
Recently one night a young director named Baz Luhrmann couldn't sleep. He
tumbled out of bed and moved over to the television where he watched MTV
for an hour. Then he moved to his kitchen where he spent the same amount of
time eating spoiled food. Then he took down a volume of Shakespeare's work
and read it cover to cover - never really paying attention to the words or
plot. And then, as a climax, he took out his video camera and pressed the
"On" button. 
The result? William Shakespeare's Romeo + Juliet - the worst film ever made
and a complete failure. 
Though, to be fair, an interesting complete failure. The idea at the film's
core is to make Shakespeare appealing to the crowds. This is done by moving
the camera around at a rapid rate so that we can't see what is going on.
And filming the dialogue in voice over. And shooting Leonardo DiCaprio like
a Calvin Klein model. And making the frame go still while flashing the
character's name at the bottom. And filming long tedious action sequences
in slow motion.
However I've seen terrible films that are fun to watch. ( Examples are
Batman and Robin and The Island Of Doctor Moreau. ) That rule doesn't apply
here. This is a film that takes itself seriously. That is it's major fault.
Another problem was pointed out by my friend, Alex ( who was singing songs
by Leonard Bernstein throughout. ); the original play is a powerful piece
of work because the author remained neutral and didn't take sides.  Here
it's clear that we are supposed to side with Romeo. ( Just look at the way
they film him. ) From the begining he's our hero and this doesn't work. And
DiCaprio's awful performance doesn't help. 
Luhrmann never decides if he wants to entertain us or enlighten us. The
result is a mess. You can feel him striving to be something he isn't. He
tries to pull of a mix in which drag queens are filmed from purposefully
arty angles. He tries very hard. Key word: tries. "Oh look, he's filming
above water action from below. Pretty. What does it represent?"
Why do people do ugly things? I scrambled away from my tv set feeling
guilty as if I could never read the play again and keep a straight face.

Title
Review for Contact (1997)
Black. A moment's hesitation and then we see the word in simple white
lettering:
Real movie buffs will know that I am quoting the third draft of THE
GODFATHER,  except that the title we see isn't CONTACT. In a moment we are
staring into a familiar corner of the earth rather then the face of
Bonasera. We look on for a moment - the theater is utterly silent. You can
almost feel the collective awe. Then we begin to pull back. Still silent.
Galaxies fly past us slowly, spiralling into oblivion. They look less like
galaxies then like big puffy clouds. And then we realize what the movie is
trying to communicate; that the universe is a huge place that streches back
and back ... farther then we can see or even imagine. That we will never
reach into these strange corners, and meet or find those that inhabit it.
It's well communicated. And when we are sure that we can't go back further,
we do. It's an amazing unbroken shot, far more effective then - say the
opening shot of last year's STAR TREK: FIRST CONTACT. But how can the movie
top such a wonderful opening? I wasn't sure myself.  But, it does. And it's
quite a feat. The sublime shot - practically a bliss out - is broken. It
hasn't even happened - it took place in the mind of a young girl, Ellie
Arroway. After a short introduction we cut to Ellie as
an adult. She is everything we want to be - confident, attractive, Jodie
Foster. To be honest, we also suspect that she is a little stupid. Later on
she goes to bed with Palmer Joss ( Matthew McConaughey ) so we think "Yes,
she is stupid. Just a little." But we are wrong. She's smart - we realize
that when she finally contacts aliens ( in a thrilling scene ). Through a
series of beautifully staged events she finds herself in a space ship (
well, sorta ) about to be transported to the star Vega. And she is ... oh
yes, she is. When she arrives there you are struck by the beautiful vision
of a far away planet, in all it's glory. Gentle waves lap on the shore ...
you are awe struck. How can director Robert Zemeckis live up to all of our
excpectations when he finally shows us aliens?  He does. The film is
glorious.
I have now seen Contact twice, and I loved it both times. It's not quite
2001: A Space Oddessey, E.T, or Close Encounters Of The Third Kind. Who
cares? Do we mark it down because of that? Rarely has a film astounded me
on so many rare and diverse levels. Contact is a masterpiece and an
achievement. The last shot tops off everything else and brings the picture
to a wonderful and amazing conclusion. Intelligently scripted ( gasp! )
with characters we ( gasp again! ) identify with, understand and like.
Contact is a most remarkable film. It is also a spectacle - be sure to see
it on the big screen.
The greatest films - The Godfather, Casablanca, Singin' In The Rain,
Vertigo, Citizen Kane, Psycho,
The World Of Apu, - cast spells. But the 90s has been a bit short on films
like the ones I decsribe. Contact breaks the trend. 
I can't say that about Barry Sonenfield's MEN IN BLACK, which is pretty
bad. The first scene is probably the best; the credits sequence is
spectacular and good fun, and the special effects are dazzling. I saw Men
In Black twice, ( an accident - it's not the kind of film you would like to
see more then once. The second time was at a double feature with the
mediocre Julia Roberts comedy, "My Best Friend's Wedding" which has a
review below ) and I found comparing my reactions more interesting then
thinking about the movie. The first time I liked the movie, but was
dissapointed by Danny Elfman's score. The second time I found the movie
stupid and sappy - just barely watchable - made more so by the score which,
this time, I liked. Yet the score is never as overwhelming as it is in his
Tim Burton films ( the best of his scores can be found in Batman, Edward
Scissorhands, and The Nightmare Before Christmas which was not directed by
Burton but was concieved by him. Blah, blah, blah ).         
Sonenfield is, undoubtedly, the wrong choice for director. So if I you are
gonna keep  talking who would YOU elect? My candidate is Tim Burton who
would have made this a masterpiece ( as Steven Spielberg would have made
Contact one of the best films ever. Pity he didn't direct that rather then
The Lost World - which was entertaining and accomplished what it wanted to
). I'm also a bit sorry to say that the sense of humor  this film
celebrates doesn't apeal to me. I would have preffered a spoof of old alien
movies of the 50s with the aliens invisible, yet causing mayhem. 
To be fair, there are two excellent scenes/shots. The first is when Will
Smith is first transformed into Agent K. I won't say how it is done, but I
will say that is a comic moment, and it is truly inspired. The second is
the films last shot, a remarkable pull back that is a fancy -  less magical
and mysterious, but still fun - take on the last shot of Contact. If the
rest of the film had been that good, and had that impact, we would have
been on to something.     
I loved Contact. I disliked Men In Black. I have no feelings towards My
Best Friend's Wedding. It is a Julia Roberts comedy. It is what you would
excpect a Julia Roberts comedy to be, only a little better. It isn't that
bad - it's a bit of fluff. If you are sick of event movies then see it now.
 Julia Roberts is good - very good, - and it begins wonderfully. Then it
degenerates into a formualic mess. It has the best scene of the year,
featuring the dazzling vocal talents of Cameron Diaz. It has another great
scene which involves a musical number that takes place inside of a
resteraunt. Otherwize it's the kind of film that is pleasent and fun. To
snooze through. But, hey - it could have been worse.
It is worth noting that apart from Contact, Hercules is the only other
really good film I have seen this year. It is far more sophisticated then
your average Con Air. Naturally it's doing dismally at the box office.
Frankly, I'm not suprised at all. Just depressed.
I also think that 1997 will be remembered as one of the great years for
movies. Not for new movies but for old ones. Reissue galore! The films
being released are mostly bad, but this is a movie lover's dream! 
Coming soon, reviews of three classics seen on the big screen: The
Neverending Story ( well it SHOULD be a classic ), The Godfather, and
Vertigo.
Also: The greatest American comedy ( not counting Chaplin ), Some Like It
Hot.
Check out Max and Micah's movie page ">http://www.garfieldlib.com/yanews/july97/max/max.html> here.         

Title
Review for Everyone Says I Love You (1996)
 Released 1996
A Woody Allen film, "Everyone Says I Love You".
Starring: Alan Alda, Woody Allen, Drew Barrymore, Lukas Haas, Goldie Hawn,
Gaby Hoffman, Natasha Lyone, Edward Norton, Natalie Portman, Julia Roberts,
Tim Roth, David Ogden Stiers, Scotty Bloch, Patrick Chranshaw, Billy
Crudup, Trude Klein, Robert Knepper
Rating: **1/2
Letter grade: B-
Everyone Says I Love You begins quaint and charming; two young lovers
struggle to sing Just You, Just Me, to modest results. Well, it's the
thought that matters. The pace picks up quickly as the young DJ introduces
herself. "We're not your normal family from a musical comedy" she explains.
Nope. And ESILY isn't your normal musical either; it isn't so much a
musical as an homage to musicals. Mr. Allen clearly loves the genre, but
his love song towards it bears mixed results. There are inspired moments to
be sure; Making Whoopee is sung in a hospital, there's a ghostly musical
number, and a couple big laughs along the way. Allen moves his camera
around hesitatively imatating the manner in which old boisterous MGM
musicals watched their stars. All this is fine; this is Wody Allen, not
Stanley Donnen  and Alan Alda not Gene Kelley. But ESILY isn't really the
attempt to revive musicals it was supposed to be; rather it's just a smile
at old times - the equivalent of a "wish you were here" postcard. 
It begins first rate; as I watched I thought to myself: this could be a
great film. But somewhere along the way Allen loses track. After Drew
Barrymore leaves Tim Roth I realized that it's a one joke movie and the
joke is on the movies people; they are pale and shallow silly things that
move from one date to the next not thinking back.They are only one
dimensional and we never quite feel close enough to them for it to work. 
That's not to say that this is bad; it's well crafted and paced but it is
lacking in a soul. The dialogue isn't really crisp. In fact, I believe that
this is something of a low point for the movie musical. Allen - holding in
his hands the entire genre - walks a fine line between quiet comedy and
self parody. All the contents are here; it's the magic that's missing.
ESILY runs short at 1:40. While it's never really boring or overlong you
might yawn once or twice - like me. While it's enjoyable I have mostly
mixed feelings towards it. I love musicals with all my heart - I really do
- but I still don't quite like this; it left me with an uneasy, unsatisfied
feeling. I can't quite reccemond except to a fellow musical lover to whom I
warn it's not really that great. It  is rated R, for some minor cursing and
one sexual situaation, but otherwise it's fine for the family. I give it
**1/2 and B-.

Title
Review for Lawrence of Arabia (1962)
Released 1962
A David Lean film, "Lawrence Of Arabia"
Starring: Peter O' Toole, Omar Sharif, Anthony Quinn, Alec Guiness, Jack
Hawkins, Claude Rains, Anthony Quale, Arthur Kennedy, Jose Ferrer
Rating: ****
Once in a very great while a truly special movie comes along. These movies
are like fairy tales; you don't just watch them you actually experience
them. A handful come to mind at once: Battleship Potemkin, Modern Times, 
The Wizard Of Oz, Citizen Kane, Casablanca, Singin' In The Rain, Some Like
It Hot, Vertigo, 2001, The Sound Of Music, The Godfather Part I and II,
Jaws. Lawrence Of Arabia is such a film. When T.E. Lawrence ( Peter O'
Toole ) stares across the simmering desert we feel his hesitation to go
ahead into the unknown. When the final battle scene unspools on the screen
you feel every man's anxiety and fear. And when, after days of dutifully
trudging through the desert, the party comes upon a small oasis you too
feel relief. The film involves you so directly that when you leave you have
been a little transformed. T.E. Lawrence was a remarkable man and his story
is truly amazing. 
Numerous moments live in your mind. I was so transfixed by the screen that
I nearly forgot I was sitting on my couch watching. I saw the film in it's
wide screen format, which means I probably didn't truly appreciate it's
full scope and breadth. But what I saw was so amazing. Words cannot
describe the sights. Characters develop so naturally; every flinch of a
muscle seems so lifelike; every time that someone tries to express
something it's all so utterly natural that by the end you are certain that
it had to be real. 
Movies were originally created for pure entertainment. Now they have came
to mean so much more. It's comforting to think that Lawrence Of Arabia will
never be forgotten. If the current 'Batman And Robin' is a turkey then
Lawrence is a feast for the eyes.  
LOA runs a lengthy 3:31. I must admit that I usually my doubts walking into
such a long film, but this one is never tedious or boring. David Lean
masterfully captured the reality of the desert on film; it is harsh but
fascinating, a windswept land of sun. Every minute is truly gripping. I
give it ****.  

Title
Review for Night of the Hunter, The (1955)
Charles Laughton's The Night Of The Hunter and Howard Hawks' The Big Sleep
are two primary examples of the genre known as film noir. During the 40s
and 50s film noirs were produced regularly in America. They featured
grotesque men who lurked in shadows, seductive women who were rarely seen
and large, looming camera angles that made their subjects look like
misshapen monsters.
Few films can send genuine shivers down your back; The Fugitive, Jaws and
of course Alfred Hitchcock's Psycho. Charles Laughton's The Night Of The
Hunter is capable of doing this. It's a smashingly scary romp that
demonstrates big, important special effects aren't needed to scare your
socks off. If you want your heart to stop don't read the following plot
summary. ( I knew the plot before I saw the movie; like Psycho it's a
modern legend. ) 
*Plot summary*
A psychotic preacher charms a town and marries a recent widow. ( Her
husband was hanged for stealing money he showed to his children before the
fatal day. ) He hopes to find the money himself and then move on. He kills
his wife and chases the children down the river in a nail biting scene that
somehow feels magical. The children are taken in by an old woman who has
the preacher arrested.
*Plot summary*
Ok, you say, what's so scary about that; and honestly nothing is or would
be scary if it wasn't for the direction. This was Laughton's only film,
reggretable because it is apperant that he could have been a great
director. As made by Hitchcock, this would have been more refined and
elegant. As made by Laughton it's mind numbingly suspensful, a rip your
hair out treat. For example here is a synopsis of one scene.
The children are hiding in the basement with the girl's doll in which the
money is hidden. Slowly the preacher comes down and finds them. He pins the
boy on a barrel and puts a sharp knife to his neck. "Where is it?", he
growls, Overcome the girl yells "It's in my doll." He laughs. "It's the
last place I would have looked." He sits down against the wall and the boy
drops a shelf on his head. He's dazed but he jumps out after them and
chases them up a flight of stairs with his arms stretched out in front of
him like a zombie. They slam the door on his fingers and quickly lock it.
The story is everything; many films ( see below ), are about style over
substance; The Night Of The Hunter is about substance. 
In The Big Sleep the story is nothng because it doesn't make much sense. If
in the middle of the screening I attended a man had leaned over and
whispered "What's going on?", I could have told him. If he had said "What
is this about?", I would have answered "Who knows?".
A quick summary: Marlowe is hired by a rich guy to get a blackmailer off
his back. The rich man has two daughters, Carmen and Mrs. Rutlidge. Alot of
people appear and get shot and Marlowe falls in love.
That's it. The Big Sleep is one of those movies that works entirely, but
only in it's own universe. The fact that it is pretty incomprehensible is
famous. Who knew it was this bad? ( Or this good? ) Watching it is like
watching something you go to see because your kid makes you. You put your
criticsms on hold and try to enjoy the show.
Howard Hawks directs with a crisp and refreshing to-the-pointness that has
you smiling at the sheer fun of it all. ( Is it a great movie? Yeah. It's
also greatly enjoyable. ) Max Steiner wrote the wonderful score that brings
it the same air as Casablanca which he also composed. ( He objected to the
use of 'As Time Goes By'. ) And how are the stars? Wonderful. Humphrey
Bogart - the ultimate noir man - and Lauren Bacall sizzle onscreen.
I saw it in the prerelease edition currently showing across the country -
and you should go see it now. Funny and entertaining, a breezy delight. At
the theater there was hardly a seat left. From the first shot to the last
the audience was drawn in, completely.
The only drawback was the final documentary shown afterwards of the version
originally released to theaters. Seen seperately I would have been
fascinated but with and after the film I was bored. I should have walked
out, still high on the experience and I wasn't given that opportunity.
Still it's a wonderful movie. ( It looks like a much better version then
the original which they show part of. ) An example of what can be done with
all the right people and nothing to work with.

Title
Review for Star Wars (1977)
I imagine that upon the initial release of George Lucas's Star-Wars there
was much excitement; too this day SW is the greatest adventure film of all
time.Imagine what it would be like to enter the theatre with no
expectations and to exit having seen a revalation in the entire history of
cinema. I can't remember the first time I saw the film but it must have
been early in my life. Like 'Singin' In The Rain','The Wizard Of Oz', and
Disney's 'Dumbo'  ( all of which I saw on video ) it made an impression on
my imagination and my life. The excitement never let up. The story was
beautifully simple, the characterizations a  total delight. So when I heard
it was to be re-released in theaters I was wonderfully excited. I was
convinced it would be a life changing experience, something         I would never
under any circumstances forget. The movie was not a dissapointment; I saw
it at an advance screening for the press and it was a truly moving
experience. 
I have seen SW so many times that I know the dialogue by heart. The very
sight of C3PO scolding R2D2  before entering the pod relluctantly brings a
goofy grin to my face. When they arive on Tatooine I feel beautifuly
nolstalgic. I love to think to myself that this galaxy does exist. It all
works for me and  everytime I see the film I am completely engrossed from
start to finish (  I have the same reaction to The Godfather, Casablanca
and Singin' In The Rain ). Yet seeing it on a big screen was completely
different. I first saw it at the afore mentioned critic's showing. Then I
saw it on the third day of it's re-release with a friend. It was truly a
communal experience, the most exilarating experience I have ever had
staring at shimmering images on an other-wise blank screen
I knew that it would be wonderful as soon as I saw the trailer for Volcano;
halfway through the preview someone yelled "booor-rrrrrring", and there was
cheering. That's the kind of experience that money can't buy. Why is the
movie so wonderful? It takes a little adventure and stirs it around with
some wonderful special-effects and charming performances. But what really
makes the film special is it's sense of wonder and innocence. I think it's
fair to say that we would'n't have seen Independence Day if it hadn't been
preceded by Star Wars
and I think Independence Day's makers have seen Star Wars ( did anybody
else notice the tribute to Empire Strikes Back when Goldblum and Smith are
escaping from the mother ship? ).  I think that ID4 wants to be like Star
Wars - a film that will always be remebered. Yet it won't, and I'll say
why. Star Wars believed that there was something wonderful waiting to be
discovered. It believed that if it WAS discovered ( and it probably never
will ) there would be a sense of wonder to it all. And that is what ID4 (
and Twister, Waterworld, Jurassic Park and it's sequel ) are all missing;
that wonderful mysterious sense of awe. That is why Star Wars will always
be remembered.

Title
Review for Close Shave, A (1995)
When making a statement regarding the animated cinema, one can't be broad
in scope -- you have to narrow things down to a point where you really know
what you're talking about. Disney has revolutionized this area, with their
sometimes brilliant, sometimes mediocre animated films -- from Snow White
And The Seven Dwarves, to Hercules. But outside cel animation, there are
different masters -- the up-and-comer Henry Selick, of The Nightmare Before
Christmas and James And The Giant Peach. Even more notable, is the
excellent Nick park, creator and animator of Wallace And Grommit. Of all
these films, considering A Grand Day Out, and The Wrong Trowsers, the best
is A Close Shave -- by turns, deliciously exciting and wonderfully funny,
the animated masterpiece is a near perfect example of story-telling. How
much of a story can you cram into thirty brief minutes? This is just about
how much. With humor, both physical and sophisticated, and action, truly
exciting, the storyline pulls together in unexpected moments -- the
expressions we see on the faces of our heros (Wallace and Gromit) are far
more then we have came to expect. This is an excellent example of how well
good stop-motion can communicate to the audience. 
- Max Solovitch Scheinin (Scheinin not stirred)
Read more of Max's work -- reviews, essays, theories, links -- @
http://www.garfieldlib.com/yanews/july97/max/max.html
To subscribe to Max's work (includes all essays, theories, thoughts) write
him @ solo@cruzio.com with the word "subscribe" in the header. You will
receive e-mail on an irregular basis, considering that Max is a lazy/busy
kid. 
"Movies are really a kind of dream state, or like taking dope. And the
shock of walking out of the theatre into broad daylight can be terrifying.
I watch movies all the time, and I am also very bad at waking up."
- Martin Scorsese, from Scorsese on Scorsese

Title
Review for Schindler's List (1993)
by Max Scheinin
Read more of Max's reviews at
http://www.garfieldlib.com/yanews/july97/max/max.html
There's a moment in Schindler's List when a number of jews are trudging
through snow, clean and crisp, dark edges and frost on the ground. One girl
waltzes through, wearing a red dress that stings the eyes. It is probably
the finest moment through out the film. When I first saw it I began to cry,
though I could not say why. This landscape is the setting of many small
moments that add up to one big whole. when one man is shot in the head we
see blood oozing out onto the ground -- so black and murky, its almost
pomegranate red. At another time we follow a young boy as he runs,
searching for a hiding spot before finally squeezing into a toilet -- which
is already occupied. Like so ( Citizen Kane, Fargo, The Godfather, The
Godfather Part II, Greed, ) many of the greatest American films,
Schindler's List plays with the concepts of money, power, and soul. But
this is a movie about a man who does the right thing. Starkly emotional,
and brutally powerful,  Schindler's List strips away everything on the
outset and leaves us ony feelings. The following that it has gained is not
suprising -- this is probably, thus far, the best film of the decade. 
Steven Spielberg has always been a skilfull filmmaker -- his assured hand
churned out both Jurassic Parks, Jaws, the Indiana Jones   films, and E.T. 
-- but it wasn't until 1993 that we saw what a brilliant man he can be. The
product of his genuis is really something to see -- it can bring tears to
your eyes just as it uplifts you. Throughout, we sense the deep control
which he so masterfully spreads. We watch Oskar Schindler (Liam Neeson)
grow from an arrogant, self important man who hires Jews only to save money
 into  a moving figure, with  a deep sense of pride and accomplishment. The
film requires much work, and can be a harrowing experience -- go expecting
a quick entertainment and you'll be bitterly dissapointed. It does reward
the patient viewer. This is a mature Spielberg, and his deft hands shape an
absoloute masterpiece. This eqsuisite, beautiful film is a rare gem. It
does a good job of summarizing why I love movies. It leaves one breathless,
uplifted, and with much to think about. Afterwards you can reflect on
individual images, visions, and people. Laconic, removed, Schindler strides
through the film a detached prescence who watches all, does much, and
leaves feeling as if he could, should, have done more then he did and was
able to. The change seems natural -- in the hands of a lesser filmmaker, it
would be crude and would cheat the audience. Instead we are told a tale,
told a story. The film is punishing to watch, yes. But anyone who allows
themselves to get involved will experience a miracle, and a genuine
masterpiece of a movie.   

Title
Review for Godfather: Part II, The (1974)
by Max Scheinin
Read more of Max's reviews at
http://www.garfieldlib.com/yanews/july97/max/max.html
When Mario Puzo first wrote The Godfather it was a piece of pop culture -
treated well because of his reputation as a good writer, but unmistakably
mediocre -  a tale of family life in the mafia from the inside. The
characters were one-dimensional, the story gripping but silly. However it
was a best-seller and several major studios grappled for the rights.
Paramount won out and the film was directed by Francis Ford Coppola, who
turned it into more then what it had been. It became a tale of family and
honor, loyalty and trust, death and fortune, innocent men and ruthless men,
passing rulers and heirs. The film was a huge hit. It was also one of the
greatest films of all time - the only adult blockbuster ever made. It one
three academy awards including best picture, and executives decided that
the story was deserving of a continuation. Coppola was brought back on, and
in an utterly astonishing act, lived up to the high standards. The sequel
was an astonishing act of virtuoso filmmaking that never spared your
feelings. It showed us a man and his gradual descension into evil. The
violence was always needed,
never gratuitous. Complete control was spread throughout in a study of
power, a tale of a family and of Michael Corleone - once a young man who
wanted nothing to do with the family buisness and now a greedy ruler who
ruins both his life and those of the people around him. It is truly epic -
the magnificent clean strokes that paint out a tale of life in the mafia.
By the end Michael has been abandoned by all except those who work for and
fear him. His empire expands and he becomes a powerful man but not a good
one. Every minute is utterly engrossing and completely amazing. Rarely has
a film been so punishing to watch. 
Something happens other then that, something amazing. We are shown the
early life of Don Vito Corleone and it is every bit as good. The sky is
ablaze with a red that springs from some unseen source. The violence here
is shocking and upsetting but completely indespensable. This is the
 rising and near falling of a band of unofficial rulers; but to us,
especially if we have seen the prequel,
 it means so much more. And, when at the end, we see Michael alone in his
garden our heart breaks. He has killed his brother and alienated himself
from all those who - did - love him. He has locked out his wife and he has
no regret. He is a lonely man but not a sad one. Breathtaking. 
Both stories come together perfectly and affect us equally. Coupled with
Nina Rota's mournful score we are told a story of one man's self
destruction. To me the first film is a better one. But they are both
examples of near cinematic perfection, and they are both hard hitting tales
that live in your mind.

Title
Review for Batman (1989)
Batman is not a perfect movie. It is a perfect entertainment. It takes
place in a dark world in which no one is safe. Police roam every street but
they are no match to the criminals. A new breed is rising. Led by...the
Joker. A grotesque face that never stops smiling is the mask that serves
Jack Napier, the criminal who, as a young man, killed the parents of Bruce
Wayne. Wayne swore that he would protect the night skies and grew up into
Batman, a cowled figure who, in dark shadow, swoops by the moon as a
warning to all those who do not abide the law. 
Batman, according to the internet's Scott Renshaw, is at this point the
eleventh highest grossing film of all time. It made 251.2 million dollars.
It is the only art house block-buster ever made. Yes, I consider it a work
of art--Batman as Batman should be. Dark annd secluded, living alone in the
Wayne manor atop a stormy hill. But Burton never forgets that his subject
is a comic book character--he keeps him fun. Now that we've been awarded 
three awful sequels--Batman Returns, Batman Forever, Batman And Robin--we
can sneer at the Batman name, but that's not fair. Burton created a kind of
comic book masterpiece--I wouldn't quite place it on par with all-time
genre classics like Back To The Future, Jaws and Raiders Of The Lost Ark.
But all those would be in my personal top 30--coming from me, I would like
to believe that that is quite a compliment. Rather, comparisons with The
Fugitive are on par--it's exciting and funny, crisply edited and a joy to
watch. The Fugitive would be in my top 50--which is still a high place--and
so would Batman. There's a moment in the film when we see what a film of
this sort should be like--the Batplane flies by the moon--what an
unforgettable image. 
In the end everything works out as planned and we see a stylish little
adventure flick that does what it wants to--it keeps all who watch
enthralled in the tale of Batman.

Title
Review for Batman Returns (1992)
by Max Scheinin
Read more of Max's reviews at
http://www.garfieldlib.com/yanews/july97/max/max.html
In 1989, Tim Burton took the legendary comic book figure of Batman and
turned him into  a huge box office hit with an atmospheric little film that
created an utterly distinct feeling somewhere between film noir and The
Godfather. Was it "deep"? Nope. However it was a perfect entertainment and
the audience ate it up. It was natural that Roger Ebert trashed it writing
that it was "without the comic book uplift" of the Indiana Jones and
Superman pictures. Which was true. If what you were looking for was the
tale of a heroic man's escadapes and adventures you were looking in the
wrong place. If those films were Tom Sawyer, then Batman was Huckleberry
Finn. Some critics ( Glenn Lovell of The San Jose Mercury News and Peter
Travers of Rolling Stone ) realized that it was something special; Mr.
Lovell gave it ***1/2 and wrote that "This is Batman as Batman should be.";
Mr. Travers called it one of the ten best films of the year. The praise was
deserved - from start to finish the film was enthralling, exciting, and
superb in every respect. There was no doubt that there would be a sequel
directed by Burton.
The result was Batman Returns which forgets that it wants to be fun within
the first five minutes.  The villains ( the hideous Penguin and seductive
Catwoman ) take over, and our epectations are always left unfulfilled -
when we wanted the Penguin to bite off Batman's nose he simply gets mad, 
and when we want Catwoman to slither over Batman's body she gets pushed off
a building. I admire Mr. Burton 
for trying to do more then entertain, but the result is a mess. Nothing
works out as planned - it fails both to entertain and to enlighten. Hints
are made to the audience that this film could be a blast. Alas, these are
only hints. There are, don't misunderstand me, several moments of cinematic
genuis contained; Catwoman and Batman understand eachother perfectly
without a word on the subject being said; Christopher Lloyd is trapped, by
the Penguin, within a giant cage; a small basket is dropped into a large
river; but nothing is drawn together and Burton is unable to make the film
work on any regular basis. A weak followup, both career and sequel wise,
Batman Returns is sometimes dazzling, but to often dissapointing.

Title
Review for Batman & Robin (1997)
Released 1997, will hopefully be immediately forgotten
A master-of-disaster, Joel Shumacher film,"Batman And Robin".
Starring: George Clooney, Chris O' Donnel, Arnold Schwarznegger, Alicia
Silverstone, Uma Thurman, Michael Gough all in embarrasing star turns
except for Uma and Mike who have nothing to do.
Rating: Zero stars
[NEWSFLASH!] Important: all lovers of the character "Batman" tune in
immediately. The latest Bat flick is in and we have the scoop on it: it's
not as terrible as you thought it would be...it's worse. Chris O' Donnel is
foremost in stinking up this miserable wreck of a "film". Arnie isn't far
behind though. In fact, with the notable exception of Uma Thurman who is
entertaining as Poison Ivy ( and the only reason I didn't walk out ) all
members of the cast suck. It feels like a long time since  Tim Burton made
his wonderful first film; today we are being fed this awful gruel and I
don't like it. We are not amused.
The film takes no time in falling flat on it's face. After the credits the
one-liners start rolling in as Batman And Robin  hop in their car and speed
off to fight the diabolical Mr. Freeze ( whadaya know, they keep ice skates
in their shoes, ain't that clever? ). Not only does the following action
sequence make absoloutely no sense, it serves absoloutely no purpose in the
story. Of course if it was exciting and well edited that wouldn't matter (
the cliffhanger in The Lost World served no purpose, but it was a brilliant
scene and helped out an entertaining movie ), but it isn't. Not only did I
have no idea what was going on, I had no interest in what was going on. And
that's how I felt through out this entire movie. You see, there are no
characters, no plot, no attempt to make the audience care what is happening
on the screen. 
And entire scenes are shot in huge stupid looking sets, where Bane and
Poison Ivy grunt stupid things to eachother. Which brings us to the
dialogue, which is non existent, because nobody talks to eachother. They
talk to themselves ( by the end of the movie I was too ) trying to impress
someone with there stinging wit ( "I want a car...chicks dig the car";"This
is why Superman works alone" ) and never suceeding. This film is truly
painful to watch.
Batman And Robin is a thought provoking film; why does Robin's costume have
nipples? Where are the nipples on Batgirl's costume? Where did these people
learn to "act"? Who cares? Why the hell was this movie made?
I have the information on Batman And Robin's running length somewhere
around here, but I'm not going to take the time to look it up, because
anybody stupid enougth to go see this movie after reading the above review
doesn't really need to know the running length. The film is rated PG-13
because they wanted to attract a certain audience to see it and didn't
suceed. It should be rated R. It is not accceptable for anyone of any age.
Some of the sets are good, but that doesn't stop me from knowing that the
movie sucks. I give it no stars. See Contact or Hercules instead. 

Title
Review for Monty Python and the Holy Grail (1975)
There isn't very much that the near classic comedy "Monty Python And The
Holy Grail" wants to  accomplish; it's so modest in it's procedures and
silly in it's meaning that it's altogether irresistable. What it wants to
do is: make you laugh. And it suceeds. Gloriously. It's not a great film
but it's funny. It looks like the result of a couple of school boys who
were given a camera and a couple hours to film around their premises.
Watching it my first time a few nights ago my friend Alex complained of the
lack of special effects. "But", I said, "the  joke is IN the lack of
special effects." Yes. The film accomplishes all it's biggest laughs by
showing off how badly it was made. For instance it's funniest moment  comes
along, perhaps only an hour in as a number of knights arrive, with King
Arthur at a castle.
A little while later, an awfully grumpy god sends them off on a quest to
find the holy grail. It's hard not to be amused by the following adventures
that eventually lead them to a creepy looking little freak who guards a
bridge to the cave that supposedly holds the grail. To cross you must
answer three questions; brave Lancelot is the first to approach.
It all looks deceptively easy, doesn't it? I won't spoil what follows by
describing it to you; rather I'll let the movie unspool before your eyes,
and let you savor the pleasures it has to offer.
Every line is a classic. ("She  turned me into a newt. Well I got
better...".) Every moment is bursting with inspiration ( there's a very
funny musical number inside a castle among other hilarious bits and pieces.
) The film is achingly funny; watching it is to experience delight as you
realize the filmmakers are pulling your strings, without allowing you to
see them. As directed by Terry Giliam ( Brazil ) and Terry Jones it's a
non-stop adventure/comedy that  takes  you on a wild ride and plunks you
back in your seat, utterly happy. It also features the most unique ending
I'VE ever seen. ( Nothing is resolved. ) It's as if we're being laughed at
by the knights of the, um, not-quite-sound table: "Oh, we're sorry - did we
waste your 2.5 hours?" Nope. You made a dead-pan comedy of, um, terrors.

Title
Review for Jaws (1975)
by Max Scheinin
Read more of Max's reviews at
http://www.garfieldlib.com/yanews/july97/max/max.html
We see the dorsal fin slide gracefully through the water. It nears the
shore. And then we see...red...blood! One more life has been stolen and
this cannot happen again. Three brave men must set out into the ocean to
kill this monster. 
It's a frightening premise, isn't it? Jaws is a movie about a series of
killings made by a shark and the men who set out to stop it. Like Steven
Spielberg's more recent ( and far inferior ) The Lost World: Jurassic Park,
it manipulates you so completely that you often feel as if you could faint
( though you just shudder. TLW: JP, though good, was never so scary. )
Every time I see it it works on some level. It's a wonderfully entertaining
mix of crisp dialogue, terrific performances, and first rate direction. ( I
have not mentioned the special effects because they are not very special. )
I recently heard that there will probably be a Jaws: Special Edition.
Apperantly the shark was never as scary as Mr. Spielberg intended it to be.
I don't remember it that way. Technology might be getting better. Movies
aren't. It's not fair to blame the Star Wars trilogy ( or at least not the
first two ) and Jaws for the current down  pour of dumb movies made by dumb
people in the hopes that dumb parents will take there dumb kids to the dumb
theater. Star Wars is based on a story cycle and so is Jaws. Steven
Spielberg knows - as his equally wonderful Raiders Of The Lost Ark shows as
well - that you can't substitute effects for a script and dialogue for a
character. He is a great director - the best of any kind to do this sort of
movie. ( Close runner-up: James Cameron. ) Jaws is - as a friend of mine
pointed out - not so much a summer blockbuster as a Hitchcock thriller.
Examine it again. The entire film is so smashingly scary and wonderfully
engaging that it would take alot of effort not to be totally enthralled.
Take another look at the scene in which a main character goes undewater to
examine something which may or may not be important. The direction is as
elegant and the editing as crisp as in,  for example, the climax of
Strangers On A Train. You are never allowed the relief of looking away from
the screen. When, at the end, you see an image as frightening as the
horse's head in The Godfather - on the other hand this is a shark eating a
man - you might want to close your eyes. But you can't. It's a nightmarish
image and, in some sick way, it holds your attention relentlessly. Mr.
Spielberg has learned the most important of cinematic tricks: if you make
hints, to the audience, of what is going to happen - in other words, make
them apprehensive in advance - and then carefully build layer upon layer of
unbearable suspense, when it does happen it will be all the more
frightening. He also knows that - with rare exceptions - images can not
live up to our fears and beliefs. ( In the original trailer for Psycho
there is a scene in which our host, Alfred Hitchcock, is exploring mother's
room. He opens a closet door and looks in with a half suprised expression.
He looks at the camera and slowly closes the door. "Shall we go on?", he
asks. Nothing more is said on the subject. What is in that closet? ) He
often cuts away when we want to look most. This only makes us want to see
more. I am anxious to see Jaws on a big screen; even with out that extra
element it's a masterpiece. 
In both Jurassic Park films Spielberg showed us the dinos good and quick.
Yeah, they were amazing. But if he had remembered what he learned while
making Jaws - our imagination is more powerful then his camera - then he
could have made two more great films. 

Title
Review for Psycho (1960)
To follow the career of Alfred Hitchcock, is to experience the various ups
and downs which are habitual among any artist. The rotound, wickedly droll,
master of suspense reached his height in the thirties, fifties and sixties.
What comes afterwards, before and in the middle is of little consequence.
Does anybody (but me) remember Blackmail, Shadow Of A Doubt, or Frenzy?
These soft efforts pale next to what I consider his top four. The Lady
Vanishes takes place on a train, revolving around a terrific set-piece in
which an older woman dissapears. Psycho follows a nice young fella who
killed his mudda and went crazy. Rear Window lets us peep on all those
crazy neighbors who leave their curtains drawn during the day AND night.
And Vertigo is...something more. It is one of the most haunting, goreously
photographed, involving, beautiful films ever commited to screen. It is his
least overtly entertaining, yet most rigorously thought provoking. And it
grows greater and greater with every viewing. Upon first observations, one
can remain unimpressed by his slow pacing, overdramatic music, strange
plot, stereotypical characters. Yet, the more and more I see it, the more I
love it, and understand what Hitchcock was thinking. I could easily write
pages, disecting every few minutes, pointing out loose ends -- what
happened to Midge?, why was Madeleine in that window? -- and anybody who
wants to hear
 about this, can subscribe (details below), for I soon plan to gather these
ideas into an entire essay. But, as these thoughts have not yet been
arranged, polished, perfected, let me say that it remains a mystery why it
was so thorougly thrashed upon its initial release, in 1952. (This was,
coincidentally, the same year that Sight & Sound conducted its first poll
of the ten greatest films of all time. Citizen Kane had been seen so little
that it was nowhere in sight -- or sound -- but by 1962, it was at #1,
where it has been ever since). I more understand why it hit high spots such
as #7 in '82, #4 on the critic's list in '92, and #6 on the director's list
in '92. It is ravishing, entertaining, and out of place in Hitchcock's
repertoire. It has inspired directors from Steven Speilberg to Tim Burton
(for particulars see Jaws and Batman). It is one of the greatest films ever
made. You can lump The Lady Vanishes, Psycho, and Rear Window into the same
category -- Shadow Of A Doubt goes there too, although it doesn't really
live up to the other's complete mastery. They are entertaining peices, well
arranged and easy to swallow. The first three are masterpieces, and
individually there is much to say -- which will eventually be said. But
after so thoroughly discussing his greatest masterpeice, I find that its
somewhat easier just to state that they are great films, worth a look. They
just don't inspire the same reactions -- they're easier to deal with. To
quote the man himself, to me, the cinema is not a slice of life, but a
piece of cake.
- Max Solovitch Scheinin
Read more of Max's work -- reviews, essays, theories, links -- @
http://www.garfieldlib.com/yanews/july97/max/max.html
To subscribe to Max's work (includes all essays, theories, thoughts) write
him @ solo@cruzio.com with the word "subscribe" in the header. You will
receive e-mail on an regular basis, considering that Max is a lazy/busy
kid. 
"We all go a little mad sometimes."
- Anthony Perkins @ the Bates motel.

Title
Review for Godfather, The (1972)
Originally released 1972, rereleased 1997
A Francis Ford Coppola film, "The Godfather".
Starring: Marlon Brando, Al Pacino, Robert Duvall, James Caan, Diane
Keaton, John Cazale, Talia Shire, Richard Conte, Richard Castellano, Abe
Vigoda, Alex Rocco, Sterling Hayden, John Marley, Al Lettieri, Sofia
Coppola, Al Martino, Morgana King
Rating: ****
Yeah, I like the cast too. Coppola's 1972 epic masterpiece was back in
theaters for a short time earlier this year, and I hope all of you caught
it. On the tv screen The Godfather is simply a masterpiece. On the big
screen it is an indespensable experience. 
The film opens at a somewhat slow pace. The paramount logo is presented
agaunst a lusterless background. Then the screen goes black. The words
appear: Mario Puzo's The Godfather. We hear Nina Rota's haunting theme and
then we are staring into the face of Bona Sera. He is on the verge of great
emotion. through oncoming sobs he says the films famous first line: "I
believe in America". 
Over the next two hours we learn to understand why. To the film's
character's America is not a place, it represents a certain ideal. The film
is about many things, but mostly it is about love and trust. It is about
how one family passes on a legacy. In The Godfather, nothing is more
important then honor. 
Marlon Brando's performance is justly famous. His use of props like the
kitten show that he is a supremely confident actor. the character he
creates is a man who, although immoral and unjust, is understandable; that
is the film's secret; although everyone the film watches with morbid
fascination is a rat, we identify with them somehow. By the time Don
Corleone dies  in his garden he has became such a real person that we
almost feel upset; this is someone we have known. 
Al Pacino had the performance of his career as Michael Corleone, the
reluctant heir to his father's position. Everything he does is so real; we
almost think that Pacino can't be acting. He suggests a young Brando in
many ways; I don't know if this is the effect they worked for, but they
certainly got it. 
In the last shot of the film he has became the next don. He straight out
lies to his wife Kay ( Diane Keaton ) and arrogantly holds out his hand to
be kissed. The door swings shut on Kay and for the last time we hear Rota's
mournful score. Michael didn't have to be who he chose to be. He had
choices but, in the end, there was no other way it could have worked.
Nobody knew that better then The Godfather.
The Godfather runs 2:31. This length would have been far too long for a
normal film, but The Godfather is no normal film. It is truly one of the
greatest films ever made. I saw it with my good friend and movie lover
Micah on a big screen and we were both stunned. On a big screen ( where you
should make an effor to see it ) there is no intermission and, to the
film's eternal credit, you won't even want one. It's a goregous and
haunting movie. It is rated R for semi-nudity,  graphic but, for the most
part, not too disturbing violence, cursing, and adult situations. It is
appropriate for mature 11-12 year olds and up.  See it. Again.

Title
Review for Top Hat (1935)
Released 1935, should be rereleased very soon
A Mark Sandrich film, "Top Hat".
Starring Fred Astaire, Ginger Rogers, Erik Rhodes, Helen Broderick, Edward
Everett Horton, Eric Blore, Lucille Ball
Rating: ****
Top Hat, a superb Astaire-Rogers musical of the 30s is pretty damn hard to
resist. I recently saw it on video and reveled in the singing and dancing,
wonderful music and glorious acting. It's a sublime film, a real bliss-out.
I'm suprised that with revivals of old films pouring in as they are,
hollywood executives haven't came around to musicals, and in particular,
Astaire and Rogers musicals. The sets are really teriffic, and I can tell
that a big screen viewing would be in order. For now we can to make do
re-watching this just plain wonderful  gloriously realized old-fashioned
film on video. My enthusiam is un-limited. Why? Sure, it's terrific fun to
watch and sure, the acting is great and sure it's just...well...a great
film, but why are you so enthusiastic? Because Top Hat sets standards for
itself, says it will live up to those standards and does. That may seem
like a silly reason to give a film a great review, but it's not really;
Batman And Robin ( for example ) said it was going to be slick big spirited
fun with terrific F/X. It wasn't. It fell flat on it's face as soon as the
credits were over. What makes a great movie? Ambition, fun and high
standards mixed well, with a dollop of talent. Top Hat has all those
things, which is why it is such a classic and deserves to be. It's a
reccemonded rental.
Top Hat runs 1:37, and every minute is heaven. It is not rated but would be
a solid G and is totally appropriate for everyone. It's good family
viewing. See it. Because of it's sense of good solid fun and slick
performances, plus great music and the fact that it is really well made I
am giving it all big ****. See it.          
