Authors
Eugene R Ahn
Number of Reviews
2

Title
Review for Higher Learning (1995)
Directed by John Singleton
Starring Malik (Omar Epps), Kristen (Kristy Swanson), Remy (Michael
        Rappaport), Professor Philps (Laurence Fishburne), Taryn 
        (Jennifer Connelly), Fudge (Ice Cube) etc
     HIGHER LEARNING searches for the meaning of American Identity in
an age of rich diversity on a college campus, Columbus.  The problem
with any movie or novel in dealing with such a subject is that the good
intentions of the director or writer are subverted by the almost
inevitable simplifications required to fit the art material into the
standard time length or page length.  John Singleton does not escape
these pitfalls and the only saving grace would have been excellent
characterizations.
     Singleton, who also wrote the screenplay, nearly pulls it off.  In
the first half hour, he introduces us to the three main protagonists:
Malik, Kristen, Remy--three ... freshpersons who step onto campus,
trying to fit in to varying degrees.  Malik, despite initial rebellion,
decides to pursue track for a scholarship to stay in school, but
battles resentment from his peers for being just another "slave" for
the school.  Kristen quickly associates with sorority-type party-goers,
but after being date-raped, she withdraws and is thrown into
disequilibrium.  Feminist, Taryn (played perfectly by Jennifer
Connelly, who no doubt benefited from her "higher learning" experience
at Yale University) helps Kristen find her new identity.  Finally,
Remy, a seemingly-innocuous midwestern neophyte, struggles to mix in
with the others, but fails completely.
     Remy's character is the most crucial to the flow and overall
effectiveness of the movie.  His character drives the plot forward.
Rappaport does an amazingly unscripted job of conveying the turmoil
within Remy as he slowly becomes alienated from his peers.  Remy
doesn't know who he is from the beginning.  And it is clear under
Singleton's direction and script that Remy is carefully watching his
diverse peers, trying to find ways to be "similar" and therefore
accepted.  An engineering major, he tries to be "cool" at a frat party
by complimenting Kristen's date-rapist for "scoring" which obviously
gets him villianized.  But there is clearly a double standard here as
the frat members, in earlier scenes, were high-fiving each other when
Kristen and her friends started to get wasted drunk at a bar (not to
say these two actions are of equal magnitude).
     But it simply is too haphazard and too quickly that Remy shifts
from alienated loner to enthusiastic skinhead.  Besides being booted
from his apartment (roommate Fudge played his music too loud) and being
dissed by his other roommate for a game of pool, Remy sure gives up
rather quickly.  The Kurtz-like Nazi leader befriends him, and the
skinheads immediately welcome him to their ranks without question, to
which Remy says thanks and shaves his head.  Singleton pushes Remy's
character too far into a Psycho-type killer role and it was completely
unnecessary as well as destructive.  It crossed HIGHER LEARNING from
the cerebral and dramatic to the cartoonish and cheesy in one fell
swoop.  Remy, as he was developed in the movie, never possessed enough
confidence to be such a determined mass murderer.  Singleton does show
how Malik unknowingly pushes Remy further into a pit of frustration and
self-hate, but after setting up the conflicts fairly well Singleton
really botches it up with an all-or-none response from Remy.
     The essence of what the movie discusses are these double
standards.  The virtue of avoiding violence and direct confrontation,
the powerlessness of those who become victims to violence, the
temptation to retaliate with greater violence.  Which is greater
empowerment and self-determination?  Malik running for a track
scholarship or Fudge withdrawing in disgust as a matter of principle
from what he perceives to be a racist society?
     Singleton clearly favors the former.  Malik's girlfriend angrily
asks him, "When are you going to stop pointing your finger at other
people and start pointing at yourself?"  He also shows how Fudge's
polar-race world view is a self-fulfilling prophecy.  But most
importantly he shows why these self-evident truths are so hard to live
by.  Malik's rage, Remy's frustration (and Kristen's ... well, more on
that later) are vividly presented.
     Professor Philps (if you ignore the nearly comical accent) is well
played by Fishburne who also appeared in Singleton's first movie BOYZ
IN THE HOOD as Furious Styles.  He plays a similar father figure, the
"center" of the chaos that takes place around him as he provides sage
but non-judgemental advice to his students ("In the real world, there
are no handouts").
     Finally, Kristen's development was another weak spot in the
movie.  Her trials bore little substance to the themes of the movie.
After her trauma of date-rape she basically explores her affection for
Taryn, finds gentle love with another guy (Oh look he uses condoms),
and becomes a 60's peace nut (she plans a "peace festival" which
becomes the site of Remy's violence).  One of the beauties of Quentin
Tarintino's PULP FICTION is the vivacious manner in which the
unpredictable can happen to its characters, and as a result, a vastly
entertaining movie was born.  Many of the connections between its main
characters were haphazard and random, and the movie never made
apologies for doing so.
     Here we have the opposite side of the spectrum.  As the Malik/Remy
conflict becomes the center of the plot, Kristen becomes more
peripheral.  Singleton tries to work her back into the midst of things
by having her plan the 60's peace festival.  Yet there are apologies
written all over Kristen's contrived character.  Singleton desperately
tries to force her into a symbolic shaking of hands with Malik in the
end and it just flops like dead fish.  There were potential themes to
be emphasized in Kristen's relationship with Taryn, which could have
molded with the violence between Malik and Remy but that's all
conjecture now.
     Despite problems with two of the three protagonists, Singleton
protrays college life very believingly.  For the most part, the casting
and acting is superb (Omar Epps, Ice Cube, Jennifer Connelly, Michael
Rappaport in particular) and the soundtrack keeps the mood just right.
The points I make about the two characters focus on the essential
problem of this movie in which the movie has the tone of seriousness
and importance, yet offers way too much cheese and cartoon convention.
This movie is probably a star's worth more enjoyable for recent college
graduates than its parent generation, and since I'm only two years
separated from college....

Title
Review for Amateur (1994)
     I think this is a fantastic movie to see in the mix of blockbuster
summer fare.  On a scale of 1-10, I rate this movie an 8.  In this review
I wanted to concentrate less on the plot and more on how this film
compares to Hartley's past works.
     To those who aren't familiar with Hal Hartley's past works
(UNBELIEVABLE TRUTH, TRUST, SIMPLE MEN), AMATEUR is the best flick to
get acquainted with this young and talented director.  It packs all of
the strengths of his past movies--great cinematography, humorous and
off-kilter dialogue, and strong central ideas--into the most
spontaneous and accessible film from Hartley yet.  In fact, after
watching this film with two Hartley-neophyte friends, they told me that
they felt it was in some ways similar to the now cultural icon, PULP
FICTION.
     And while that analogy is not entirely accurate, it does best
point at what makes AMATEUR so much more wildly enjoyable than his
previous works and more accessible.  Whereas Hartley's past movies
tended to focus in on the suburbs and the tame, this is the first film
of his where there are more fringe elements: pornography, mobs,
torture.  The result is a great mix of Hartley-esque humor with
spontaneity, sex and suspense.
     But at the same time, AMATEUR is still very much about ideas and
it is in every essence a followup to Hartley's last film, SIMPLE MEN.
One of the original endings of SIMPLE MEN was Kate (Karen Sillas)
telling the Sheriff (Damian Young), "Yes I know this man" before he
tries to arrest the protagonist (played by Robert Burke, now of Robocop
III fame).  That scene was cut from the ending since it wasn't
"essential" but it became the nucleus around which AMATEUR was built.
     Before I continue, I should mention that the extra information I
am drawing from comes from a published text of SIMPLE MEN and TRUST.
It features an interview with Hartley which I recommend all Hartley
fans to read if you have not.  It is very revealing and adds to the
enjoyment of watching his films.
     Anyhow, one of Hartley's tenets as revealed in the interview is
"... there is no escape from inequity.  One way or the other he's got to
pay ... you don't get something for nothing, ever." He's referring to the
reason why he felt Bill McCabe in SIMPLE MEN had to be arrested after
returning to Kate.  In the same vein, AMATEUR is about a once callous
man who suffers from amnesia and forgets who he was and becomes an
entirely different, albeit confused persona.  The idea behind AMATEUR
becomes a question of whether it matters to be sorry for something you
did before when you don't even remember doing it.  There are many
religious overtones, not to mention a character who is a former nun who
left the covenant after the Virgin Mary told her she wasn't fit to be
one.  The Bible has one answer, Hartley has another.
     But what I have always liked about Hartley's films is the way
Hartley makes tragedy watchable and bittersweetly so.  The characters
who become pawns in Hartley's tragedy are never victims but are
elevated by their thoughtful dilemmas and pains.  And I think AMATEUR
succeeds more because not only are the stakes higher, but also the very
essence of who Thomas, the amnesiac, decides he is is being
challenged.  Thomas also fights his tragic situation more than past
Hartley protagonists (with the guidance of the former nun, Isabelle)
which makes the result even more effective.
     There's a dialogue in SIMPLE MEN which I feel best sums up the
essential of Hal Hartley:
     "...the funny thing is, when you desire something you immediately
get in trouble.  And when you're in trouble you don't desire anything
at all."
     "I see." "It's impossible" "It's ironic." "It's a fucking
tragedy is what it is, Ned."
     Hal Hartley paints tragedy beautifully in AMATEUR and the best
scene is saved for last as Thomas opens the front door of the church, a
gift of faith from Isabelle misconstrued as something more sinister.
It's hard to believe, but Hal Hartley is just getting better.
