Authors
Emily L. Corse
Number of Reviews
2

Title
Review for Free Willy (1993)
     FREE WILLY is a formulaic tear-jerker for children, with a sad
killer whale and a misunderstood boy finding spiritual kinship and
beating the bad guys.  Kids should love it.
     However, within the confines of the kiddy formula, FREE WILLY
delivers its pathos effectively and with a certain dignity.  The
emotional manipulation is subtler than usual, the characters are better
developed, and the nature photography is beautiful.  Sentimental adults
with anthropomorphic sympathies (that's me!) will be able to overlook
the cliches and appreciate the age-old themes of freedom and
belonging.
     In a nutshell, the story is about an adolescent whale stolen from
his mother and a twelve-year-old boy, Jesse, abandoned years ago by
his.  A childless couple take the surly young human into foster care,
with the wife quite obviously more enthusiastic than the husband.
After Jesse gets caught in an act of vandalism, he is sentenced to do
chores at the local aquatic park, where he becomes fascinated by the
brooding young orca, Willy (played convincingly by real-life orca
Keiko).
     Willy hasn't responded to any of the humans at the park until he
is seduced by Jesse's soulful harmonica noodlings.  With the help of
the park's animal trainer, Rae, Jesse learns to communicate with Willy
and teaches him to perform for his supper.  Eventually the bad guys try
to kill Willy and Jesse saves him, with the help of his friends.
     So don't see this movie if you're interested in an original
storyline.  Obvious lessons are presented--the abandoned boy learns to
trust his new parental units, the limp-finned whale learns to lick not
bite, the suspicious foster father (and world's cleanest auto mechanic)
learns to love his mop-topped urchin.
     On the other hand, the beauty of the opening scenes alone may be
worth the price of admission.  Photography by Robbie Greenberg, backed
with a soundtrack by Basil Poledouris, presents a long, glorious
montage of wild orcas, swimming together and diving, leaping, and
luxuriating in the sun-sparkled waves of the Pacific Ocean.  It's as
good as a "National Geographic" special on the big screen, without
Marlin Perkins droning in the background.
     The sudden intrusion of whale hunters into this natural paradise
is almost sickening.  On board the Pequod (yo! literary allusion!),
the men are scary, loud, harsh, violent, and hideously ugly.  The
capture scene is certainly unsuitable for younger whales.
     The characters in FREE WILLY aren't quirky or original of course,
but neither are they offensively stereotyped.  Jesse is played by Jason
James Richter, who's only a little too white-bread to be interesting.
He's supposed to be half-way to irreversible delinquency, but looks
like he's on leave from the Mickey Mouse Club.  In Richter's defense,
he doesn't come across as smarmy or precocious.
     Lori Petty plays Rae with a refreshing twist.  After years of
cinematic embarrassments like Darryl Hannah as an astrophysicist or,
more recently, Laura Dern as a paleobotanist, Petty's portrayal of a
marine biologist gives new hope to girls across the nation.  This is an
attractive blonde woman as a professional scientist who doesn't seem
like a Hollywood bimbo wearing glasses!
     Other supporting characters, the unconditionally-loving mom, the
gruff-but-fair dad, the spiritually-advanced Native American
story-teller, the runny-nosed street kid pal, the no-nonsense social
worker, the butt-kissing corporate patsy, et al, are familiar but
competently played.
     A new Michael Jackson single "Will You Be There?" seemed like that
rare treat--an infectious end title song.  It's upbeat and pop (the
kids in the audience were *grooving*!), but disintegrates into a sickly
spoken piece that put an end to the clapping and started a mass
exodus.
     FREE WILLY deserves its share of the summer theatre crowd.
C'mon.  Take a kid along and cheer like crazy when Willy and Jesse find
their families.

Title
Review for Poetic Justice (1993)
     In 1991, John Singleton set himself a tough act to follow.  At
just twenty-three years of age, he won Academy Award nominations for
both directing and writing BOYZ N THE HOOD, making him the youngest
nominee ever for best director.  And that was his first feature film.
     Unfortunately, the many fans of Singleton's beautifully conceived,
beautifully executed debut will be disappointed by his second feature
film, a rambling love story starring pop star Janet Jackson.
     Singleton's decision to step away from the scene of his original
success, the grueling violence and drugs of the 'hood, is both daring
and laudable.  POETIC JUSTICE is billed as a "street romance" and
presents a portrait of a young woman who finds herself through poetry
and, eventually, true love.  But the major strength of BOYZ was the
sensitive, believable characterizations of the young men whose lives
were chronicled--and this strength is missing from the new film.  The
fault lies mainly with the lead character, Justice.  As written by
Singleton and performed by Jackson, Justice does not ring true.
     Filmed against the ravaged landscape of post-rebellion Los
Angeles, POETIC JUSTICE begins "Once upon a time...", an ironic
reminder that not all stories are fairy tales.  Suddenly the screen is
filled with giant images of the ultra-white Penelope and Brad (Lori
Petty and Billy Zane) breezily trading bad dialogue and gunfire in a
glossy new-wave penthouse.  For whom are these role models?
     Certainly not for the youth of South Central L.A., who fill the
parking lot of the drive-in theatre, just barely noticing the
hilariously awful action on the giant screen above them.
     Among the audience are Justice and Markell (played by Q-Tip),
sharing an intimate, teenaged moment.  Before allowing too much
familiarity, Justice asks her boyfriend why he loves her.  "'Cuz you're
fun," he replies to her disappointment, before returning with the more
thoughtful, "...'cuz when I was in the county jail you sent me all
those nice poems."
     That's all we see of the relationship between the two young
lovers, as Markell soon falls victim to a casual, senseless murder.
The film's main story begins with an older Justice, still in deep
mourning, working as a hairdresser and hiding out from her feelings,
from the world, and from men.
     One of the hopeful suitors whose hopes she depresses is Lucky
(Tupac Shakur), a hip-yet-responsible mail carrier attracted by
Justice's flair for stamp-licking.  Shakur's Lucky is both convincing
and irresistible.  When a postal supervisor advises that he should use
mace to ward off vicious dogs, he exclaims, "That stuff is like Binaca
to them rottweilers!"
     With a standard plot twist, the two antagonistic protagonists are
forced into a long journey together, on a mail run up the California
coast to Oakland.  And romance blooms.
     It's a familiar scenario that could have worked with a stronger
lead, but Justice is only boring.  The poetry she writes in her
notebook, though beautiful and powerful in its own right, sounds
artificial in the passionless voice of Janet Jackson.  Justice's poetry
sounds like it's read from a book, not from her heart.  (In fact, the
soul-stirring poetry used in the film is the work of famed author Maya
Angelou.)
     Jackson's mediocre acting skills can't overcome the handicap of
her cover-girl looks and TV white teeth.  When she grimaces in pain, she
looks like she's smiling for the camera.  The only time her character
comes alive is during a montage of her lonely home life, to the
accompaniment of Stevie Wonder's "Never Dreamed You'd Leave In
Summer."  This scene of Justice eating popcorn with Tabasco, lying on
the floor in the dark, and trying on faces in the mirror is
well-filmed, realistic, and quite affecting.
     Tyra Ferrell plays Justice's boss Jessie, a sexy, no-nonsense
owner of a successful beauty salon.  Jessie's character has the depth
so lacking in Justice--she is self-assured and powerful; she nurtures
her staff to some extent, but remains unwilling to sacrifice herself to
the needs of others.  She's a little too hard to be happy, yet
fulfilled at least in her career.  POETIC JUSTICE would have been a
better movie if it followed the growth of her three-dimensional
character, as Ferrell's performance never falters.
     After the hard-hitting social commentary of BOYZ N THE HOOD, John
Singleton may take plenty of flak for POETIC JUSTICE--more for its
immature writing and flat, uninspired treatment than for its lighter
theme.
     With any luck, he'll remember Jessie's warning to Justice:  "Out
here ... sometimes you gonna lose one, like a blow dryer or a good
hairbrush."
