Authors
Roger Gerbig
Number of Reviews
5

Title
Review for Star Wars: Episode I - The Phantom Menace (1999)
The Thumbs For Sale! review by Roger Gerbig
Believe it or not, these Thumbs! hitchhiked all the way from the sunny
Central Coast of California to Columbia, Tennessee (business trip)
to catch an opening night show of "Star Wars: Episode I - The
Phantom Menace." Sometimes you do what you have to do. After all, this
self-styled movie critic and his army of droids--er--interns is but
one of the legion of complete and total "Star Wars" fans who when all
else seems boring and mundane, turn to tracking small disturbances in
the Force like some turn to bickering about tiny variations in a day's
weather.
That's what I call an active lifestyle.
Fortunately though, I never let this obsession get the best of me.
I've remained cool, collected and placidly normal over the
years--never even once showing up to a job interview brandishing my
lightsaber.
In the sixteen odd years since the last installment, some things in
the "Star Wars" universe have changed, while others haven't. "Phantom
Menace" opens up roughly 30 years (or about the time it would take
George Lucas to crank out 5.45 "Star Wars" movies) before the original
trilogy. The tiny planet, Naboo--featuring what may be the first
viable ecosystem of any planet visited in the Lucas universe--is under
siege by the Trade Federation, which appears to be quite a sinister
Political Action Committee replete with deep pockets, an army of
droids, and leaders who have no noses. And judging by their near
complete inability to lip sync to their dialogue, the Viceroy and his
sidekick may just have been borrowed from the Japanese touring company
of "Star Wars on Ice."
Being that this is sort of a dicey situation, the Republic wastes no
time sending in a couple of Jedi Knights, Qui-Gon Jinn (Neeson) and
Obi-Wan Kenobi (McGregor), to negotiate a settlement of sorts. Of
course, things go a bit wrong and soon those lightsabers are pressed
into action. Then things get worse when the Trade Federation decides
to stray from the peaceful pasture of planetary orbit and stage a
full-blown invasion of Naboo.
All of which illustrates the first major problem I had with this
flick. You see, the Jedi are basically a couple MBAs (that's Mythical
Bad Asses in Thumbs! speak). Every line they utter (when not rehashing
"classics" from the first trilogy) drips with self-importance and
excessive knowledge of the way things are. And Lucas makes it
abundantly apparent that when it's a lightsaber vs. a legion, the
lightsaber reigns supreme. Sure, in the first 45 minutes alone they're
chased by battle droids, forced to stow away on enemy ships, nearly
stomped on by the Federation's war machine, hunted mercilessly by the
really big fish in the pond, and finally driven to flee to the far
corners of the galaxy. But there's never really any sense of danger
during any of this turmoil. They're just a couple of Jedi, caught in
an amazing universe of special effects.
The furious pace of plot and planet hopping are nearly guaranteed to
make you feel like you've embarked on an extended bus tour of the
universe. Sure, it's great to see the sights, but Lucas the driver
leaves you wondering if you'll ever get a chance to make a pit stop.
In fact, it's debatable whether or not this tour guide would ever stop
long enough at a roadside stand for you to buy some trinkets for the
folks back home.
The rather thin plot labors under being a setup piece for parts II and
III of this trilogy, and suffers from some ill-begotten cloning of
certain characteristics of "Return of the Jedi." When all the films
are completed, I can assure you that this one will be the least able
to stand on its own.
As our heroes rocket across the galaxy collecting cast members and
bumper stickers (Tattooine is for Lovers!), it suddenly occurred to me
how deficient the characters were--at least in comparison to those in
the first series. It's not bad acting, it's just the purely functional
nature of the dialogue. Apparently, as a species, humans aren't all
that funny (Han Solo being a notable exception). Just forget your
dream of having a career in stand-up comedy in the ring of clubs
dotting the edge of the Republic. Unless you've got floppy ears, fur,
or skin tones that lean toward the blue end of the spectrum, that is.
Which leads us to the requisite Jar Jar Binks paragraph. Every other
critic has one, so why can't I? For those of you doing time in Jabba's
dungeons, Mr. Binks is the klutzy amphibious alien dude entrusted with
96% of the humor present in the script. Already the most controversial
character in the "Star Wars" universe, I'll limit my critique to one
point: Upon occasion, someone really needs to come between Lucas and
his marketing "yes" men and casually mention that, "um...this ain't
necessarily funny."
Now, if we could just schedule him and a squad of Ewoks to engage in a
little Ultimate Fighting between themselves... There's a pay-per-view
event even I'd pay for.
While it's obvious that I have a few complaints, I will say your
entertainment dollar isn't wasted. Not only are the visuals
spectacular, but Lucasfilm had enough common sense to keep some of the
better ones out of the previews. And, if you missed subtlety the first
time around, as I did, rest assured. A second viewing does wonders for
the actors' performances. Portman's regal Queen Amidala makes a
plausible case against business casual dress in the workplace, and
Darth Maul's actually pretty evil despite his vaguely devilish good
looks and M.C. Hammer-inspired getup. Subtlety also befriends the
finer points of production design. These are fabulously-realized
worlds we're visiting here, though I still wish I could open the bus's
window!
Unfortunately, I'm completely incapable of lowering my expectations of
an event such as this, which didn't serve me well. "Phantom Menace"
just isn't a good enough movie to shatter said expectations. But it is
an event. It is entertaining. And it's got enough of those classic
holes in the plot (why wasn't Obi-Wan able to sense a certain dark
presence when he was standing less than five feet away?) to merit much
frivolous discussion over the next few years until the next
installment arrives.
And here's one perhaps all of you can help me out with: since main
Jedi characters tend to have hyphenated first names like "Obi-Wan" and
"Qui-Gon", why wasn't that other famous Jedi named something like
"Luke-Warm Skywalker?"
At any rate, a good show!

Title
Review for Election (1999)
w/ MATTHEW BRODERICK, REESE WITHERSPOON, CHRIS KLEIN
DIR: ALEXANDER PAINE
Maybe consciously I was simply avoiding any film with even the vaguest
hint of cyber-anything. Or perhaps unconsciously I'm hopelessly stuck
on titles that begin with the letter "E" (as in last week's review of
"Entrapment"). Whatever the case, I'm not the least bit sorry I chose
to duck in out of the sun and catch a  Saturday afternoon matinee of
"Election."
Senior Tracy Flick (Witherspoon) is the reigning Miss Apple Pie of the
Free World. Everything she wants, she pretty much gets. And everything
she gets, she pretty much deserves. So, getting elected president of
the student body should be little more challenging than copping a
smoke in the girls room in between third and fourth period.
At least that's the way she sees it.
Of course, being quite the perfect specimen (she's the type who on at
least one occasion probably wore her 4-H ribbons pinned to her
cardigan for school pictures), she's got ten perfect little toes, all
of which are just waiting to be stepped on.
Enter Jim McAllister (Broderick), three-time educator of the year and
student council advisor. He's got a wife he can't seem to get
pregnant, lust in his heart for the divorcee who lives across the
street, an aging Ford Festiva (one of the greatest self-esteem killing
auto designs in the history of motorized transportation), and a
nascent disgust with Ms. Flick.
Expect the shenanigans to begin momentarily.
When the Man Who Was Once Ferris declares war, you suddenly realize
you're in for one heck of an interesting ride. Director/co-writer
Payne and cast absolutely bond to create one of the more piercing
satires in recent memory. The script is so streamlined that it's no
less than positively aerodynamic. Not a single moment isn't accounted
for as the pieces of the puzzle come together. Big laughs emerge from
around unexpected corners. The allegory at hand is firmly anchored by
a foundation so sturdy it must have been constructed by union labor.
Not to mention the casting director deserves no less than a State
Dinner at the White House.
Witherspoon is so perfect as Flick that at one point I feared she
might slap me upside the head with an apple pie. The shear depth of
her unctuousness will forever make you think twice about accepting a
complimentary cupcake from anyone less than your best friend. If she
burst into tears within earshot, you'd cross a street during rush hour
without looking both ways to offer her a shoulder to cry on. As
student body president, she would undoubtedly wield enough power to
convince the lot of us to chuck pizza and pay more attention to
getting in our three squares a day.
Broderick thoroughly becomes quite the slightly downtrodden
proletarian next door. But  the moment he senses his big chance to
really "make a difference," that malicious demeanor he perfected all
those years ago as Ferris Bueller takes on a whole new dimension.
While it's safe to say all the characters here are somewhat flawed in
character, he is in many ways the most believable.
The rest of the cast is filled out mostly by first-timers and
unknowns. Chris Klein as a Keanu Reeves Jr. clone more than proves
that a thoroughly vapid aptitude shouldn't stop one from running for
office. Jessica Campbell as his sister, the third candidate in the run
for the roses, clearly illustrates that getting a little political
during your tender sophomore year really isn't a bad thing--especially
if having vaguely diabolical leanings are an integral part of your
fabric. And finally, Phil Reeves as the hapless
ringmaster--er--principal... No need to say more here; he's a walking
laugh factory.
Payne and collaborator Jim Taylor have successfully mined the fields
of political satire once before with "Citizen Ruth" (1996), which I
coincidentally just caught on video a couple weeks ago. While that
little morality tale about the tug-of-war between pro-life and
pro-choice fronts was entertaining enough, it was in many ways more
interesting than effective. "Election" is quite the quantum step
forward.
For all practical purposes, "Election" is a civics lesson with one big
advantage over your rank-and-file lesson plan; it's built-in fun
factor is actually worth dropping a few bucks to check out.
Thumbs For Sale! - movie reviews for the post-everything generation
http://www.thumbsforsale.com

Title
Review for American Pie (1999)
A Thumbs For Sale! Review: http://www.thumbsforsale.com
Oh, to be the nice guy...and actually win for a change. That, if you'll
allow me to get slightly philosophical for a moment, seems to be one of
the key themes behind "American Pie", that perverse Home Economics
lesson now playing down at your multiplex. Or, if you're a Hollywood
exec, or one who likes to sit at home and play Hollywood exec (I like to
think I play one on TV, for example), the theme might appear to be
"everything old is new again." Or, "what comes around goes around." You
see, "Pie" is like a late nineties remake of "Porky's", with the
requisite twists. With all the doubling up of condoms, they could have
called this one "Pigs in a Blanket."
But let's get back to deconstructing the Pie, which appears the media is
trying to turn into a spectator sport for the duration of the summer.
Don't let them. Not only is there little to deconstruct here, the flick
is enough of a spectator sport in and of itself to warrant little
popcorn-laced pontificating after the fact.
The high concept on display here is watching four perfectly average and
perfectly nice guys wallow in an increasing surreal world of
masturbatory mishaps. Mostly, these happen to the generally innocuous
Jim (Biggs), which serves to bring him all that much closer to his
clique of friends who spontaneously decide after one particularly frigid
beer-soaked evening, that they must band together and form a little
blood cult if any of them ever hopes to get some action before D-Day--I
mean, Senior Prom.
But in typically late-90s fashion, rather than sign a pact (in blood, of
course!) with an unholy spawn of Satan, they agree to form what amounts
to a little support group. Yup, when the going gets rough, or fails to
get going altogether, they'll chime in with a little well-deserved
support for the poor libidinous sod left to his own devices after
another failed attempt at gaining maturity.
Of course, in high movie fashion, the flick ends the morning after the
Prom and the impossibly Hollywood-esque party that follows. And amongst
our little group of friends, there are the typical smiles of
accomplishment, little moral lessons floating about in their heads, and
a wave of nostalgia so instant, it makes VH-1 look as fresh as PBS in
between pledge drives.
True, unless you're a hopeless prude, or vying for an internship at "The
700 Club", you'll laugh and laugh until the fateful moment your Coke
makes a safe passage through your sinuses. But we're talking about
extremely cheap thrills here. Unlike, for instance, "There's Something
About Mary", the best stuff wasn't left out of the trailer.
For the most part, the guys mulls about like a bunch of mostly
well-behaved B-average students on their way to Big-10 universities in
the fall. Which, I might add, the flick points out on occasion after
occasion. They're extremely likeable, but not charismatic to say the
least. Even Finch (Eddie Kay Thomas), the resident geek and sophisticate
of the gang, isn't so weird that he won't be able to pick up quality
dates down at the library once he makes it to U-State or wherever his
student loans take him.
The girls, on the other hand, are the fascinating folks in this story.
Unfortunately, unlike other aspects of their character, their roles are
a tad underdeveloped. Natasha Lyonne, who ruled the indie world for a
few weeks last year in "The Slums of Beverly Hills", begs for a spin-off
starring her worldly-wise Jessica. I think she gets all of eight or nine
minutes of screen time here. And Alyson Hannigan will probably spend a
few months in the limelight for her captivating "Band Camp" schtick.
Both will then move onto bigger and better projects.
As will this critic. Make it a matinee, if you must.
Thumbs For Sale! Online: http://www.thumbsforsale.com.

Title
Review for Notting Hill (1999)
NOTTING HILL (1999) w/ Julia Roberts, Hugh Grant
Director: Roger Mitchell
The Thumbs for Sale! review by Roger Gerbig
In passing, I've heard "Notting Hill"--the new Julia Roberts-Hugh
Grant luxury SUV-type vehicle currently parked at your local
multiplex--shows a lot of "Romantic Comedy 101" influence. After
leaving the theatre with these Thumbs! twitching more rapidly than Mr.
Grant's mug at the precipice of a nervous breakdown, I have to
disagree. I felt more like I'd just sat through a workshop for
"Romantic Comedy 404 - Advanced Studies in the Common Boy/Girl
Dilemma."
Which my ever-twitchy Thumbs! remind me is a good thing each time I
grope for the space bar.
Roberts is Anna Scott, world-wide superstar actress and platinum club
member of the jet set. Grant plays William Thacker, a slightly
impoverished bookstore owner and member of the "my best friend owns a
fast Peugeot wagon" set. While winning the lottery might be the most
appropriate life-changing event for Thacker, instead he is fated with
the experience of literally running into Scott and dousing them
both--enter the miracle of movie magic here--with what appears to be
about a gallon or so of orange juice. As their juice stains dry into
what appears to be mustard (British special effects technicians might
possibly have something to learn from "The Phantom Menace"), she
graciously accepts his offer to duck into his apartment to change
clothes.
And as they say in certain sports circles, "They're off and running!"
But fortunately, never too quickly. While the same writing/producing
team that gave us "Four Weddings and a Funeral" is clearly happy with
mining familiar territory ("Wedding's" director Mike Newell apparently
isn't, as he recently went down with that ship called "Pushing Tin".),
they've managed to make a film that unfolds with a leisurely pace and
treats its characters with remarkable decency.
Early on, there's a birthday party involving Thacker's friends,
family, and that certain movie star. As each character airs his or her
particular quirks (no shortage here), I was amazed at the deft hand
shown by the production team at large. Which is to say, you shouldn't,
as it's that well done. All too often today sparkling, witty dialogue
and blatant over-reaction are mistaken as hallmarks of truly inspired
writing. Here, they aren't, even though Thacker's little sister (Emma
Chambers) goes ballistic in proclaiming her absolute love for actress
Scott's work and persona, and the last brownie at dessert is auctioned
off to the person who tells the most pathetic story about him or
herself. In lesser hands, this scene could have been a disaster.
Since we've now clearly gotten the message that our little lovebirds
are probably going to be heading back to the nest at some point, it
must be time for a musical interlude, which for better or worse
happens. True, these misty-eyed excursions into Bob Seger-land often
send me on a search-and-destroy mission to the kitchen in order to
locate appropriate utensils for my ritual gagging ceremony. But here,
things are kept low-key enough (no Bob on the soundtrack either!) to
perhaps subliminally remind us that during real-life moments like
this, we're probably humming some little soundtrack to ourselves to
help preserve the moment.
I survived, and the eggbeater remained safely stowed in my backpack.
Not that there aren't a few quality moments of cliche (especially
toward the end), but they're more than mitigated by an abundance of
inventive and sometimes touching moments. This is, after all, a film
that successfully manages to pull off two Beavis & Butthead jokes
without the slightest twinge from the audience.
As for performances, I'm proud to say that for the first time I feel
compelled to break out the old "winning performance" moniker to
describe Julia Roberts in this film. Seemingly at all the right
moments, she shows an astounding vulnerability without resorting to
the old quivering lip trick. While she may never win the awards
bestowed on her character, I will say that all too often she's been
asked to carry films that are entirely too insubstantial for any actor
to salvage. That she's managed to take such heapings of negative
criticism and still avoid becoming an alumna of the Betty Ford clinic
certainly counts for something.
Hugh Grant, of course, really is the ultimate poster boy for your
average silver-screen nice guy. He's in perfect form here, having
apparently either sought hypnotherapy for his notorious tics, or
undergone a spiritual reevaluation of his art. Together he and Roberts
generate more than enough of that mythical chemistry to make this
flick work.
To sum it all up, I think it's fair to say since I only spent two out
of roughly 120 minutes biting my critic's lip on account
"questionable" moments, I think "Notting Hill's" a pretty solid value.
Now, if I could just sell my thumbs! for an eighteenth of what Julia
Roberts makes per picture...
Visit Thumbs For Sale! Online: www.thumbsforsale.com
Š1999 Roger Gerbig

Title
Review for Vie ręvée des anges, La (1998)
The Thumbs For Sale! Review by Roger Gerbig
With the impending arrival of that Star Wars flick, these Thumbs! felt
obligated to travel down the dark alley theat bypasses the multiplex,
snakes its way past dozens of dumpsters, and ends somewhere in the
vicinity of France--that mythical place where they do indeed make
better films than cars.
"The Dreamlife of Angels," a big winner on the international
film-festival circuit, lets us in on the lives of Isa and Marie
(Bouchez and Regnier, who shared the best actress award at Cannes last
year), two young women who seem to be in between most
everything--jobs, apartments, boyfriends, and quality time spent with
family. Theirs is a tentative existence, filled mostly with mass
consumption of tobacco products and a staggering lack of bigger plans.
Isa's just arrived in town and discovered her one prospect has taken
off for the greener pastures of Belgium. After bedding down for a
night in a freezing abandoned restaurant, she wastes no time looking
for an establishment with central heating. Despite apparently being
perpetually down on her luck, her toothy grin, steely resolve, and
sparkling eyes that instantly remind us of alien autopsies past land
her a job in a matter of hours.
Once employed at a local clothing factory, she befriends Marie, a
quiet girl who's content to hang out in the wings and roll the fattest
cigarettes in the history of nicotine addiction. Turns out Marie's
housesitting a cozy flat while the owner and her daughter recover from
comas obtained in a tragic car accident.  Refreshingly, this dual coma
plot device is as outlandish as the movie gets. For the next hour and
a half, we watch as the women's friendship develops, matures, and
nearly vaporizes. Often with the French, you're never quite sure if
their films are low budget, filmed to look low budget, or are really
documentaries masquerading as narrative fiction. In "Angel's" case
this has a lot to do with the oft-handheld camera, unadorned lighting
and the complete and total lack of melodrama (and for many, many
minutes lack of just plain drama).
Yet it's never boring, which is a testament to the fact that director
Zonca doesn't let the story unfold. Rather, he allows it to develop at
a pace consistent with what his characters can realistically bear. Nor
does he waste our time filling us in on the minutia of their
motivation and behavior. Like your friends, family, and yourselves,
they sometimes just do things that momentarily evade explanation.
For instance, Marie gets involved with Chris (Colin), a rich kid who's
obviously practicing to become a classic philandering Frenchman (and
scoring high marks, I might add). Why they are drawn together is never
fully explained. Sure, judging from his selection of pastimes, I can
see why he might be interested in taming a feral child, but is this
the whole story? I don't think so. As for Marie, she makes a living
out of asserting her complete and total independence, yet who do you
think's running off to the beach house for a weekend of wet sand and
bliss?  Likewise, Isa visits the comatose daughter at the
hospital. While she maintains a certain element of curiosity in the
beginning, when asked she can't provide an answer why she keeps going
back. Trust me when I say there are many more facets like these to
ponder both in real time while watching the film, and later.
With "Dreamlife", Zonca makes his full-length feature debut well past
the age of 40. His years of documentary filmmaking clearly leave their
mark here, yet this isn't any "NYPD Blue" affair. Though the camera is
handheld in many scenes, make no mistake, this is an exercise in
subtlety. Everything from pensive moments bathed in the soft bluish
light of the perpetually overcast sky, to fierce lovemaking captured
by an intrusive cameraman hovering just above the action are captured
in whichever style feels most honest. But like the plot, adjustments
from scene to scene are a matter of only a few degrees. Everything
stays on course and well within the realm of plausibility.
If I appear to be repeating myself, it's because I want to drive a few
underlying points home. Having these points illustrated allows you to
focus on the myriad of other details present on screen, not to mention
more time to take in the subtitles. While I feel I had quite a
meaningful experience with this film, I'm not entirely sure
why. But having so few conclusions drawn for you by the filmmakers
makes deciphering your experience all that more rewarding.  Folks, the
laserblasts heralding the beginning of the summer silly season have
arrived. For a quality calm before the storm (or respite), I can't
recommend this flick highly enough

