Authors
Sean Gabb
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Starship Troopers (1997)
I have two qualifications for reviewing this film.  First, I broadly
agree with the political, economic and social views of Robert A.
Heinlein, on whose novel of the same title the film is based.  Second, I
have never read that novel.  This gives me an advantage over those who
have.  Screen adaptations of a favourite book nearly always disappoint.
Last Christmas, for example, I watched a BBC adaptation of Wilkie
Collins' The Woman in White.  I was horrified by the removal of the
legal complexities that drive the plot smoothly forward through 500
closely printed pages, and their replacement by something about child
abuse.  This kept me from appreciating what others tell me was an
exciting television play.  Not having read Starship Troopers, I am
better able to judge the film on its own merits.
This being said, I will organise my thoughts on the film under two
headings:  the political shape of the Federation; the credibility of the
Bug War.
First, I was surprised by the libertarianism that Mr Verhoeven allowed
to remain in his portrayal of the Federation.  He is some kind of
leftist with a settled dislike of what may broadly be called the
American Way.  Certainly, he is on record as having said his film was
based on a "fascist novel".  The British reviewers have generally
followed this line, sprinkling their articles with phrases like "fascist
utopianism", "totalitarian nightmare" "aryan shocktroops", and so forth.
I have never trusted film reviewers since they nearly put me off
watching Star Wars when I was 17.  But this time, I can only doubt if
they have actually bothered to watch the film.
Though the word has been so overused as to have lost any precise
meaning, the essence of fascism is hostility to individual rights.  The
collective, and its embodiment in the State, is everything:  the
individual is nothing more than an expendable element of the collective.
This cannot be seen as the guiding ideology of the Federation in the
22nd century.
Too much is made of the fact, revealed early in the film, that voting
has been turned from an automatic right into a privilege that must be
earned by military service; and that the Government is a sort of
military council.  There is nothing inherently fascist about this.  Both
England and America enjoyed their greatest freedom under limited
franchises; and both have been, or are being, ruined by systems that
give almost absolute power to whoever can lie most convincingly to the
masses.  Salvation lies in hoping that economic growth can reproduce the
middle class majorities that existed before democracy, or in a direct
limitation of democracy itself.
And we are told this even as the restricted franchise is explained.  It
comes from the lecture that Mr - later Lieutenant - Rasczak (Michael
Ironside) gives to Johnny's class.  The social scientists brought
humanity to the brink of disaster, he says.  Only the Veterans'
Revolution saved us.  They took over and limited the franchise to those
who could be trusted to use it in the public interest.  Since then,
there had been generations of political stability and social and
economic progress.
There is nothing in the film to contradict the old liberal belief that
having the vote is far less important than having the right to live as
we please.   The Federation is built around respect for this right.
>From what we see of Buenos Aires, the Federation is America writ large.
Everyone speaks English with an American accent.  The teenagers enjoy
the hedonistic lifestyle that emerged in America during the 1950s.  They
go to dances.  They make love.  They study as they please, free to do
badly in their examinations.  In short, they live as free people do
nowadays.
So do the adults.  Look at the family of Johnny Rico (Casper van Dien),
the film's hero.  His parents are wealthy.  They seem to have managed
this without being connected to the military.  Indeed, they are openly
contemptuous of a military life, and are not afraid to say so.  When
Johnny comes home after joining up, they do every thing to persuade him
to back out.  His father even threatens to go public with disinheriting
him.
Again, looking at the news bulletins that punctuate the film, there is
evidence of limited constitutional government.  There are peace
activists who oppose the war against the Bugs, claiming that we should
all live and let live.  We are supposed to laugh at the Mormon colonists
who disobey the Government's advice and build their Joseph Smith City in
the neutral zone, and get eaten by the Bugs.  No attempt had been made
to stop them from emigrating.  Like all free people, they had been left
alone to direct their own actions and to suffer the consequences.
Nor is there any evidence of the racial and sexual supremacy that, while
not inherent to it, has been central to our historic experience of
fascism.  Non-whites are present at every level in society and the
military.  Women are integrated into the military.  Half way through the
film, we even have a Melanesian woman appointed to the supreme command
after a white man has failed in the job.
Then let us look more closely at the military itself.  We are also
supposed to laugh at the official recruiting advertisements, and to see
these as "fascistic".  But they are not.  Under real fascism, there is
no need for official inducements to join up.  Young people are recruited
by force.  Here, they need to be persuaded.  The general message of
personal responsibility is rammed home in the scene where Johnny asks Mr
Rasczak if he should join up.  He is told that this is a matter purely
for him to decide.
Nor is there any effort to recruit under false pretences.  The news
bulletins are occasionally censored - as, for example, when we are not
allowed to see a Bug rip a cow to pieces.  But we do see humans have
their arms and legs torn off in the reports of the failed attack on
Klendathu, the Bugs' home planet.  This admission of military failure
would be unthinkable under a fascist government.  In the Second World
War, we were allowed to see the newsreels of the disasters at Dunkirk
and Tobruk - though with a soothing commentary.  The German people never
saw the full horrors suffered by their forces at Stalingrad; and many
smaller defeats were never admitted at all, in case they called the
leadership's abilities in question.
Again, when Johnny joins up, he signs at a desk manned by a veteran who
has had been horribly wounded in action.  We are given another
opportunity to laugh as the veteran announces that service "made me the
man that I am today" and he pushes back his chair to show the stumps of
his legs.  But this is entirely consistent with the those of a
libertarian society.  Recruits are encouraged to join up - but only on
giving their fully informed consent.
Not only this, but once signed up, recruits can walk out just as they
please.  Only this makes sense of the scene in which Johnny's father
tries to get him to change his mind:  even in Old England, once you had
taken the Queen's Shilling, there was no going back.  And it entirely
undercuts the pacifistic message we are supposed to take from the
brutality of Johnny's training and the punishments handed out for
breaches of discipline.  See what happens when Johnny lets one of the
trainees in his unit take his helmet off during a manoeuvre with live
ammunition, and gets his head blown off.  Several trainees resign
immediately.  Johnny is almost thrown out.  He is only allowed to remain
in the military if he takes his punishment.  In this context, his
flogging must be seen not as an act of military sadism, but as a free
acceptance of responsibility.
Moreover, having taken his punishment, Johnny decides that he is not
good enough for military service, and signs his discharge papers.  The
war then starts, and his parents are killed int he bombing of Buenos
Aires, and he wants to rejoin.  He can only do this because his
immediate superiors connive at a breach of law in tearing up his
discharge papers before they are filed.
And it is worth recalling that, harsh and dangerous as it is, military
service is accepted partly in exchange for the vote.  This is perhaps
the most decisive argument against the fascistic nature of the political
system.  In a real fascist state, the vote is so worthless - because
elections are always rigged - that it can be safely given to everyone.
The vote is only useful to the authorities because it can be used as an
endorsement of their rule.  No one would lift a finger, let alone risk
life and limb, for a right so absolutely empty.  In the Federation, the
vote means something:  it means the right to take part in the government
of a free people.  And that is why it is seen as worth all the risks
involved in earning it - risks that are deliberately brought to the
attention of those thinking of taking them.
I can understand the intellectual idleness of the reviewers.  What I
find astonishing is Mr Verhoeven's belief that he has filmed a "fascist
novel".  Probably, Heinlein was far more explicit in his portrayal of a
libertarian society.  But enough remains of this in the film to put it
almost in the same class of libertarian cinema as The Fountainhead, or
High Noon, or Star Wars.  Mr Verhoeven is a great director - anyone can
realise this who has seen films like Robocop and Total Recall.  But his
greatness is surely most fully revealed in Starship Troopers, where he
has unknowingly created a powerful and dignified vision of a future that
contradicts his own leftist views.
Turning to the Bug War, I was less happy.  As shown in the film, the
Federation strategy makes no sense.  The war begins with the destruction
of Buenos Aires.  The Bugs achieve this by hurling an asteroid across
the galaxy.  I cannot believe that a civilisation able to build
interstellar spaceships could fail to see this coming months in advance,
and fail to do anything about it.  Nor can I believe that, after one
failed attack on the Bugs, in which Federation ships have been blasted
out of low orbit over Klendathu, the same positioning of forces could be
risked in the next attack.
Nor do I find the use of ground forces at all convincing.  The soldiers
are sent into combat against a numerically superior enemy with horribly
inadequate weapons.  They have small atom bombs, and these are
occasionally used to good effect.  But otherwise, they only have
standard calibre machine guns that are plainly inadequate against the
Bugs.  Hundreds of rounds of fire from more than one weapon are needed
to kill just one Bug.  The sort of guns used in Star Wars - indeed, even
the guns now used by the American and British military - would make far
greater sense.  They would cut the death toll from hundreds of thousands
to perhaps a few hundred.
And that is on the assumption that ground forces need to be committed at
all.  In one scene, we are shown a very effective aerial attack on the
Bugs.  Why was this not continued to the point where only a few Bugs
remained?  Then ground forces might have been committed for a mopping up
and the capture of the Brian Bug - and could have acted under the same
umbrella of air supremacy as Allied forces may be about to enjoy in the
Persian Gulf.
The answer is that a more sensible strategy would bring the war to an
easy conclusion, and this would rob the film of much of its excitement.
And the set piece battles are exciting - they remind me of the best
Second World War films, and even in places of the Spartan defence at
Thermopylae.  But the excitement is always undermined by the knowledge
that the actions make no military sense.
Moving to generalities, I was impressed by the portrayal of sexual
equality - which is what we can expect in a libertarian society.  But I
was not convinced by way in which the sexes are integrated in the
military.  The shower scene, where we see male and female recruits naked
together, is conceivable - but only, I think, on the assumption that the
recruits do not regard each other as sexual beings.  But this is not the
case in Starship Troopers.  Johnny does get into a sexual relationship
with a member of his unit while on active service.  I may be wrong, but
this must be bad for discipline.
As an aside, I notice that his lover (Dina Meyer) is able to go through
weeks of active service against the Bugs with an undamaged perm; and
when she eventually gets into bed with Johnny, her armpits are smoothly
shaven.  Is this, I wonder, more evidence of the goodies on offer in a
free society?  Or is it just Hollywood?
I enjoyed Starship Troopers.  I may even watch it again.  And I will
certainly get round this year to reading some Heinlein.
        ">http://freespace.virgin.net/old.whig/>
If you like Free Life Commentary, you may also care to subscribe to my
longer, hard copy journal, Free Life, subscription details for which can
be obtained by writing to me at the above address.
