Authors
Jeremiah Rickert
Number of Reviews
13

Title
Review for Starship Troopers (1997)
     I saw the first trailer for this film about a year ago.  I looked
forward to the film back then, the movie kept getting pushed back and back
and back, and finally in June, they say "Coming in November."  Hmmm.  I
decided to read the book instead.  Despite the fact that, in the past,
the movie is *never* as good as the book, I figured, hey, this will be a
good movie.  I was half right.
     The film concerns the adventures of a trio of high school students
who enter public service in order to become full citizens in the the
Federation that governs Earth.  (In the book we learn that you cannot vote
unless you enter public service).  Public Service is synonymous with
Military service.  One of them (played by Doogie Howser's Neil Patrick
Harris) has phychic abilities and is sent to the Military Itelligence
division (where they become officers immediately).  Johnny Rico (played by
a unknown set of cheekbones) doesn't test very highly, but is rather
athletic, he ends up in the Mobile Infantry. his girlfriend Carmen
(played by an unknown, overly nubile set of cheekbones) and a math-whiz,
enters the flight academy.  They all three take separate paths, which
right away suggests that they will all come together in the climax.
     In between we have Rico's and Carmen's training, which contains the
first ever dear john minidisc in film history.  In the novel, we learn
that the mobile Infantry is the most prestigious form of Public Service,
it is highly regarded by the public, and those who have survived their
term in the MI are revered...this does not come out in the film, much to
my dismay.  It's an element that would have explained a lot that didn't
really make sense.  During his training, Rico quits, but is persuaded to
stay on when the bugs send an asteroid which impacts Buenos Aires, the
kids hometown, wiping it out completely. 
      Carman on the other hand, is wild and wacky and excells at her pilot
training, she ends up getting paired with Xander, another set of amazing
cheeckbones, who is slowly stealing her heart away from Johnny.  She
graduates early and is assigned to the Roger Young, a transport ship,
which delivers the MI to their destinations and retrieves them. 
     Joining Johnny in the MI, and slowly turning his eyes away from
Carmen, is the athletic Dizzy Flores (played by a well-muscled set of
cheekbones who is not afraid to do gratutious shower scenes), another alum
of the BA school, she has always had a thing for Rico, but he's always
shunned her for Carmen...this tit-for-tat love triangle...not, not
triangle, love Rhombus, continues through most of the film. 
     Finally, after 55 minutes...we get bugs...bugs and bugs.  The Earth
forces assume that the bugs are not intelligent, and this is their
undoing, they have some rather unsettling military defeats, and are forced
to do a bit of rethinking before taking the war to the bugs.
     The special effects are pretty darned good, there really wasn't a
time I stopped and went "that was cheesy." which usually happens during
sci-fi films when I spot a flaw.  The bugs were creepy and horrid and
brutal all at the same time, and more than fulfilled any visions I'd had
while reading the books.  The space scenes are well-done as well, somewhat
reminiscent of Babylon 5's style, but looked less computer generated.  The
bugs were overseen by Phil Tippet, who made his mark with the Star Wars
Trilogy.  
     The action in the last half of the movie is a bit fractured, there
isn't really smooth continuity, just a lot of shooting and slurping and
blood and guts, but for some reason I liked it.  A lot of the action
scenes were done rather well, and I wish I'd looked up to see who the
second unit director was, there was some creative stuff done with what
could have been a very redundant set of battle scenes.
     If I hadn't read the book, I would have really liked this film.  I
think that Paul Verhoven is one of the last directors I would have chosen
for Starship Troopers.  In an interview with him and the producer, they
said that the book was about a "facist utopia."  The same thing was said
by critics when the original novel came out in the 60's.  Because Verhoven
was attacking the flim from that slant, many of the details of the society
got smoothed over and ignored, in order to highlight the things he saw in
the story as "facist."  Furthermore, the first half of the film, which
represents about the first two-thirds of the book, is smothered in the
tedious love-triangle, that just about every reviwer calls "a bad episode
of 90210."  A better choice for a director of this film would have been
Terry Gilliam, or Ridley Scott (maybe too obvious).  Verhoven has too many
odd obsessions, one with horrid, horrid violence, and the other with naked
bodies (see Basic Instinct, Robocop, Showgirls, Total Recall), most of his
films are distinguished by their over the top sex or violence.  I believe
Total Recall has the dubious disinction of the most people killed in a
film, Robocop was originally an X-rated film for violence.  He's out to
shock or something, and seems unphazed at his movie ratings.  
     Starship Troopers, however, is probably going to be popular, for the
very reasons that I have disliked it, especially all the yong nubile
actors and their relationships, which play like a 90210 episode on at 2am
on Showtime.  The same factors that made a movie like Scream a hit...young 
beautiful actors and actresses, love-triangles, shower scenes...some
humour...  
     I probably should not see this film again, because I will find more
and more wrong with it, that's what happened with me and Independence Day,
the first time is was GREAT! The second time is was..oh...good, yeah...and
it was downhill from there...but I digress.
Out of the $3.50 I paid for my ticket, it was probably worth $1.75
--

Title
Review for Three Kings (1999)
Starring: George Clooney, Mark Wahlberg, Ice Cube, Spike Jonze, and Nora
Dunn
Written and Directed by: David O. Russel w/John Ridley
     The advertising for this film would have you believe that you are
about to see a caper-film.  The ads portray the kind of talky disco
swagger that we have come to associate with the films of Quentin
Tarantino.  Tarantino's films, however disjointed on the surface, still
contained a linear narrative to follow.  Three Kings never finds this
straight line, and instead is a very schizoid, music-video of a film
that never really finds its own place or purpose.  At the end, the
single biggest thought that crossed my mind was, what did I just see?
Was it a drama, comedy, action adventure, caper-film, political
statement, what was it?  My only answer was that it is a film that
people praise because they don't have any idea what else to say about
it.  Now that just about every major reviewer in the country has raved
about it, those who thought the movie was so much artistic vomit, will
only bewilder and perplex.
     This film is basically Kelly's Heroes (1970) for the Gulf War.
While searching Iraqi prisoners after a cease-fire, a pair of American
soldiers, Troy Barlow (Mark Wahlberg) and Chief Elgin (Ice Cube)
discover a map that seems to have directions to some Iraqi Bunkers out
in the desert.  Meanwhile Special Forces Captain Archie Gates, (George
Clooney) has been fed up with his cease-fire job of escorting  Christina
Amanapour-like reporter Adriana Cruz (Nora Dunn) around the battle
sites.  He is  told by his superior that "This is a Media War, and you'd
better get on board." While cavorting with a female reporter who is a
rival of his charge, he hears about some Kuwaiti gold, and of course, he
and the guys who found the map come together and come up with a plan:
let's zip out in the desert and search these bunkers, there and back in
a day, so we can quit our cruddy jobs back home.  Also along for the
ride (and the comic relief) is the adorable country bumpkin Conrad Vig,
played by Music Video director and dancer (Fatboy Slim's "Praise You")
Spike Jonze.  Vig's character is a familiar archetype in these films:  a
brainlessly cute hayseed who of course is destined to die.  Gates hires
a buddy to lose Cruz out in the desert and heads off after his booty.
     Once the players on in place, they grab a Hummer and head out to
make their fortune.  This would not be possible normally, but Russell's
victorious Allied Army is portrayed as an extremely unorganized bunch of
frat boys (and girls) who while away the hours drinking and dancing to
rap music.  Everyone is so distracted by enjoying all of the rich
trappings of American excess, that our heroes have no problem slipping
out to get the gold.  Russell seems to be saying that the Gulf War and
those who fought in Desert Storm lacked any kind of moral imperative.
Any notions of patriotism are quite sincerely lacking.
     On the way to the bunkers, the boys fire their guns in the air
skeet-shoot with nerf footballs, carefree and overconfident that
everything will go as planned.  However, the operation hits a speed bump
when they stumble into the middle of a conflict between Saddam's loyal
soldiers, and rebels who are taking up George Bush's appeal to rise up
against Saddam.  George Bush is name-dropped so often that his name soon
becomes a sort of ironic punchline.  I half expected someone to mention
his 90% approval rating with a nod and a wink to the audience.  Bush is
portrayed as a great betrayer when Clooney and gang, limited by a
cease-fire agreement with Saddam, refuse to become involved in the
civil-war.  They are only interested in the Gold and nothing else.  The
steely reserve begins to soften and soon they find themselves duking it
out with The Republican Guard, and getting rescued themselves by Iraqi
rebels.  Once here they have no choice but to help.  It isn't because of
morals, it is because they have painted themselves into a corner and
cannot finish the job on their own. It's up to them to get the rebels
safely into Iran before the hammer is dropped on them, and in return the
rebels will help them carry the gold.  After that, it's a race to the
border.
     Politics show up in a less-than-subtle way after Barlow is
captured.  He is subjected to shock-torture and we get to listen to an
Iraqi talk about how his child was murdered by an American bomb.  The
interrogator also pours oil down Barlow's throat, asserting the cliche
notion that the war was only about oil. This is just short of the
director showing up and saying "Man, we Americans are sure bullies."
Luckily after being locked in a closet with all sorts of big-money items
such as Levis and Electronic Appliances, Barlow finds a cellphone and
after failing to directly contact the Allied Forces, decides to call
home.  My main problem with this scene is the fact that a cellphone will
lose a connection going under an overpass or a tunnel, yet Barlow has no
problem calling out of a closet in an underground bunker.  Go figure.
Wahlberg, however, gives his best performance, and his character was the
only really sympathetic of the bunch.
     Three Kings is filmed with a dizzying combination of slow-motion,
quick pans, and jump cuts.  At times the contrast is cranked, giving the
film a washed out "documentary" quality that we saw in Saving Private
Ryan too recently for it to be used here.  Russell also generously shows
what actually happens to a body when it is shot, complete with rupturing
gall bladders and organ-piercing slugs from an "inside" view of the
body.  Some of the bloodletting is portrayed with comic undertones, and
some is portrayed with an urgent kind of heavy-melodrama.
     By the time the real army comes looking for these guys, they have
pretty much broken every major military rule in the book,  Luckily,
however, the reporter they tried to ditch is around to film everything,
thus Gates seems to have learned all about the "media war" and how to
use it to his advantage.  The final images of the film are the "What
ever happened to..." blurbs that used to show up at the end of several
of the teensploitation films of the 80s.
     Overall the film was all over the map, never once deciding on
whether it was a comedy or a drama, or whatever.  Perhaps Russell wanted
it this way, but it doesn't make it a great artistic achievement.  The
characters really never change.  Afterwards they may have been a little
shaken up by what they saw, but they still were just out to steal some
gold, and everything they did was supposed to lead to pulling off their
caper, no matter how they tried to dress it up as "just helping out."
They are portrayed as a microcosm of the rest of the Allied efforts in
the Gulf.  Only $$$$ matters, nothing else.  Unlike films like M.A.S.H.
and Saving Private Ryan, we aren't given ordinary humans trying to cope
with inhumane circumstances, we are given greedy pirates who try to take
advantage of the power and position that their victorious Army has given
them.  I really cared if Hawkeye Pierce managed to keep his humanity
intact, and I really cared if Capt. John Miller survived the war.  I
didn't care about the leads in Three Kings.  Again, perhaps that is what
Russell intended, but that doesn't make it great cinema.  It plays more
like a really long tantrum.
Of the $7.50 I paid for this film, it was worth $0.00 (Nada)

Title
Review for Titanic (1997)
Starring:  Leonardo DiCaprio, Kate Winslet, Billy Zane, Bill Paxton, and
Gloria Stuart.
     I really wanted to hate this film.  It is part of what I call the
Forrest Gump syndrome, you hear a film hyped, you hear Oscar Buzz before
it is even released, and you think in the back of your head, for these
reasons I want to hate this movie.  I was wrong with Forrest Gump, and I
was wrong with Titanic. 
     Much of what has been said about this film is absolutely true, at the
end of the film, it does not seem that you've been sitting there for over
three hours, and if the ship were not on the bottom of the Atlantic, it is
quite possible you would want more.
     The film is a story within a story.  The framing story concerns a
treasure hunter (Bill Paxton) who is being bankrolled by several
"interests" to find what is thought to be the most valueable diamond in
the world.  It was last known to be aboard Titanic in the possession of a
Pittsburgh Steel Tycoon.  In navigating the wreck he finds a safe which he
believes holds the diamond, however upon opening it, all he finds is muck,
water, and a packet of drawings, one of which of a naked girl wearing the
diamond.  He shows the picture on TV, knowing/hoping someone is going to
know the person.  A elderly woman (Gloria Stuart) phones him and claims
she is the woman in the picture, identifying the diamond by its name.  She
is flown out to the ship and tells the story of the diamond, and her
voyage on the Titanic in a flashback.
     Her flashback is the meat of the movie.  We are introduced to Rose
(Kate Winslet) a young woman who is promised to be engaged to, you guessed
it, a steel tycoon, played by Billy Zane (Phantom).  Also, proclaming this
is the luckiest day of his life, artist Jack Dawson (Leonardo DiCaprio)
wins a third class ticket on the Titanic and runs to get to the ship
before she sails.  It is obvious that Rose is not conent with her match
and we later learn that her mother is bankrupt and must insure their class
status.  Class is one of the major themes here, and there is a clever
duality where it refers to not only one's position in society, but ones
position in the ship.  Literally, the first class people were on the top
of the ship, and the lower class, were on the bottom.  Rose is not a usual
girl of high breeding and feels a slave to her class rather than a part of
it.  She is so distressed that she would rather die than marry.  She is
about to throw herself off of the boat when Jack saves her.  They have
instant chemistry, but it is obvious that she is still slightly bound by
her class strictures, and slowly but surely (but not too slow) she begins
to loosen up even more as she moves closer and closer to Jack.
     Her fiance and his Valet (David Warner) see her relationship with
Jack blooming and seem to do all they can to stop it, including handcuff
him to a post when the ship is going down.  
     It is difficult to expound futher on the plot without giving too much
away.  The acting in this film is top notch especially with people in the
smaller rolls.  Victor Garber (Godspell, Sleepless in Seattle) is
brilliant as the cathartic Andrews, the designer of the unsinkable ship.
He is a tragic figure of Greek and Shakespearian proportions.  A man who
thought he could question the gods, indeed, someone does say that even
"God couldn't sink her" when referring to the ship.  The leads, DiCaprio
and Winslet were good, but could have been better.  DiCaprio will forever
seem 12 years old, and it is difficult to see him as an adult in any role.
Winslet was facially brilliant, so many of her expressions conveyed
emotions and sometimes I could almost imagine fire behind her eyes, and
sometime great sadness.  Zane oozed smarmy evil, as he has done in so many
other films, and did it with style too.  Rose's Mother as well, conveyed
her personal terror at having to work and losing her position.  Kathy
Bates as Molly Brown showed us what new-money is, and what it meant to the
other people with money.  Finally, I cannot say too much about Gloria
Stuart, she has been absent from film for several years, and she is what
sucked me into the film emotionally before we even had a single flashback.
Her ice blue eyes held an incredible amount of emotion, laughter, pain,
and in a way, I looked forward to her appearances in the film.
     Now on to Cameron's direction.  It was pretty good.  He created
several short moments in this film that were very moving.  The string
quartet as the ship was going down, was something that could have been
played as a comic moment, in fact, some people in the audience laughed.
However, these four melancholy gentleman, no one ever listens to them, why
do they bother, but they sit down and they play and they play and they
play knowing that they are most likely going to die.  The fades from Rose
and Jack "flying" on the front of the ship to the wreck, and later from
Young Rose's eyes to Old Rose's eyes, during the sketching scene,  I sat
back in my seat and said wow, it was such a little thing, but it seemed to
powerful, it locked the framing story into the other in a way that is
stronger than most films and even books ever do.  There was obvious,
strong, connections between the two.  Finally, one of the most simple
shots was just of an old couple in bed as the ship was sinking and it was
a short, but extremely moving moment in the film.  Even though nothing is
said about them, they are not characters we have met, but we see them
there and we immediately think that is love. 
     I have gotten to the bottom of my review and I have not even
mentioned special effects.  That is a surprise in a Cameron film, because
his name is often synonymous with them.  In this case, however, you aren't
seeing a special effect, you are seeing THE TITANIC, the real one.  The
CGI effects are superior in some cases, and only the very carefully
watching eye can catch them.  Only the daytime shots of the ship betrayed
the special effects, at night, the shots were spectacular.  Same with the
shots of the engines turning, it was exciting, it was loud, and it was
powerful.  
     The only thing I found a bit weak in this film, was the writing of
dialogue.  It is a difficult thing to do in any film, some writers have a
gift for it, some do not.  In this case, though, considering the rest of
the film, it is often easy to forgive.  It did bother me a bit, however.
Other than that, this is an excellent film.  It was far better than I
would have expected, and I am glad I saw it.
Of the $3.50 I paid to see it, it was worth $6.25
--

Title
Review for Anastasia (1997)
     I caught the late showing of Anastasia at one of my favorite
theaters, the Westgate in Beaverton, Oregon.  It is the theater where as a
lad of three, I stood on the seat and shot Darth Vader with my green spark
gun, but I digress.  
     Anastasia is the first animated production of Fox Family Films, and
for the most part it is a pretty good offering.  The man behind it is Don
Bluth, who has put out a fairly steady stream of animated entertainment,
including The Secret of Nimh, An American Tail, and All Dogs Go To Heaven,
just to name a few.  None of the above have really competed with
concurrent Disney offerings, but this latest one, in my opinion, outshines
two of the last three Disney Animated films.  (Hercules and Pocahontas).
At first glance, it seemed that Fox and Bluth were trying to emulate their
competitors style.  They began to market Anastasia with teasers and
posters and such practically a year ago.  A few months later, I recall
seeing a trailer with partially completed animation (sound familiar?), and
then the blitz started.  It's the old jam it down our throats campaign, a
bit softer than the Disney bombardment, but there nonetheless.
     The story concerns a rabidly revenge-minded Rasputin (Snickered and
Growled wonderfully by Chistopher Lloyd), who in an effort for repaying
the Tsar of Russia for disowning and trying to have him killed (assuming
they've stuck to history of course, this is never fully explained), curses
the royal family to be killed.  He then sells his soul to the forces of
Darkness in order that this curse be carried out.  The curse then seems to
cause the once prosperous and placid peoples of the empire to become
agitated and angry towards the imperial family, finally culminating in the
bloody Russian Revolution.  I thought that history should have been a bit
more elaborated upon, simply because at least kids would "learn"
something, but it was not to be.  The family then attempts to escape, but
they are all killed save the mother of the Tsar (voiced by Angela
Lansbury), and his Daughter Anastasia, however, she fails to catch the
last train out of St. Petersburg, and is coldcocked to the ground,
becoming an orphan.  10 years later, now grown, she yearns to find out who
she is, and whether she actually has family, thus begins the adventure.
She meets up with a swindler named Dmitri and his sidekick Vlad (played by
John Cusack and Kellsey Grammer respectively) who attempt to pass her off
as the Grand Duchess Anastasia in order to receive the 10million Ruble
reward.  And of course, Rasputin returns to finish the job.  The pieces
are all in place, and how they play out is rather entertaining.
     The story kept me interested and definitely entertained, the songs
were passable, but not very memorable.  If it wasn't for the fact that the
strongest song was in the credits, I would have probably forgotten it.  
     The Animation was good, but incosistent, at times I found it
breathtaking, particularly during the "paris" song, when the city is laid
out like an Impressionist painting.  The human movements were as good as,
in some cases more realistic than, those of Disney characters, except for
their faces.  Their faces lacked detail and their lips rarely moved in
synch with their lines and songs.  This is the biggest flaw in the film,
it bothered me throughout the whole thing.  The computer animation also
didn't blend in as well as it could have, sometimes it stuck out like a
sore thumb, particularly the cars driving around paris.  The computerized
"camera" movement in the Dowager's townhouse looked too rigid and
unnatural.  
     Overall, however, I was entertained, the story was interesting, and
actually more "Grown-up" than I expected.  I think it would be scary in
some respects for young kids.  I was reminded of The Black Cauldron a bit,
where armies of the dead poured from the Cauldron, summoned by the Horn
King, and how a lot of families were put off by that.  I would be
surprised if Anastaisa grosses in the Disney territory for this very
reason.  The comic foil, Bartok, unfortunately has all of his best lines
stuck in the trailers, as it often is with these things, and really didn't
seem much more as an attempt to garner a few laughs.  This sounds strange,
but The parrot in Alladin as played by Gilbert Gottfried was a more
well-rounded character than Bartok.  
--

Title
Review for Jerry Maguire (1996)
Starring:  Tom Cruise, Rene Zellweger, Cuba Gooding Jr., Bonnie Hunt
Written and Directed by Cameron Crowe
     I waited until this one came to cable before watching it.  This time
it was a combination of hype AND Tom Cruise that steered me away.  On some
levels I'm glad I didn't have to fork out any money (not counting the cost
of cable TV) to see this film, on some others it may have been worth it.
     The film sucks us into the world of professional sports from an angle
that is a fairly fresh one:  From the inside of the sports management
business.  Jerry Maguire is a fast-talking, big-money, big-deal, sports
agent with a huge firm who lives and dies by his telephone.  Cruise
portrays him fairly well, not well enough to be nominated for an Oscar,
which he was, but with humor and a bit of genuine vulnerability amongst
that which seems to be simple method-acting with a big nose.  Maguire has
a catharsis and decides that his career lacks soul and his life lacks
purpose and he types out his memo, which flows not from his lust for cash
or his desire to close the deal, but from his heart which he thinks he has
lost along the way.  His fiance, played by Kelly Preston (um...what else
has she been in? Double Cross and SpaceCamp) is a well...psychotic
codependent-type who on the one hand craves honesty, but twists it into
brutality.  She and Maguire are basically in a loveless relationship,
which also seems to contribute to Jerry's "breakdown." (And after a
seemingly gratuitous sex-scene.)
     Jerry gets fired after drafting the memo because he stresses the need
to have less clients which allows for a more personal business
relationship.  He delcares that he's starting his own firm and asks
anyone who wants to come along to get up and follow him.  Only one does, a
soft-spoken accountant Dorothy Boyd played by Rene Zwelleger (Love and a
.45). She is inspired by his memo and decides that to give meaning to her
life, she needs to break off with Jerry.  She seems to have a crush on
Jerry from the beginning and of course, this leads to a love story,
although a basically un-cliched one.  Jerry calls all of his clients and
only one of them will still with him, Arizona Cardinal wide-receiver Rod
Tidwel, played by Cuba Gooding Jr. (Lightning Jack, A Few Good Men).
Gooding won a much deserved Oscar for this role.  Jerry's hole deepens
when he loses a big football prospect and he breaks up with his fiance.
     Thus being without clients, a job, and a fiance, Jerry finds himself
alone and apparently since he has this thing about being alone, he turns
to the only female in his life, Dorothy Boyd.  He shows up at her house
Drunk and after a few minutes of sexual tension he makes his move.  He
seems all the sorrier for it, however.  At the Boyd house we are
introduced to my favorite two characters in the film, Dorothy's sister
Laurel, played wonderfully by Bonnie Hunt (Jumanji, Beethoven) and
Dorothy's son Ray, played by Jonathan Lipnicki (The Jeff Foxworthy Show,
Meego).  Hunt's Laurel is an older, wiser, wry, Curmudgeony, woman who
takes everything with a grain of salt, and has to watch her younger,
skinnier sister go after some good-looking successful guy.  She does it
without actively seeking sympathy, to the point in reveling in her
situation.  There was a very moving (at least to me) scene of her sitting
in the dark eating the leftovers from Jerry and Dorothy's date-dinner
while the two are in bed together.  
     Lipnicki's Ray is a too-smart-for-his-own-good kid, but not all of
the time. To the writer's credit he still does things to remind you he's a
little boy and after a string of films with 8yr olds who talk like adults,
it was refreshing to see a kid be a kid as well as a clever smart-aleck.
     Ray and Jerry bond almost immediately, and that helps faciliate the
relationship between Dorothy and Jerry.  Despite his catharses, Jerry
still becomes a business-robot when on the job, and this slowly begins to
alienate Dorothy, so he proposes and it seems to patch things up for now,
but soon he finds himself taking more and more roadtrips with Rod and
spending less and less time at home.  They eventually separate.  Rod's
lack of stellar success on the field leads to a small contract offer from
the Cardinals.  Jerry eventually tries to convince Rod of the same thing
he had to convince himself of, that you need to play from the heart,
rather than from the wallet.  
     Enough of the plot, on to the criticism.  Crowe does a fine job
juggling three disasters...Jerry's Love Life, Jerry's Career, and Rod's
Contract. All of them are stories in themselves, that revolve around these
characters' lives and Crowe doesn't let any of them get out of hand, and
on the other side of the coin, none of them ends up getting token or
cliched treatment.  One of the thing that bugged me throughout the film,
however, was the casting of Rene Zwelleger as Dorothy.  Don't get me
wrong, she did a fine job, but at times she looks about 15 years old.
When she uttered the line "I am the oldest 26 year old in the world" I
laughed, not because it was funny, but because it was ironic.  She's
another in a long line of blonde waif-like, pouty-lipped women who are
supposed to be wives and mothers, but who look like they are
high-schoolers.  (Liar Liar's Maura Tierney and anything with Gwyneth
Paltrow).  Zwelleger is cute, she is at times even sexy, however, she
looks 15 or 16 and did not seem to fit the character she was playing.  It
bugged me throughout the film.  This certain body-type of woman seems to
be placed in films that evoke an almost Romantic (capital R) appeal, as
in, she's an incredibly cute, spunky, smart, sincere, extremely young
looking, slim, single lonely woman, she's wordly wise, but only looks
16...she'd be a great leading lady.  
Overall, the film was funny, Gooding Jr. and Bonnie Hunt made this film,
in my opinion, and Cruise did just fine.  Despite the fact that I didn't
think she looked the part, Zwelleger did a fine job as well.  Crowe's
directing and writing were top-notch as he kept three solid stories
seperate, equal, and then tied them up in the end.  
Of the $10 a month extra I paid for Showtime, Jerry Maguire was worth $5
(c) 1997 Jeremiah Rickert
--

Title
Review for Deep Impact (1998)
Starring: Tea Leoni, Morgan Freeman, Robert Duvall, Elijah Wood
Directed by: Mimi Leder
     Since the cities of the world were fried by the malevolent aliens of
Independence Day, the apocalypse has been tres chic to the film-industry.
It's like the 70s all over again, only this time the budgets are bigger,
and the marketing/packaging causes you to believe that this isn't like
those films...this is a serious drama.  Uh huh...of course it is.
     In a summer-blockbuster season that sees not one, but two
object-hurtling towards earth films (Deep Impact, and the upcoming
Armageddon) and of course Godzilla, and of course, previous summer's
volcano extravaganza,  it seems another era of "crowds-
trying to outrun the disaster" camera angles, and "the end of life as we
know it" philosophizing is upon us.  Deep Impact's villain is a comet that
a young astronomy student Leo Biederman, played by Elijah Wood (Flipper,
North, The Ice Storm) happens to scope out one day while on an astronomy
club outing.  He snaps a photo of it, which is developed by a
scientist-type (Charles Martin-Smith in a wasted role) who unfortunately
has a car accident before being able to spread the word.  We don't know if
the photo and computer disk with the information are destroyed in the
explosion of his jeep or not.  This is supposed to be suspenseful.
     We are then introduced to aspiring news anchor Jenny Lerner, played
with much facial intensity by Tea Leoni (Tv's The Naked Truth).  She's
deal a story about a government official (James Cromwell, in another
massively wasted role) who resigns his position as a cabinet member
apparently because his wife is ill.  Rumours abound as to why this is,
including that his wife is an alcoholic, and it's because he's having an
affair.  One of his aides, tells Jenny that he talks to an Elle, has a
private phone line, and shuts his door when it rings. She decides to
confront the man about it, and she suddenly becomes very ominous, telling
her she has the biggest story of her life, and that she needs to keep it a
secret.  She of course thinks he's talking about an affair, and is just
egotistic.  She is stopped by secret service on her way back to the office
and introduced to the president, who asks her to sit on the story until
they make an official announcement.  She still thinks this is just an
affair, but the President refers to elle as ELE and that gets her
thinking.  At the ensuing press-conference, she puts it all together as
the president informs the nation that a comet is heading straight for us.
He offers hope in a space mission to plant nukes deep into the surface of
the comet.
     Enter: The Action part of the film.  Miraculously, our Russian allies
have invented a wonderful propulsion system, that will zip a crew of
astronauts towards the comet, where they will plant the nukes that will
throw it on another course.  If that plan fails, then a volley of nukes
will be launched from the surface of the earth...and if that fails...well,
the government has been secretly constructing "the ark" an undergroudn
facility that will protect the chosen few from the destruction and
guarantee that (the american way of) life will go on.  
     Of course, Leder's beef with action films is that they don't have any
humanity, and she stuffs this film with enough fake humanity to make you
ill.  The human drama can be presented either tastefully or
manipulatively, and in this case, I believe it comes across as
manipulative.  There are countless scenes using children to gain the
sympathy of the audience.  Kids are the ultimate in things that everyone
can releate to.  Politicians speak of "our children, and our children's
children" after all, who could be against children?  It gets milked too
often...parents desperately thrusting their babies towards the "chosen"
hoping one of them will take them along, little kids saying goodbye to
their parents, it just comes off as weak to me and gratuitously yanks at
our collective heart-strings, in an apparent effort to give a little
credibility to what is basically a disaster flick.  The same goes with the
"nobility" of characters dying with grace, or giving themselves to that
others can live.  The nobility ends up looking cheap, and rather than the
audience respecting the valorous sacrifices, they think "she was stupid
not to go on the heliocopter."  
     The humor, or attempts at humor fell flat as well.  They are trying
to make light of the end of the world, and you just can't do that.
Everyone is going to die!  At a school assembly, when Biederman's
fellos students are asking him questions, one of them stands up and
proclaims that boy is he going to have a lot of sex, famous people have 
a lot of sex, it's the best part of being famous.  There are some shots 
of his sweetheart giggling and being whispered to by her friends, it
was just horrid.  The low-point of the humor, however,  comes when
the astronauts decide that they will give their lives to try to stop the
comet.  One of them says "well look on the bright side, we'll all get
schools named after us."  I was in 6th grade when the Challenger exploded.
It was the height of Reaganism, an era when on the whole, patriotism
thrived, belief in the immortality of America and our way of life was
booming, and then this diaster happened.  It was something that I found
moving.  I remember my teacher coming into the room and telling us what
had happened...and then setting up a TV and letting us watch it, and it
was painful.  Those astronauts had schools named after them, of course,
and it truly irritates me that they would try to make that into a cheap
joke.  Maybe no one remembers, maybe the crowd this film was aimed at was
too young to remember, but that really was a truly disgusting piece of
attempted humor.  
     The Special effects did the job they were supposed to do, no
complaints there.  The Tidal wave shots were the high-point of the film.
The outer-space scenes were well done as well, although one camera shot
from inside the helmets of the astronauts, sounded like an obscene
phone-call in surround sound.
     There were other things that bothered me...how the film seemed
boring, despite the apocalypse, how it seemed everyone in the country
watched MSNBC, how Tea Leoni really was wasted in the film, as were most
of the other actors (Blair Underwood, Kurtwood Smith, Charles
Martin-Smith, and James Cromley.), and how the second nuke attempt isn't
even shown...just the President telling us it didn't work.  Some of this
stuff really distracted me throughout the film.
     Overall, the EFX were good, the characters were flat, but likeable,
the humor was disastrously horrid, the plot kept the movie going, but I
found myself not caring about characters who were dying, I just couldn't
buy into supposed human drama, it was too cheap and exploitive for me, and
perhaps that kept me from enjoying the film.
Of the $6.75 that I paid for the film, it was worth about $0.50
--

Title
Review for Godzilla (1998)
Starring: Matthew Broderick, Jean Reno, Maria Pitilla, and Hank Azaria
Directed by: Roland Emmerich
     Oh boy, it's the edge of summer, and those two guys who ruled the
summer box office two years ago are back with their uber-flick, Godzilla.
With a gigantic budget and big-name stars...well, a gigantic budget
anyway, Dean Devlin and Roland Emmerich, the team behind Stargate,
Independence Day, and now Godzilla, are going for the summer-flick
hat-trick, and if hype alone can sell a picture, they will have it.
     The plot was definitely there, just enough to move the movie along,
although at times it seemed really slow.  With a running time of about 2
and a half hours, yet still barely enough plot, you have to wonder if the
next Devlin/Emmerich release will be all special affects and no story at
all...why bother with that pesky story element anyway?  There were a
number of jump-cuts, whenever the characters reached a decision about
something, the film suddenly jumped forward to just before it was about to
be implemented, making the transitions between grand action scenes as
short as possible, which means that the largest chunk of the movie is
action action action.  Some of the editing didn't quite seem up to snuff.
The cuts were jerky at times and you'd cut away from an action shot before
it was totally finished.  The editing team was a pretty good one too,
Peter Amudson (Daylight, Dragonheart, Dragon: The Bruce Lee Story, and SFX
work on Return of the Jedi and Empire Strikes Back) and David Siegel (who
I believe was nominated for an emmy for work on Law and Order).  Despite
the pedigree of the team, I still thought the final product was not as
good as it could have been.
     The plot, by the way, is about the foul and large creature that is
produced due to French nuclear testing in the French Polynesian Islands.
(That's right, we've run out of enemies, so now it's time for the French.)
The French are the first to learn about the creature's existance, when
they investigate a large fishing vessel that was attacked and sunk.  They
are worried that their testing has caused whatever this thing is, and they
need to try to hush up the attack in order to protect their reputation.
     After -something- with huge footprints tromps across Jamaica, our
hero, Nick Tatopoulis (Matthew Broderick) is pulled away from his exciting
job of measureing radioactive worms at Chernobyl by the U.S. Dept. of
State, who takes him to the island to examine the large prints.  He is
added to a team of scientists, drafted by the govt. to try to get a bead
on what they are dealing with and how to deal with it.  Hollywood must
think that all scientists are beatniks, hippies, slobs, and wierdos,
because that is what we have in our group in this film. (as played by
Vicki Lewis, Malcom Danare, and Broderick.) The creature leaves a trail
that seems to be leading to New York City, where the creature is sure to
wreak a lot of havoc.
     Of course, he does hit new york, bigtime, causing a big ruckus,
panic, and a special effects extravaganza!  In the city, we are introduced
to the supporting players (well, they all kinda support old 'Zilla, but
who's counting) news anchor Charles Caiman, who gets the award for the
most horrible pun, played by Harry Shearer (Simpsons, Spinal Tap) his
assistant and former college flame of Tatopoulos, Audrey Timmonds, played
by Maria Pitillo (Dear God, TV's House Rules), and her friend's husband
and network camera man Victor "animal" Palotti, played by Hank Azaria
(Gross Pointe Blanke, Birdcage, Heat).  Also running around spying on the
Americans is French agent Phillipe Roche, portrayed by french actor Jean
Reno (The Professional, Mission Impossible)
     The French government still wants it covered up, the army wants it
dead, and Godzilla just wants to build a nest, even if it means (and it
does) destroying most of Manhattan in the process.  
     The special effects are of course excellent.  They are consistently
good throughout the film, and for the high price-tag they well should be.
The creature itself manages to be CGI without looking too much like CGI, a
welcome change from the recent Lost In Space, which featured a CGI
creature that looked like a cartoonist had sketched it on the film with a
colored pencil.  The sound was pretty darned good as well, with lots of
good breathing, tail swooshes, and crunching buildings to entertain the
ears and the eyes.  Emmerich's direction was satisfactory, and there was
actually one nice bit of foreshadowing, however obvious it may have been,
when the camera follows a dirt road that the footprints are leading down,
and then fades into a shot of a city street.  
     The acting is satisfactory as well, but even the "names" in the cast
don't do anything spectacular.  Broderick is wooden and distant, even when
he's trying to show feelings for his lost love, Audrey.  Apparently even
the oft-heard Love Theme From Godzilla cannot stir his emotional fires.
The army is, as usual, portrayed as bunch of buffoons, who can't and don't
think.  They seem to choose the hard way to do things, even though every
10yr old in the audience is saying over and over "why can't they just send
a laser guided bomb after him from a high altitude."  The rainy helicopter
chases were actually kinda fun, though, even if a bit far fetched.  Of
course, the idea of a giant lizard is far-fetched as well.  The French
mercinaries are played for laughs as well, frowning at stinky coffee and
being saddened that they couldn't find a croissant.  The laughs I got out
of the film were from things not meant to be funny.  When Nick is staring
into the face of Godzilla, and the love theme was playing, I accidentally
said "phone home" in an ET voice and sent the surrounding three rows into
laughter.  The casting of Audrey again pokes one of my biggest movie
nerves, and that is the female leads looking 15 or 16, but actually being
28.  Her acting was fine, it's just it's hard for me to visualise maturity
when the character looks 16.  
     Some of the other items played for laughs are the chubby Mayor Ebert
and his sidekick and assistant Gene, who try to play out the political
ramifications of Godzilla, with all the appropriate thumbs up and down.
It got old really really really quickly.
     Overall, expect a typical summer flick, action, explosions, lack of
plot, cheesy characters, cheap humor, this one fits the formula to a tee.
And of course, following the lead of Lost Word, they pumped it into as
many theaters opening weekend as possible (a record amount) so by the time
the word of mouth got out, a great number of people had already plunked
down their $6-$10 to see it.  Nice plan, and I expect a lot of films are
going to follow the same formula.  So for what it was, it delivers, as a
piece of art...a film, it's kinda bleah.  I will give them one point for
class, though, they managed to avoid a lot of bodies being ripped...blood,
guts, and I didn't hear one wet squish.  
Of the $3.50 I paid for it, it was worth about $1.75
--

Title
Review for Jackal, The (1997)
     I had not seen the film this was based on, I am sure this was a plus.
I have never been a fan of Richard Gere, so I have to admit I was a bit
negative going into to this film.  
     The plot concerns an attempted assassaination, contracted by a
Russian mafioso, in retaliation for the death of his brother, who was
killed in a joint FBI/MVD (the post Soviet version of the KGB) raid on a
nightclub as part of an investigation. The head MVD agent, Col. Valentina
Koslova (Diane Venora), and the head FBI agent on the scene Carter Preson
(Sidney Poitier) are immediately targets for the mafia, however, instead
they decide to get their revenge on the Americans in a more spectacular
way. They send in the Jackal (Bruce Willis) to convey their message of
revenge in a brutal and public manner for the incredible sum of $70
million in cash.  The premise is a bit hokey for three reasons.  1.  The
FBI does not function outside the United States, the CIA maybe.  2.  $70
million in C-A-S-H?  That would be a LOT of money, even with $100 bills,
and incredibly difficult (doesn't matter who you are) to raise anywhere
without attracting a lot of attention, especially in Russia.  3.  I seems
to me that the mafia would be more able to reach people within Russia than
in the U.S.  Why not take care of the people who did the raid?  That said,
I did enjoy the film.
     No one knows what the Jackal looks like, but they do know that he
exists.  The KGB apparently used him for jobs, but all those who have seen
him are dead, or impossible to find, except for one, a woman who knows his
face named Isabella.  (Mathilda May).  In order to find her, however, they
need her former boyfriend Declan Mulqueen (Richard Gere) a former Irish
Republican Army assassain who is incarcerated in the United States.  (how
convenient).  He agrees to help them find Isabella in return for his
freedom, which is never really given, but he seems to have personal
reasons to go after the Jackal as well, so he decides to help them,
revealing that he has seen the man as well.  Lucky for the good guys,
Declan is an expert on the Jackal's techniques, and the race is on to
find out who his target is, and how he's going to carry out the hit,
before he has a chance to do it.
     The plot keeps one guessing, which is rare these days in a lot of
films.  Unfortunately, the Jackal seems to be predictable enough that
Mulqueen can follow his trail easily.  It seemed like tracking him didn't
take as much effort as it could have, there seems to be no doubt that they
will catch up with the Jackal, and since the movie is only about 2hrs
long, you know you won't have to wait that long.  
     The direction by Stephen Hopkins (Blown Away, Ghost and the Darkness,
Predator 2) is adequate, but rarely top notch.  The performances, however,
are all very good.  Willis seems subdued throughout the film, but really,
a killer who has "been in the business for 20 years" is not going to have
a really distinctive personality.  Poitier is at his intense best, as is
Mathilda May as the former criminal Isabella, who is trying to escape her
checkered past, happy to be in a stable family situation, but a bit
unhappy in a might-as-well-settle-before-I'm-dead way.  Diane Verora, as
the scarred former KGB agent has the strongest performance.  She seems to
have a cold detachment from her humanity, brought on by the combonation of
her job and her disfigured face.  However, Mulqueen seems to breach that a
bit, and Venora manages to make the character change in a very very subtle
manner.  She has never thought about a relationship she says because men
are not attaracted to her scar, but Mulqueen seems to connect with her,
and it's very very faintly acknolwedged by her, that is what makes her
stand out.  There was no overt attraction between the two which could
cheapen it, and I found it very entertaining and well-written.  It was a
part of the flim that really avoided cliches.
     The pacing of the film was pretty good also.  Instead of long drawn
out scenes, punctuated by a flurry of action, like recent films The
Peacemaker and to an extent, Starship Troopers, the film is paced rather
evenly, chugging along at a pleasant gait that doesn't leave you gasping
for air, or snoring in your seat.  There was a lot of technological jargon
and hardware that got a bit old, but at the same time, used the internet
in a way that seemd more real than most films that utilize the information
superhighway.  (The Net, and Hackers).  The finale of the movie was also
refreshing because again, it lacked those things which have become cliche
in recent years in action films:  The crescendo of music which peaks then
pauses for a bit, enough for the hero to recite a one-liner, (Hasta La
Vista Baby! Time's Up! Bad Dog! Assimilate This! to name a few recent
examples) and then proceed to kill the bad guy in an overblown way.
(lowering him into molten metal, placing the bomb in his pants, shooting
him with a cannon, and blowing up the piece of hardware he's attached to,
respectively with the cliches above).  I was very pleased that the Jackal
did not sink to that level.  
(Below is a minor spoiler, so don't read on if you haven't seen the film,
my rating by the way, is the film was worth $2.50 of the $3.50 I paid for
it)
     In the end of the film, I would have to say there is no president in
the history of this country that would not have pardoned Mulqueen, or
shortened his sentence, or something like that.   I mean
really!  Talk about making up for your past wrongs!  Maybe they were
trying to avoid the cliche again, but they went to far on that one.    
Once again, of the $3.50 I paid for the flim, it was worth $2.50
(c) 1997 Jeremiah Rickert
--

Title
Review for Saving Private Ryan (1998)
Starring: Tom Hanks, Edward Burns, Matt Damon, Tom Sizemore
Directed by: Steven Spielberg
     For the last couple of weeks, I have been bombarded with a pile of
very lyrical and moving reviews of Steven Spielberg's realistic war-tale,
Saving Private Ryan.  The reviews themselves were as moving as any film
I'd seen, telling me that this was a film about war and humanity and the
like, the greatest American War Film ever, the best American film of the
last 10 years, one after another I read them.  My local newspaper even
went so far as to give the film five stars out of four.  I had to see this
film and I had to see it soon.
     The opening sequence of Saving Private Ryan is one of the most
harrowing, accurate (from what survivors have said in print and on TV)
brutal, wet, muddy, desperate, bloody, tense scenes in the history of
American Cinema.  For those expecting the kind of scenes that made John
Wayne a star, you are in for a shock.  There is no trumpet-blowing and
flag waving to be found as German machine guns rip the landing American
soldiers to shreds, over and over for about 30minutes.  The camera sits
the audience right in the middle, there is no omnipotent camera in this
sequence, you see and hear exactly what the soldiers see and hear, and it
causes you to want to duck as the bullets whiz passed your head and clang
off of helmets and bone.  It's a very remarkable picture of war at its
most brutal...and honest.
     This scene introduces us to Capt. John Miller and his squad of
rangers as they slowly push onto the beach.  Hanks as Miller avoids
melodrama and cliche and just does his duty, sending men to their deaths
again and again until the objective is accomplished.  Hanks leads the
strong Ensemble cast that includes Tom Sizemore as Sgt. Horvath,  (Heart
and Souls, The Relic, Heat) Edward Burns (Brothers McMullen, She's The
One) as the vocal Pvt. Reiben, Matt Damon (Good Will Hunting, Rainmaker)
as Pvt. Ryan, and Jeremy Davies (Nell, Spanking The Monkey) as map-maker
turned squad interpreter, Corporal Upham. 
     After surviving Omaha, a clerk discovers that three of the four Ryan
brothers are dead, and a fourth has just parachuted into Normandy with the
101st Airborne.  General George C. Marshall (played with gruff elegance
by Harve Presnell) decides that in order to avoid not only a PR disaster,
but another heartbroken mother (the Sullivan brothers were all killed when
the ship they were all one was destroyed) he wants a squad to find Pvt.
Ryan and bring him back home.  Miller gets to pick his best men for the
job and head to where Ryan was to have landed.  On the way they bicker
among themselves as to whether this is all worth it, and is it worth
giving their lives to save one man?  Miller insists that it's their
mission and they must follow orders.  Can he keep his squad together for
this seemingly unimportant mission?
     Overall, the film is a start, realistic picture of war, but I have to
say that overall I was a bit disappointed.  While I'm sure this will make
me unpopular with some, I have to be honest.  The main purpose of the film
seemed to be to make a realistic war film.  On this level, Spielberg and
Co. succeeded.  However, realism doesn't make great cinema.  The plot and
characters more and more fall a distant second to the realism of the
images and sounds.  I found myself less and less interested in the
characters and more and more interested in the cinematography and details
of the costumes and such.  A truly great film doesn't allow you to be
distracted by the individual parts that make it great.  I didn't sit
through L.A. Confidential marvelling at the fact that the guns and ammo
were really the ones the LAPD used in the 50s. I was more interested in
the characters.  Saving Private Ryan failed to keep me enthralled with the
characters.  
     There was a great opportunity to explore a variety of themes that
were ever-so-slightly touched on in the film, but only barely.  I wanted
to be swept up in the conflict that arises when decent humane people are
forced to be in an inhumane environment and expected to survive.  Hanks'
character embodied this very theme, but he wasn't allowed to do much with
it.  I wanted to be moved by the cameraderie between fellow soldiers, but
this is just taken for granted, we're all brothers, they just say it,
their actions rarely speak for themselves.  Spielberg obviously took a lot
of care to avoid the cliches and flag-waving of earlier films, but he
failed to make this something that Americans can relate to.  It is
entirely possible to make people feel emotionally patriotic without
resorting to cliches and manipulative imagery and music and dialogue.
When I say emotional, I only mean that the audience needs to feel a
kinship with the characters, and when characters and audience come from
such different backgrounds/eras the only thing you can do is relate to the
things that are the same in everyone, humanity, and in the case of
American audiences, the country we live in.  I found it hard to relate,
and that's what was missing in this film.  Even though the camera sets you
right in the middle of the action, it's only your eyes and ears, and not
your heart that is into it.  They just went a step too far in setting the
parameters for the film and I was very disappointed because of that.
     The opening and closing scenes of the film, with the d-day veteran (I
won't say who) visiting the graves of his fallen comrades in France in the
present were far more moving than any other part of the film.  He looks at
the crosses and says with his face "why me? Why did I survive?" It was
that humanity that the rest of the film lacked, that emotion.  Perhaps
Spileberg and Co. wanted there to be emotional detachment, the same
detachment Miller has as he sends wave after wave of his troops to be
slaughtered.  If that was the case, the film was successful, but not
engaging.
     The technical aspects of the film are of course all top-notch.  The
Cinematography by Janusz Kaminski (Jerry Maguire, Lost World, Amistad) is
at times incredible, a real achievment.  The colors, textures, and scenes
are consistently stunning.  The musical score by John Williams is adquate
to the task, only subtlely in places, so as to not overcome the music of
war.  One thing that I also liked was the fact that during the entire
opening sequence, we don't see the faces of the German soldiers until the
characters see their faces.  Just a rain of machine-gun fire, greeting
them/us on the beach.  
     Overall, the film is realistic and technically superior to previous
war films, but in my opinion it lacked the any emotional connection to the
characters and the story.  I really didn't care if they found him or not,
as long as the characters caused me to be involved in the film at a
personal level.  That did not happen.  Therefore the film was to me a
disappointment.
Of the 3.75 I paid for it, it was worth $1.85
(c) 1998 jeremiah rickert
--

Title
Review for Six Days Seven Nights (1998)
Starring: Harrison Ford, Anne Heche, David Schwimmer, Jacqueline Obradors
Directed by: Ivan Reitman
     Any film with Anne Heche manages to glom headlines because of her
public relationship with Ellen DeGeneres.  The film probably needs as much
help as it can get, despite the box-office friendly Harrison Ford and
Friend's puppy dog David Schwimmer rounding out the leads.  My first
reaction when I saw the preview for this film was "Romancing the Stone"
but without the on-screen chemistry of Turner and Douglas, and for the
most part, I was right.  
     The plot is fairly thin, relying on the interaction between
characters to drive it for the most part.  Some of their banter is funny
and cute, but the two big leads, a fashion editor played by Anne Heche
(Volcano, Wag the Dog, Donny Brasco) and a grizzled charter pilot played
by king of the box office, Harrison Ford, just don't quite seem to mesh
right on the screen, and I got the impression that if they hadn't kept
tripping and falling into each other's arms, they wouldn't have had any
relationship at all.  Their lives intertwine when Ford's Quinn flies
Heche's Robin and her fiance Frank played by David Schwimmer (Friends,
Pallbearer, Breast Men) to an island paradise where Frank has chosen to be
the place of their engagement.  They seem oh-so-happy together in
paradise, with the prospect of a long and happy married life before them.
However, because Frank arranged with Robin's boss to get the week off in
the first place, it turns out that she knows where to reach them and Robin
gets asked to fly over to Tahiti for a quick photo-shoot.  She (and $700)
convince Quinn to fly her to the shoot and leave behind his buxom island
beauty Anjelica, played by Jacqueline Obradors (Problem Child 3, Red Sun
Rising). 
     Unfortunately, or fortunately, depending on how you look at it, they
are forced to crash land because of a storm, and then all sorts of bonding
takes place.  All hope seems lost, especially when Robin accidentally
shoots their only flare into a palm tree.  With the landing gear damanged,
the radio fried, and no apparent hope for rescue, they decide to explore
the island, which leads to two scenes that seem almost purposefully
plucked from Romancing the Stone, a mud-slide-ride, and the discovery of a
crashed plane.  Luckily the plan is a Japanese pontoon boat, and LUCKILY
there happened to be a hack-saw in the plane.  The final nudges to the
plot involve some rather nasty pirates and Frank's infidelity with
Anjelica.  
     This film could have worked if the chemistry between the leads had
been better.  For some reason Ford and Heche don't really click.  They
seemed fine individually, but don't really go together.  Ford at times
reminded me of Dennis Quaid in Great Balls of Fire, making some of the
same faces and such, but really I thought the two of them did fine in
their individual roles.  Schwimmer plods through his role as the
apparently sweet and romantic frank.  However, it seems like he has so
little personality when he's away from his sitcom pals.  My theory is that
the cast of Friend's has a collective borg-esque personality, and when
they're alone they only have a tiny fragment, not enough to make a
convincing performance at anything.  (at least so far)  Ajelical also
comes up as a cliche and the two of them seem like a perfect pair.
     Reitman is primarily a comedy director and there are some funny
moments in the film, however some of them fall rather flat (like the
pirates blowing themselves up).  I also got a little bit tired of Heche's
nipples in just about every scene she was in.  It almost seems like they
should have gotten some billing or some stunt credit or something.  My
final major beef was with the amount of convenient equipment he happened
to have on board the plane, including a come-along which is just what
every pilot carries I'm sure.  I almost felt like humming the A-Team
themsong.  
     Overall, the film was all right, I'm sure Ford's star-power will
carry the film to decent returns.  I'm not sure if Heche is star power
yet, but she's certainly well-publicized.  I was disappointed by the lack
of chemistry between the leads, especially when it seems like that was the
thing driving the film on, the supporting case was pretty much
window-dressing as well, plodding through their roles with a seeming lack
of interest.  There were some good laughs, but the action and the
apparently coruncopia of hardware in his plane were a little too much for
me to swallow.
Of the $6.75 that I paid for this, it was worth about $3.00
--

Title
Review for Parent Trap, The (1998)
Starring: Dennis Quaid, Natasha Richardson, Lindsay Lohan
Directed by: Nancy Meyers
     Disney's remake department must be working overtime, trying to
ressurect their "wonderful" "hits" of the past.  We've seen remakes of
such "classics" as "The Shaggy Dog," "The Computer Who Wore Tennis Shoes"
"The Absent Minded Professor," and now "The Parent Trap."  Most of these
have been rather horrid attempts at injecting the 90s into concepts that
were borne of the 60s.  However, "The Parent Trap" outclasses all of these
others in several respects.
     Our story, as in the original, concerns a set of identical twins
living with single parents. Annie James and Hallie Parker are the twins
(played convincingly by newcomer Lindsay Lohan) who meet at summer camp.
They discover that their parents (Dennis Quaid and Tony award winner
Natasha Richardson) separated soon after they were born, each taking one
of the twins with them.  The girls were then raised without knowledge of
each other.  However, they both end up attending the same Summer Camp one
year and after at first becoming rivals at the camp, they then realize
they are twins with the same parents.  They concoct a plan to switch
places with each other, so they can meet the parent they never knew, and
then force their parents to meet again when they're unswitched.  After
switching and enjoying time with their "new" parent, it is discovered that
their father plans to remarry to a 20-something gold-digger who is only
after his money (played with slime by Elaine Hendrix).  The race is on to
get everyone in once place again and convince their father that it's their
mother he should marry.
     The parents are Nick Parker (Dennis Quaid) and Elizabeth James
(played by Tony winner Natasha Richardson).  Parker runs a winery, and
is an outdoorsey type, while James is a London Wedding Dress designer,
with a growing reputation.  Each of them seems to have done well without
the other.  
     There is some fantastic comic relief provided by each parents' hired
help.  Lisa Ann Walter (Eddie) plays Chessy, the crass, down-to-earth
housekeepr for Nick, and Simon Kunz (Goldeneye, 4 Weddings and a Funeral)
plays Martin, Elizabeth's bulter.  Each of them cares for the girls almost
as much as their parents and each gives a hand in straightening things
out.  
     The film kept me interested throughout its entirety, something that a
lot of recent big-budget films have failed to do.  The jokes range from
the very obvious to the very subtle.  In other words, there's stuff for
the young kids to laugh at, as well as the adults in the audience.  The
acting is all more than adequate, except for perhaps Quaid.  Having seen
the original, I always saw Nick Parker as a little rougher than Quaid's
portrayal.  The late Brian Keith, in the original version, was a man who
had some money, but didn't know what to do with it, was befuddled when it
came to things like dressing up and acting refined in front of a woman,
Quaid was a little too adjusted to these things, which doesn't ruin the
movie, but it takes away an element that could have made it better.  They
don't really explore the conflict between the two worlds that the new
parents live in.  Farm life is a far cry from a London design house.
     Meyers direction does the job just fine, she also had a hand in the
screenplay.  I have to give her a bravo for the long fencing duel fought
by the two twins.  Besides being rather hilarious, it had a lot of homages
to the classic duels of the past, with lots of posing, strutting, and
general braggadacio.
     Overall I was entertained by this "little" film.  It's by far the
best of the recent Disney remakes, and was more entertaining than most of
the summer blockbusters.  
Of the $6.75 that I paid for my ticket, it was worth every penny.
Copyright 1998 Jeremiah Rickert
--

Title
Review for In & Out (1997)
     A Review by Jeremiah "Spassvogel" Rickert
     I've always been a Kevin Kline fan, Silverado, Fish Called Wanda, 
Pirates of Penzance, and even his Hamlet on PBS' Great Performances.  The
minute I saw the trailer for this film, I resolved to see it.  Besides the
fact that Kline starred, it looked like a hilarious film.  I got sucker
punched by the trailer to an extent, however, as I also thought, "wow, if
there's this much funny stuff in the trailer, there must be a ton of
laughs in the rest of the film."  (Oops)
     I packed up the wife and headed to Les Cinemas Del Diablo (my name
for our local Multi-multi-plex.) The film began....
     The film concerns an English/Drama teacher at a suburban high
school, named Howard Brackett.  He loves poetry and great literary works,
but his class is more interested in his famous former student, played by
Matt Dillon.  (I'd put in his name, but my wife won't let me take notes
during a movie and I've forgotten it.) They continually interrupt his long
poetic expositions with fawning questions about him.  
     Brackett has been engaged to another teacher (played by Joan Cusack)
for three years, and has finally gotten up the gumption to marry her.  The
wedding, however, becomes the big question mark of the film as this famous
student of his says during the Live Oscar broadcast that Brackett is a
homosexual.  Kline spends most of the first two-thirds of the film
frantically trying to convince everyone that he isn't.  The whole town
begins to examine every detail of his life and begins to identifying all
those things that confirm his sexual preference.  His closest friends
don't help matters, bringing nothing but Barbara Streisand laserdiscs to
his stag party.  There are some genuinely hilarous moments, one involving
a tape geared towards helping men assert their masculinity.  
     Kline is hounded by a gay reporter played by Tom Selleck, who waxes
poetic on the benefits of coming out, while at the same time doing his
best to exploit the situation for his own sleazy tabloid machinations.  
     The movie moves along fine and slowly builds to the climax of the
wedding.  Kline stands at the Altar and is asked to take his vows...  If
you want to be surprised, don't read, I am going to reveal the ending.
...instead of saying "I do" in front of his parents and most of the town,
and even some cameras, he says "I'm Gay."  This is where the movie, in my
opinion falls apart.  Most of the humor in the film had come from Kline's
insistence that he was straight, while at the same time, loving poetry
and being a senstivie guy, dressing well, and occaisionally acting prissy.  
It reminded me of the "Effeminate Heterosexual" sketch from Saturday Night
Live.  It was funny, it was sustainably funny, and Kline's performance
made it doubly so.  However, after the wedding, the film drags on.  They
should have attempted to come to a quick conclusion, but it then gets into
the serious side of what he's done.  He reconciles with his parents and
his friends, some of which had turned on him.  There are several scenes
which seemed like a waste of time, the scene with his Mother and her
friends, which was hilarious, seemed pointless, and the scene with Tom
Selleck in the Bar with Joan seemed pointless.  
     Finally, even though I am not Catholic, I found the scene with the
Priest to be condescending.  The preist cannot believe that a man was
engaged for three years and had not consumated the relationship,
proclaiming to Brackett in the third person, "He's Gay."  It got a chuckle
from the audience, but I was distracted by it, and began to tire of the
film.  By the time the wedding had come and gone, I found myself hoping it
would be over soon.  (much like this review you are saying)
Overall, if I have to quantify it, I say, Rising Action gets **** and
Climax and falling action gets *1/2 out of *****.
See it in economy time.

Title
Review for Tomorrow Never Dies (1997)
Starring: Pierce Brosnan, Jonathan Pryce, Michelle Yeoh, Teri Hatcher
Directed by: Roger Spottiswoode
     I had been comfortable with the idea of Pierce Brosnan as 007 since
the early 80s when he was originally slated for the role.  Goldeneye was a
slight disappointment, however, as James Bond just didn't seem much like
James Bond.  With Tomorrow Never Dies, both Brosnan and those who write
for him as Bond seem comfortable with each other, and the long lasting
series of action films seems destined to continue for a long time.
     This latest offering, for the most part, can compete with various
Bond classics on some levels, but falls a bit short in others.  The plot
concerns the attempt of Media Mogul Elliot Carver to dominate the
reporting of news by making news.  Carver is played with beautiful, slimy,
arrogance by Jonathan Pryce (Glengarry Glen Ross, Evita, Miss Saigon,
Brazil).  He wants to push China and Great Britain into a war and make
sure his cameras are there to see it.  He tricks a British frigate into
invading China's waters, and then sinks it and shoots down a Chinese plane
with his hidden stealth boat.  This forces the two great superpowers into
a showdown, with him in between, firing in both directions, and getting
the news scoop at the same time.  It's up to Bond to reveal Carver's hand
and stop what could lead to a nuclear war.  
     On the way Bond runs into an old flame played by Teri Hatcher (Lois
and Clark, Heaven's Prisoners), and a Chinese agent with the same mission
played by Michelle Yeoh (Supercop). Yeoh lights up the screen with her
martial arts acrobatics and some of the same swaggering and gadgets that
Bond is famous for.  I have to say I would look foward to her appearing in
future Bond films.  Despite the fact that they both work "alone" as
agents for their respective nations, Yeoh's Mai Lin and Brosnan's James
Bond make a good team.  Joe Don Baker also reprises his role as the
American CIA agent who seems to loud and boisterous to do anything
remotely secret.  (Am I the only one who remembers he was a villain in
"The Living Daylights?)
     The action in this film is good, and there is not too much of it, as
there was in Goldeneye.  The stunts are outlandish and over-the-top as in
most Bond films, and we were treated to some bond traditions such as the
obligatory car chase and some underwater action, not to mention a
nail-biting opening sequence where Bond flies by the seat of his pants.
(Literally).  There was a lot in this film that you just do not see in the
run-of-the-mill action film, or if you do, it is so watered down that the
excitement is completely lost. (See The Peacemaker).
     Finally, the thing that nagged at me throughout the whole movie was
the interaction between Bond and his former flame, played by Teri Hatcher.
When he sees her he acts like his misses her, and has this intense sadness
and longing in his face that we NEVER, and I mean, NEVER except from 007.
The usually aloof and arrogant James Bond looked whiny and depressed, and
that cut into the Bond mystique.  It's almost like PC has caught up with
the world's least PC agent.  They dealt with that issue in a very
hilarious way in Goldeneye, but I think they dropped the ball on this one.
I wonder if it has anything to do with the death of Albert "Cubby"
Broccoli, who had been the series producer for some time.  I was reminded
of similar scenes in Batman Forever (well, just about every Batman film
really) where the Bat and the Belle De Jour (Nicole Kidman in this case)
discuss his Dark Past, and reflect on his deep dark character flaws, and
he opens up and is just a man.  James Bond is not A MAN, he's THE MAN.
That is the way that Fleming created him, and that is way he should be,
humanizing a character that is so well-established, changing them, is a
detriment, not an improvement.  
     Despite that major flaw, I found that the villian was slimy and great
in the Bond Tradition, yet still a progression from those in the past, the
action was wacky and "yeah-right" but still entertained, and the writers
managed to write one-liners and jokes that were funny, and not so obvious,
like the best from the Connery and Moore days.  There was a good balance
of Humour and Action and Suspense, but the little bits of Character Drama
threw off that balance a bit.  Despite that, I enjoyed the film, and think
it's the best Bond film since For Your Eyes Only.
My rating, of the $6.50 I paid for it, it was worth $6.50
--
