Authors
Brandon Herring 
Number of Reviews
21

Title
Review for American History X (1998)
Starring: Edward Norton, Edward Furlong, Beverly D'Angelo, Fairuza Balk.
Rated R for graphic violence and language, strong sexuality and nudity.
"American History X" is one of the most powerful, most involving movies I have
seen in a while. The whole movie is simply amazing, shooting off the center
minor times but quickly picking up where it left off. I think Edward Norton's
performance in this movie is one of the best performances in a movie to me on
record. He gets into his character so deep, he believes what the character is
doing. After a while we start to believe him, it's absolutely incredible. The
supporting cast more than supports Edward, they almost do just as great of job
as he does. The rest of the cast includes Edward Furlong, Beverly D'Angelo and
Fairuza Balk.
The movie starts out with some guys trying to break into Derek's (Edward
Nortan) car. His younger brother Danny (Edward Furlong) walks in during him and
his girlfriend having sex to tell him someone is robbing his car. Derek gets up
quickly, grabs his gun and shoots the three guys outside. The police come and
Derek is put in jail for three years. Derek is also a neo-natzi skinhead.
Before all this happened he had a group of other skinheads, meetings and
robberies. 
Danny having seen what happened, wants to follow in his brother's footsteps and
he too becomes a skinhead. His grades in school start to drop, he hangs out
with the wrong crowd and does other misc. stuff. Three years later Derek gets
out of prison. A changed man no longer a skinhead, but a person who respects
other people. Danny learns that when Derek was in prison, he was partnered with
a black man to do jobs and found out, there is no reason to hate these people.
Now years before Danny and Derek's father was killed by a drug dealer while
fighting a fire. Since then Derek has been a skinhead. His mother played
superbly by Beverly D'Angelo can not understand where she went wrong. Her other
three kids are not like that. Derek a changed man, no longer a nazi has to
fight his past when he returns, and fight the people from his past to change
his brother into a regular person.
'American History X' is definately one of 1998's best films. It has superb
acting to go along with it's excellent storyling. It's extremely believeable in
all senses, very very powerful and emotionally involving. We actually live the
lives the characters live. We are there right beside them the whole time
through the rough times and the good times. When the ending comes we are
shattered but left with a good message. 
Now the whole movie is nothing but a message. It deals with race and how we
shouldn't base someone precisely on the color of their skin, but what they are
inside. Edward Furlong gives a performance that is not only great, but his
character is really the star of the film. It's the story through his eyes, what
he sees, and what he doesn't see. If you want to see a movie that will disturb
you while making you cry, see 'American History X' it's one of the best films
made.
Reviewed by Brandon Herring August 29, 1999.
Brandon Herring
Movie Review Heaven
(http://www.geocities.com/hollywood/movie/3160/moviereviewheaven.html

Title
Review for Vampires (1998)
Starring: James Woods, Daniel Baldwin, Sheryl Lee, Thomas Ian Griffith.
Rated R for strong vampire violence and gore, language, sexuality and nudity.
John Carpenter directed this stylish and gory vampire flick to which has it's
good side and it's bad. It's held up by some good performances and dazzling
special effects leading up to an ending that's pretty satisfying. James Woods
gives an outstanding performance that almost covers up the movie. The good
side: some neat scenes of vampires and violence. The bad: No scares. Yes that's
right, even though being directed by one of horror's most cherished directors,
'Vampires' is the least bit scary, if not at all.
James Woods stars as Jack a vampire hunter out to stop the plans of the
'master' vampire Valek played by Thomas Ian Griffith whom wants vampires to
walk in the daylight. Daniel Baldwin plays his sidekick Montoya, a
wise-cracking guy who really isn't that funny. In the opening scene Jack along
with Montoya and the team of vampire hunters, find an abandoned house to which
vampire occupy. Of course we all know sunshine kills vampires, and that is just
how they kill these vampires: hooking them to ropes and dragging them outside
letting them burn to death.
After throwing a party for what happened, the vampires that did not die come
back to trash it. They kill almost all of Jack's team, leaving only a few
alive. Sheryl Lee plays a prostitute Katrina who was bitten by Valek, but not
yet turned into a vampire. She is rescued by Jack and  flees with them on their
search for Valek. They have to fight they're way against vampires, leading up
to a finale that is well-done with great special effects.
'Vampires' definately could have been done better. The make-up, special effects
and story are first rate, but there is no scares or terror that the film could
have had. It to me had more humor than horror, almost being compared to 'Fright
Night' with the mix of violence and comedy. John Carpenter does a great job of
directing this film. He eases through some tough times and saves the flaws,
which are noticeable but forgettable. The script is clever and funny, with many
lines that make us laugh out loud. 
I much enjoyed 'Vampires' with a few exceptions. It's one of those films you
see but don't take to heart. You enjoy the time you spent and go on. The
recently released 'Psycho' is the same way, it's not as good as you'd hope but
it is fun and entertaining. 'Vampires' is a good horror flick with no scares
but plenty of other content to please the viewer.
Reviewed by Brandon Herring April 29, 1999.  
Brandon Herring
Movie Review Heaven
(http://www.geocities.com/hollywood/movie/3160/moviereviewheaven.html

Title
Review for Superstar (1999)
Starring: Molly Shannon, Will Ferrell, Elaine Hendrix, Harland Williams, Mark
McKinney, Glynis Johns.
Rated PG-13 for sexual humor and language.
As an avid SNL (Saturday Night Live) viewer I sadly never got to see 'A Night
at the Roxbury'. The two brothers from that skit always cracked me up and I
enjoyed them on SNL. Of course they are silly, dumb and plotless but SNL films
are always funny and entertaining. 'Superstar' is one of those films. It's a
surprisingly warm and good-spirited movie that doesn't even feel like an SNL
movie. It has heart and at the same time lots of laughs. Molly Shannon's Mary
Katherine Gallagher character is a riot and at the same time a lovable, sweet
character that we instantly fall in love with.
Mary Katherine Gallagher is a young high school girl in hopes of big things.
One day she would like to be a superstar and has always wanted to have a big
screen kiss. She's not a very liked person in school. One of her worst enemies
is Evion (Elaine Hendrix) the head cheerleader and major bimbo. She's going out
with Skye (Will Ferrel) the most popular guy in school and captain of the
football team. Mary has always had a crush on Skye and one day would like to
kiss him. She lives a normal life, she has friends, she has a job and she has a
loving grandma whom she lives with. When she hears that there is auditions for
a talent show she knows she HAS to try out and prove to everyone she's a
superstar.
Her grandmother disapproves of it, but Mary tries out anyway. Rather she makes
it or not is what you'll find out when you see the movie. It's a clever movie
with plenty of laughs, as well as heart. Molly Shannon is a extremely talented
actress who makes us believe who she is and what she does. She has very funny
moments including make-out scenes with a tree, yes I said that right as well as
a stop sign.
Not surprisingly other critics are panning this movie and calling it dumb and
lame. But what people have to understand is that the film isn't supposed to be
an Oscar Worthy movie. All they planned when making this film was fun and
entertainment and that is what they made. I found many of the skits in the film
funny and the overall tone of the movie was surprisingly sweet. There's a few
offensive jokes (especially towards Catholic people) but none of them are
scarring or on bad terms.
Mary Katherine Gallagher is a sweet young girl who has many priceless lines
towards Evion. The ending is very satisfying and makes a warm, fuzzy feeling go
over us as we realize even movies like this can make us feel good. There are
still some good SNL characters who need their own movies. I know I was glad to
see this movie and I might even see it again. It's a great acted, funny, warm
and engaging film that works on many levels that appealed to me and may to you.
As long as you don't take it to heart 'Superstar' is a good movie. It actually
contains a good message embedded in it's storyline: People should not listen to
others on how they look or how they should act. They need to look inside
themselves and find the good things rather than the bad ones which is a real
winner. See 'Superstar' for fast-paced fun and entertainment with heart, no
more.
Reviewed by Brandon Herring October 13, 1999.
Brandon Herring
Movie Review Heaven
(http://www.geocities.com/hollywood/movie/3160/moviereviewheaven.html

Title
Review for Dogma (1999)
Rated: R for strong language, sexual dialogue, drug use, crude humor, violence
and brief nudity. 
Starring: Ben Affleck, Matt Damon, Linda Fiorentino, Salma Hayek, Alan Rickman,
Chris Rock, Kevin Smith, Jason Mewes, Jason Lee, George Carlin, Alanis
Morissette. 
Being a huge fan of Kevin Smith, I was expecting a lot out of his newest
project 'Dogma'. It might just be Kevin's best work to date. It's very funny
with smart and foul-mouthed dialogue while unexpectedly it has a serious
undertone to it and besides going against God and Jesus Christ, it actually
tries to tell people that there is such a thing rather than that there isn't.
In 1994 a little $27,000 movie premiered at Sundance. This little film was
called 'Clerks' and this little film went on to become a huge video sensation.
You really can't meet a person on this green Earth who has not seen 'Clerks'.
It was hailed by critics as one of the best movies of the year and soon a
sequel is coming. In 1995 Kevin made another movie 'MallRats' that flopped
horribly, thought it was not the best movie ever made it was a pretty good
little flick. It was panned by critics but hailed by audiences and in 1997
'Chasing Amy' came out and was Kevin's biggest success to date. Now in 1999 we
get a great little movie by the name of 'Dogma'. 
Wow! What a cast. Ok here is the plot in this movie: Linda Fiorentino plays a
regular woman who works at an abortion clinic. One day at her house Metatron
(the voice of God) appears at her house much to her surprise and tells her that
she must stop two fallen angels (Matt Damon and Ben Affleck) from getting back
into Heaven by ways of a church. Ok now get this, she is told to find two
prophets: One who talks a lot and one who doesn't, however she gets Jay and
Silent Bob instead (who give us great performances). Now on her way to New
Jersey with Jay and Silent Bob to try and stop the two angels the 13th Apostle
falls out of the sky (Chris Rock) and helps guide her to find these angels.
Salma Hayek plays Serendipity who also helps her out along her way. Azrael
(Jason Lee) who is a demon is trying to help the two angels out so that they
can win. Bethany (Linda Fiorentino) has to now use the help of all these people
to try and stop the angels before they cheat their way back to Heaven leading
to a violent and bloody end that will make you think twice about your faith. 
What a movie, it is everything rolled into one: An offensive, offbeat, smart
and sassy comedy that surprisingly has a great message at the end, and ends up
being a feel-good movie. Who would have known Kevin had such a soft side on him
that could make us know that he is a faithful person himself. Now for those of
you who get offended with this movie really should not take it to heart. Yes it
may target the Catholic community and bash them a lot, but it also seems to
rather than go against God and Heaven, it actually goes with God and Kevin
gives a message that there is a God. This review may sound confusing at first
but really the only way to understand it is to see this excellent movie. 
Kevin goes to new lengths in this hilarious comedy and gives us some great
characters with not too much background or study and rather we start to know
the characters as we watch the movie. Of course the best (and funniest) of them
all is the only duo in history that have made me fall out of my chair laughing
and that my friends are Jay and Silent Bob. Probably the best characters in
movies that I like. The star-studded cast is amazing and has some other cameos
by George Carlin, Jeanne Garafolo and so may more that we start to lose track
after a while. The script was written by Kevin Smith with many f'words in there
of course and a strong emphasis on sexual talk but he also seems to concentrate
on what is important rather that what isn't and makes us laugh at the same time
as we think. 
Chris Rock gives a hilarious performance and gets into his character very well,
with some classic lines. Linda Fiorentino is just perfect for her role and
makes us believe that she really is who she is. Of course Jason Mewes and Kevin
Smith do a great job as Jay and Silent Bob with some priceless lines from Jay
(as well as Silent Bob). Alan Rickman, Jason Lee, Salma Hayek round out the
cast with Matt Damon and Ben Affleck in the starring roles. Being Oscar Winners
for the classic 'Good Will Hunting' they give great performances here again but
Matt Damon seems just a little held back and to me did not give it all he
could. Ben however was all out and got very much into his character as well as
the story. 
The movie's only big flaw is that it has a few unfunny lines and some slow
parts to go along with it. However the direction by Kevin and the script by
Kevin as well as the priceless performance by many of the cast members, 'Dogma'
stands as a new classic and I think I can safely compare it to 'Clerks'. While
being funny at times, in the end it becomes a serious movie with an important
message that some may not agree with but can't deny it. 'Dogma' will offend
people, especially deeply religious people, but for those of you who are open
minded and want to see some very funny material then this is the movie for you.
All Kevin Smith Fans MUST SEE!! 
Reviewed by Brandon Herring November 13, 1999.
Brandon Herring
Http://www.geocities.com/hollywood/movie/3160/moviereviewheaven.html

Title
Review for House on Haunted Hill (1999)
Rated R for horror violence and gore, language and some nudity.
Starring: Geoffrey Rush, Famke Jansen, Ali Larter ,Brigette Wilson, Taye Diggs,
Chris Kattan, Lisa Loeb, James Marsters.
Running Time: 115 minutes
So here is the second of 1999's remakes of classic horror movies. The first was
the dumb, pathetic but OK remake of the classic 'The Haunting'. Now comes the
highly awaited remake of House On Haunted Hill. The classic which starred
Vincent Price as a man who pays a group of people 100,000 to stay in his house.
If they survive the night they get the money. If not well you get the
jurisdiction. Having not yet seen the film (DVD on its way) I wasn't sure if I
would really like the remake. But sure enough it comes through and has a great
storyline to fall back on. 
Geoffrey Rush (in a fantastic role with an incredible performance) is Steven
Price, the owner of an amusement park destined to scare the wits out of people.
His wife Evelyn Price is throwing a party with her friends. Steven dismays at
the idea and makes his own list. Somehow someone, or something changes that
list and five other people are invited to the party. Eddie (Taye Diggs) an
ex-baseball player, Sarah (Ali Carter) an ex-assistant who can re-wire
anything, Melissa (Brigette Wilson) a talk-show host in sorts, Dr. Blackburn
(Peter Ghallager), and Watson (Chris Kattan) a smart-mouthed humorist in ways.
What he is gonna do is pay these five people 1,000,000 dollars if they can
survive through the night. If they can they get the money, if not well they
don't. 
The House On Haunted Hill used to be an insane asylum. Years before mental
patients broke out and killed the Dr. there, forcing him to lock the place up
because if he died, so did they. Everyone who was in there burned to death. Now
it is Steven Price's home and he is throwing this party for these five people.
What starts out as a seemingly normal night, turns into a horrifying, blood
splattering night. The deep dark secrets of what really happened in that asylum
and why those guests are actually there are revealed. One-by-one the people
start to disappear. Conspiracies start to turn up, and Steven Price finds out
that his house may be alive after all. The people find rooms, which once held
mental patients. Rooms which once had people dying. Rooms which may still
contain these people. Now these five people must try and survive the night and
try and survive the house, and they must survive each other with terrorfying
results.
Since I officially haven't seen the original I can't say which is better. I can
say however I liked this movie. Geoffrey Rush gives a one in a million
performance as the rich Steven Price, and does a great job doing a Vincent
Price role. Famke Jansen as his wife was great and even kind of eerie at times.
Ali Carter and Taye Diggs sort of become the main characters and Ali Carter who
debuted in Varsity Blues gives a fantastic performance here as does Taye Diggs.
Chris Kattan gives us great comic relief and the movie contains a lot of
comical lines. Peter Ghallager and Brigette Wilson were great as well and gave
commanding performances as potential victims.
The plot was well conceived and was very absorbing. The movie has atmosphere
the whole way through that is disturbing and creepy, and even sometimes
downright scary. I found even the opening credits to me a little ominous. One
thing I knew not to expect was a 'Haunting' type movie with special effects
galore. Even though it had fantastic gore and special effects, the movie has
only a 19 million dollar budget, which doesn's show all the way through but you
can tell. The movie was written well, and it's only major flaw is the
under-developed characters and plot holes that we are left with.
The ending is quite clever and some may not even get it. I must say House On
Haunted Hill was a surprise. I was expecting another Haunting with special
effects, no scares and a dumb ending. Instead I found a good Halloween movie
with gore, scares and great acting. House On Haunted Hill is one of those
movies you really can't take seriously. Though it is a well-made movie with a
good storyline it still has some flaws. But besides that the movie is fun,
smart and scary and makes us wonder why remakes like this can't be made all the
time!
Reviewed By Brandon Herring October 28, 1999.
Brandon Herring
Movie Review Heaven
(http://www.geocities.com/hollywood/movie/3160/moviereviewheaven.html

Title
Review for Pokémon the First Movie: Mewtwo Strikes Back (1999)
Rated: G but contains mild animated violence. 
Voices...Veronica Taylor, Racheal Lillis, Eric Stuart, Iikue Ootani. 
Ok so your probably wondering why I gave this movie the rating I did. Well the
answer is because the movie was actually good. Even though you can tell it's
definitely made for kids, the message it gives in the end and it's charming
characters bring out the good side in the movie and cover up the bad. It's far
from being a great movie however kids will love it because it is Pokemon and
parents will like it because of the end and the important message it gives to
kids without being mean or complicated. 
Since there really isn't a strong plot I will try and explain it the best I
can. Ash is a Pokemon trainer trying to become one of the world's best. He
receives an invitation to go to a championship hosted by the world's best
Pokemon trainer. Ash of course being a trainer wants to immediately go and
compete. Well in the meantime a new Pokemon has been created from another
Pokemon. This Pokemon is Mewtwo, an evil psychic Pokemon which can read
people's mind and wants to take over the Earth. While Ash is on his way to the
Pokemon championship, Mewtwo causes a big storm so no one can pass through and
get there. Other trainers however take their Pokemon to get them there and
eventually do as does Ash. What Mewtwo's evil plans are to clone all the
Pokemon and make them fight each other. Ash has to try and stop him in a battle
in the end that will leave you heartbroken as well as feeling good with it's
important message of fighting. 
That's about all there is. Pokemon: The First Movie is not Disney, you can tell
that by first glance. The story is one that is light and fluffy with a heart
hidden below somewhere we can't see. From the plush animation and rich colors
to the kicking soundtrack with some great songs and noticeable voices. Pokemon
has become a big thing in the last couple of months: Trading Cars, Toys,
Clothes you name it Pokemon is on it. My little brother and sister are huge
Pokemon fans and do not miss any episode and if they do they are depressed
until the next episode comes on. 
You really can't meet a kid now who doesn't like Pokemon. It's the new trend
I'm sure other things have been big like this but when both theatres sell out
on the first day, it's a big bet Pokemon is going to be huge. I've also heard
that this was Japan's biggest grossing movie of all time. You can call it an
anime if you want, but I really do not think it deserves the name of an anime.
The movies only real big flaws come from spots that are so slow that it could
put one to sleep and that fact that it takes itself too seriously at times even
though the TV series doesn't. 
When you see Pokemon you wonder why this just couldn't be a direct-to-video
feature. I mean it is a low-brow kids movie with overviews of humor and
violence. But it has something there that makes it worth all the while and
trouble to see it. I wasn't surprised that all the kids came out of the movie
with a huge smile on their face saying over and over Pika Pika after the cute
and cuddly little Pokemon Pikachu. 
Overall Pokemon: The First Movie is a surprisingly sweet, funny and good
animated movie that the whole family can enjoy. With it's lovable character,
plush and colorful animation and humor all embedded in one Pokemon fans will
not be let down. Kids will definitely love it for the fact it's Pokemon and
it's big important message at the end will make parents proud and knowing that
even though a movie is all about fighting it can actually be against it too.
Doesn't make any sense? See the movie. 
Reviewed by Brandon Herring    November 10, 1999 
Brandon Herring
Http://www.geocities.com/hollywood/movie/3160/moviereviewheaven.html

Title
Review for Pokémon the First Movie: Mewtwo Strikes Back (1999)
Pokemon: The First Movie (Mewtwo Strikes Back)
Rated: G but contains mild animated violence. 
Voices...Veronica Taylor, Racheal Lillis, Eric Stuart, Iikue Ootani. 
Ok so your probably wondering why I gave this movie the rating I did. Well the
answer is because the movie was actually good. Even though you can tell it's
definitely made for kids, the message it gives in the end and it's charming
characters bring out the good side in the movie and cover up the bad. It's far
from being a great movie however kids will love it because it is Pokemon and
parents will like it because of the end and the important message it gives to
kids without being mean or complicated. 
Since there really isn't a strong plot I will try and explain it the best I
can. Ash is a Pokemon trainer trying to become one of the world's best. He
receives an invitation to go to a championship hosted by the world's best
Pokemon trainer. Ash of course being a trainer wants to immediately go and
compete. Well in the meantime a new Pokemon has been created from another
Pokemon. This Pokemon is Mewtwo, an evil psychic Pokemon which can read
people's mind and wants to take over the Earth. While Ash is on his way to the
Pokemon championship, Mewtwo causes a big storm so no one can pass through and
get there. Other trainers however take their Pokemon to get them there and
eventually do as does Ash. What Mewtwo's evil plans are to clone all the
Pokemon and make them fight each other. Ash has to try and stop him in a battle
in the end that will leave you heartbroken as well as feeling good with it's
important message of fighting. 
That's about all there is. Pokemon: The First Movie is not Disney, you can tell
that by first glance. The story is one that is light and fluffy with a heart
hidden below somewhere we can't see. From the plush animation and rich colors
to the kicking soundtrack with some great songs and noticeable voices. Pokemon
has become a big thing in the last couple of months: Trading Cars, Toys,
Clothes you name it Pokemon is on it. My little brother and sister are huge
Pokemon fans and do not miss any episode and if they do they are depressed
until the next episode comes on. 
You really can't meet a kid now who doesn't like Pokemon. It's the new trend
I'm sure other things have been big like this but when both theatres sell out
on the first day, it's a big bet Pokemon is going to be huge. I've also heard
that this was Japan's biggest grossing movie of all time. You can call it an
anime if you want, but I really do not think it deserves the name of an anime.
The movies only real big flaws come from spots that are so slow that it could
put one to sleep and that fact that it takes itself too seriously at times even
though the TV series doesn't. 
When you see Pokemon you wonder why this just couldn't be a direct-to-video
feature. I mean it is a low-brow kids movie with overviews of humor and
violence. But it has something there that makes it worth all the while and
trouble to see it. I wasn't surprised that all the kids came out of the movie
with a huge smile on their face saying over and over Pika Pika after the cute
and cuddly little Pokemon Pikachu. 
Overall Pokemon: The First Movie is a surprisingly sweet, funny and good
animated movie that the whole family can enjoy. With it's lovable character,
plush and colorful animation and humor all embedded in one Pokemon fans will
not be let down. Kids will definitely love it for the fact it's Pokemon and
it's big important message at the end will make parents proud and knowing that
even though a movie is all about fighting it can actually be against it too.
Doesn't make any sense? See the movie. 
Reviewed by Brandon Herring    November 10, 1999 

Title
Review for Perfect Blue (1997/I)
Unrated contains (all animated) graphic violence and gore, a strong rape scene,
nudity and some language.
Anime films have always been awesome to me, I haven't seen many, but what I did
see made me hooked on them. Now I finally get to see the brand new anime film
'Perfect Blue' as I would put it is that it is a cartoon with Hitchcock
highlights. A cartoon which is not for kids at least under the age of 14. With
it's high quotient of graphic violence and copious gore, it's a mature film
made to be viewed by adults.
Mima is a popular star in a Japanese pop group. After wanting to pursue an
acting career, despite the personal opinion of her agent, she becomes an
actress and gets a part in a thriller. Someone however does not like the fact
that Mima is out of the pop light, and has become an actress, someone is
watching Mima, every move she makes, killing off people she knows, now she has
to try and figure out rather her career or her life comes first...
Despite a few slow parts in the film, this is a great psychological thriller.
It takes on a journey to places where our minds are challenged, we have to
think about what is happening. The lead character Mima is so well-thought out,
you'd think she was real. Even being a cartoon at times the film seemed like a
live action movie, with some intense scenes. Towards the middle of the film it
becomes a little confusing on our part, but quickly descends back into it's
brilliant mind.
The animation is plush and colorful, with the character well-animated. The
movie does contain content that some viewers may not like or even be offended
by. Graphic violence does occur in the film, but not all the time. Of course it
is animated, but with the violence is alot of blood and gore, some resulting in
bloody messes. The movie has a way to captivate us, and make us part of the
story. The direction of the film, writing and the way it is brought to us is
very original and innovative.
'Perfect Blue' is probably the best adult cartoon movie I've seen in a while.
It pays homage to Hitchcock, has the animation to satisfy any animation buff,
the intensity to make someone uncomfortable. I also found the film to make me
think about what can happen, and by the end of the film some shocking stuff
happens in the storyline, which I would have never thought possible. A
wonderfully entertaining movie, that all anime fans should love.
Reviwed by Brandon Herring September 11, 1999.
Brandon Herring
Movie Review Heaven
(http://www.geocities.com/hollywood/movie/3160/moviereviewheaven.html

Title
Review for Double Jeopardy (1999)
Starring: Ashley Judd, Tommy Lee Jones, Annabeth Gish, Bruce Greenwood, Michael
Gaston.
Rated R for violence, language and some sexuality.
Underrated movies are a common reoccurrence in show business today. 1998's
'Hope Floats' was extremely underrated and was one of the best movies of the
year. We always get films that make big money at the box-office but critics and
audiences pan on them. This year 'Double Jeopardy' is one of those films.
Critics are calling it predictable and worthless, audiences are disappointed
with it and think it was a disappointment. But as I viewed 'Double Jeopardy' I
found that it was a great movie, it has a surprising sense of humor and a big
dose of heart, along with heart-pounding suspense and twists and turns here and
there it certainly is a really good movie.
The always wonderful Ashley Judd plays Libby Parsons, a woman with a seemingly
normal life: a great loving husband, a beautiful son and a great friend. Her
husband Nick Parsons has made a surprise for her and is going to buy her the
sailboat she has always wanted. After a night of bliss Libby wakes up in the
middle of the night to find blood all over her and all over the sailboat, her
husband is missing and there is a bloody knife on deck. Of course being in
shock she picks it up and a coast guard comes over and sees her.
However she isn't immediately ceased until they find out his life insurance was
worth two-million dollars and they start to wonder rather she killed him for
the money. She pleads not-guilty but is found guilty and sent to prison for six
years. While making a phone call to her best friend who adopted her son for her
and she hears him say hi to his dad, which makes Libby's heart stop right
there. She realizes she must get out and prove that he isn't dead, one of her
cell-mates tells her that as long as she has been convicted of a crime she
cannot be convicted of it again. Which means she can shoot him in the middle of
Mardi Gras and they cannot do anything about it.
After she gets out she goes to a halfway house run by parole officer Tommy Lee
Jones. He is a man who has had his share of bad things. While out for the day
she breaks into a school and tries to track down her kid and husband, leading
up to some jaw-dropping twists that are both predictable and not. Whatever
happens the film was excellent to me. I found the writing well-written as well
as the acting was great. Ashley Judd is such a talented and beautiful actress
that she is a hero in a sort in this movie. Even if you know what is going to
happen in the end, you don't know how. 
This is one of those movies that you really do know what is going to happen,
except you don't know how they are going to make it happen. It could be one way
or another, it could be this way or that way. The movie is highly stylized and
extremely well-made. It gets most of it's power from the two leads: Ashley Judd
and Tommy Lee Jones both give excellent performances. The characters are
well-realized and believable and we feel Libby's pain when she cannot see her
child for 6 years.
Even though a lot of critics didn't like the film, I loved it. The director
took his time making the movie, and put a lot of shadowing in the movie. I
found it not to be boring at all and it's only flaw comes from some
predictability. It moved at a fast pace, has suspense, humor, heart and great
acting. It earns it's right to be a great movie and to me that's what it was.
Reviewed by Brandon Herring October 13, 1999.
Brandon Herring
Movie Review Heaven
(http://www.geocities.com/hollywood/movie/3160/moviereviewheaven.html

Title
Review for Sleepy Hollow (1999)
Rated: R for graphic horror violence and gore, and some sexuality. (And TONS of
heads)
Starring: Johnny Depp, Christina Ricci, Miranda Richardson, Casper Van Dien,
Michael Gambon, Christopher Walken, Christopher Lee, Martin Landau.
Only Tim Burton could to it: Make a big-budgeted horror flick based on the
classic tale by Washington Irving....and make it great. 'Sleepy Hollow' works
on so many levels that in the middle of the movie, I had a huge smile on my
face and thought 'Man this is awesome!'. Of course most of you know the Legend
of Sleepy Hollow and the book by Washington Irving which has always been one of
my favorites. TIm Burton directs with such skill that he has created one of the
most beautiful films put on print.
The movie opens with a creepy and scary little montage of the Headless
Horseman's first victim. From there on we meet Ichabod Crane (Johnny Depp) New
York's constable who is sent in my the judge of the town to Sleepy Hollow where
many people have been losing something there. Here in Sleepy Hollow he stays
with the Van Tassel's. He hears the story of the headless horseman and does not
really know what to believe, he meets the Van Tassel's daughter Katrina
(Christina Ricci), who's mother and father are Lady Van Tassel (Miranda
Richardson) and Baltus Van Tassel (Michael Gambon). He really doesn't believe
in the fairy tales of the headless horseman until he himself has an encounter
with him which scares him out of his wits. He however sets out to find the
headless horseman, and for once and for all stop him from killing
again....before he becomes the next victim. 
I must say the best things about this movie are: Johnny Depp's wonderfully
comical performance which he does so good it would almost surpass his Edward
Scissorhand's performance. Christina Ricci seems to also give one of her best
performances to date with strong back-up from Miranda Richardson (always good)
and Michael Gambon. I think the strongest thing of the movie however is the
Headless Horseman himself. Part CGI part man in suit, he is nothing more than
astonishing. He looks incredibly like he has no head, and when you see him a
chill goes down your spine. When he rides his horse its very creepy and when he
chops off someone's head it really does make you scared. For the person who
plays the Headless Horseman he was well-cast and very scary when they tell how
he died. 
Astonishingly enough this isn't the kids story it was before. This is a very
mature film that has so much smartness and cleverness in it, that you have to
wonder why it could not have been made before. It has a dark, creepy atmosphere
and a beautiful setting with incredible costumes. The whole film has a sort of
gothic feel to it, and may be too dark for some people. It is also incredibly
gory and bloody with over twenty beheadings, all resulting in bloody messes.
The beheadings are also very graphic and only one or two are off screen. The
violence and gore may not appeal to everyone so I am just trying to warn you so
you know about it. For those fans and even non-fans of the horror genre I don't
think you will be disappointed.
The directing was also incredible and Tim Burton did just like he did with
Batman and gives it a special touch to be something you didn't think it would
be. He did a great job with shadowing and in the end it's very surprising and
satisfying. One flaw was some slow parts in the movie and one scene that went
on forever, but besides that 'Sleepy Hollow' doesn't have much wrong with it.
The performances are all strong  (except Casper Van Dien YUCK!)as is the clever
writing with a surprising amount of comedy.
Even though the story has been done many times before, this one seems to the be
the best of them all. The 65m dollar budget shows quite clearly and in the end
pays off. It is a beautiful film, with some amazing camerawork, along with the
neat little opening titles. The film is very intense, with some downright scary
moments that had me holding on to my arm chair. 'Sleepy Hollow' does have a few
changes in it than the movie did and adds some surprising twists especially in
the end, and the person who plays The Headless Horseman was quite scary and
well-cast.
'Sleepy Hollow' will go down as a new classic in the horror genre, and shall
not be remade anymore. I would not be surprised if this movie is a hit with
both the young and old crowd. The movie is all entertaining, scary, funny and
gory. It has a touch of this and a touch of that and should have something to
impress or please someone. TIm Burton gives us a great film worthy of the
rating above. With its creepy atmosphere, its graphic violence and witty comedy
'Sleepy Hollow' is nothing but a great movie.
Reviewed by Brandon Herring November 18, 1999.
Brandon Herring
Http://www.geocities.com/hollywood/movie/3160/moviereviewheaven.html

Title
Review for Bachelor, The (1999)
Starring: Chris O'Donnell, Rene Zellwegar, Artie Lange, Ed Anser, Hal Holbrook,
James Cromwell, Marley Shelton, Mariah Carey.
Well there goes another one. Sadly this like other movies this year wasn't
good. This one being almost as bad as 'The Omega Code' but not quite. From the
opening credits I had a good feeling this would be bad, and well I guess I was
right. With bad excuses for acting, a horrible screenplay and straight-out bad
direction 'The Bachelor' is a terribly unfunny movie that doesn't work on any
levels accept that fact that Rene Zellwegar who does give a good performance.
The two cameos by Brooke Shields and Mariah Carey are also good with Brooke
being the best. The movie is troubled from the start because Chris O'Donnell is
hugely miscast and gives one of the worst performances to date.
Here is the stupid plot: Chris O'Donnell plays Jimmie Shelton a man who has
just broken up with his girlfriend, he meets Anne (Rene Zellwegar) they
instantly hit it off and are together for three years. Jimmie decides that he
wants to bring their relationship a little bit up. He really doesn't realize
that Anne thinks he wants to marry her (what he wants I never did catch). So he
proposes in a really bad way, and she shoots him down and is very mad. He of
course tries to apologize but nothing seems to help any. Then his grandfather
dies and he learns that he has left Jimmie 100 million dollars....as long as he
marries before the next day at 6:05 pm. Now Jimmie must find Anne and try to
marry her to get the money and because he loves her, or get married to someone
else to get the money itself, leading to an un-funny and predictable ending
that leaves a bad taste in our mouths.
Ok so maybe this could be one of the dumbest, cliched, silliest romantic comedy
to date that has no real big laughs. Even the supporting roles of Artie Lange,
Hal Holbrook and Ed Anser aren't even good. The plot was a good idea, but the
script would have to have been written in less than five minutes and by a five
year old. The choppy dialogue and bad directing don't help things any. Even
though Chris O'Donnell gave an OK performance in the two Batman movies, he does
not give even a remotely good or funny performance here and I wanted to boo and
throw my pop at the screen to get rid of him.
Rene Zelweggar is a different story and gave a charming, sweet and likable
performance (as usual) and really was the only thing that saved this confused
movie from being a total huge washout. Her sister played by Marley Shelton is
also good and the two have good chemistry onscreen. Brooke Shields showed up in
a funny little performance as a big-headed mogul who after a while became
routine and old. One really can't help but think that we have seen this stuff
before. It's not like this is an original idea and in the end, everyone knows
what is going to happen due do its cliches and typicalness.
'The Bachelor' works on no good levels and in fact doesn't work at all. Ed
Anser and Hal Holbrook were wasted in terrible roles and Mariah Carey can not
act to save her soul, and this could be the only film of her movie career
dispite her terrific music career. Chris O'Donnell is not as bad an actor as
Casper Van Dien but that is not saying a great deal. He seems held back and
really doesn't get into his character much and after even the first 30 minutes
gets annoying and old. Artie Lange just to me seems like he is trying to
another Chris Farley and was completely unfunny and un-nerving.
Why the filmmakers would want to waste such a cast in such a bad movie, with
such bad acting and dialogue is a question only they will know. Maybe they
thought it would become a hit or a critical success, and sometimes I don't
agree with other critics on movies, even from the trailers for this film they
made it look bad and showed all the mildly funny parts. Its based on the 1925
silent film 'Seven Chances' which I am sure is very better than this mess. Even
though some may think of this as a good date movie, most who see this will want
to pull out thier hair and scream for thier money back. 
Besides being a terrible movie, 'The Bachelor' is well a terrible movie. It has
nothing worth recommending therefore I really can't recommend this movie. I did
not have a good time and I laughed only three times. The running time of the
movie is 106 minutes which is wayyyy over time and needs to be shortened at
least thirty minutes. Parts of it seems to go on forever and parts of seem to
not last enough time. Being one of the worst movies of the year, we can be sure
that I hope they will not make anymore stupid unfunny romantic comedies, and if
they do they I give up on filmmakers.
Reviewed by Brandon Herring  November 13, 1999.
Brandon Herring
Http://www.geocities.com/hollywood/movie/3160/moviereviewheaven.html

Title
Review for South Park: Bigger, Longer and Uncut (1999)
Rated R for strong language, crude sexual humor, violence and some nudity.
Voices.....Trey Parker, Matt Stone, George Clooney, Minnie Driver.
"South Park: Bigger, Longer and Uncut" is undoubtedly crude, offensive,
mean-spirited movie, that comes off as a politcally correct movie too. If your
Canadian, a strong Christian, fat, gay or anything else, you will be offended.
But when you watch this movie, there is no doubt that you will laugh.
Based on the wildly popular Comedy Central TV show, South Park stars Cartman,
an overweight , foul-mouthed kid, with attitude, and a sweet side. Kenny, a
poor kid who gets killed in every episode, and talks with his coat hood
covering his head. Stan a regular, sometimes boring kid who has problems with
women. And Kyle a lonely jew who talks to his poop.
The movie opens with a funny, but messageable song, that all of the people of
South Park sing. Cartman, Stan, Kenny and Kyle are very excited to see the new
Terrance And Phillip (Beavis and Butthead types) movie "Asses of Fire". But
when the kids get up to the movie to get the tickets, they learn the movie is
rated R, which of course means that anyone under the age of 17 cannot get in
without a parent or legal guardian. The kids do not understand this, and they
pay a homeless man to buy their tickets.
While in the movie, laughing at the movie, Terrance and Phillip cuss repeatedly
entertaining the kids. They kids then go out and cuss themselves, getting in
trouble and causing Kyle's mom to go against the MPAA. While doing this Kenny
learns a thing or to, by proving to Cartman he can light his fart on fire.
Kenny does so, dies, and goes to hell, to find out that Satan and Saddam
Huiessan (homosexual lovers), are about to take over the world, if Terrance and
Phillip die.
>From here on, nothing more should be said to keep the rest a surprise. But
believe me, this isn't your regular South Park TV show, and should not be seen
by anyone under 14 or more. This film contains extreme profanity (over 130 "f"
words and a collection of others). But beyond being bad in a tasteless type
way, South Park: Bigger, Longer and Uncut has many messages that are embedded
inside it. But I bet you will not leave the movie, for at least laughing one
time or more. And enjoying yourself. Take it from me, South Park: B, L, and U,
isn't as good as you'd hope, but it is good for some laughs.
Reviewed: July 14th, 1999.
Brandon Herring
Movie Review Heaven
(http://www.geocities.com/hollywood/movie/3160/moviereviewheaven.html

Title
Review for Deuce Bigalow: Male Gigolo (1999)
WARNING!: MAY CONTAIN SOME MILD SPOILERS AND OFFENSIVE MATERIAL. 
Rated: R (!) for sexual content, crude and sexual humor, and some nudity.. (A
mild R rating) 
Starring: Rob Schneider, Oded Fehr, Eddie Griffin, Arija Bareikis, Amy Poehler,
Norm McDonald. 
"Deuce Bigalow: Male Gigolo" is simply a hilarious good-natured comedy that may
offend some, but underneath all it's crude humor and sexual content is a sweet
little love story that is surprisingly involving. It isn't any kind of
cinematic classic, but it's a very very funny comedy that keeps us entertained
until the end credits which themselves are funny too. It has all it needs to be
a breezy entertaining comedy: the acting is up to pace and some of the
performances quite funny, the screenplay is witty and smart, and the whole
story is sweet and cute. 
Deuce Bigalow (Rob Schneider) is your typically average guy: He cleans fish
tanks for a living and gets an average of 10 bucks for it. Though one might
call him a loser, Deuce gets a job he would never thought he would get. He gets
to clean the tank for a Male Gigolo (Oded Fehr) and gets offered to watch over
his place while he goes on a trip. Trying to be like him he hangs upside down
from a pole and accidentally pushes off the fishtank and burns his cabinets.
The thing is now he has to try and find $6,000 dollars in three weeks to make
sure everything looks right again. So he decides to go "Man-whoring" and to his
luck gets the oddest people on Earth: An over-weight woman who decidedly wants
to eat everything in site, a woman with Narcolepsy who sleeps all the time, a
woman who has sudden screaming outbursts, and a woman he can't stop thinking
about. He charges $10 but he is willing to negotiate. From now on he is
considered Deuce Bigalow: Male Gigolo. 
With non-stop laughs an a abundence of crude humor "Deuce Bigalow: Male Gigolo"
is sometimes like last years hit "There's Something About Mary" that is
offensive but very funny. The screenplay by Harris Goldberg and Rob Schneider
himself is a smart, clever and witty screenplay that seems to have been written
with care to make is so hilariously funny. The characters in the film are all
actually likable especially "Jabba Lady" with her big body but soft heart.
There are actually times in the movie where I fell out of my chair laughing so
hard that my stomach was killing me. Even though I thought "Toy Story 2" and
"Being John Malkovich" were the funniest of the year "Deuce Bigalow" follows
right behind them. 
The directing by Mike Mitchell is fantastic and shows he took time on the film.
Rob Schneider gives a surprisingly endearing performance and when his romance
develops with one of his customers Kate (Arija Bareikis) it is a sweet romance
that we get involved in and actually like being involved in it. "Deuce Bigalow"
is a good-natured film worth all the merit it can get. Its not a classic or a
masterpiece, it's just a comedy that we don't feel bad about watching. Sure it
may come off as offensive and may come off as dumb sometimes, but you cannot
deny that it isn't funny. 
"Deuce Bigalow: Male Gigolo" is no disappointment. Its a fast paced,
entertaining sweet and hilarious comedy that may be destined to become a cult
classic. Fans of Schneider will not be disappointed and fans of crude but nice
comedies will not either. For some reason the film garnered an R rating but
with no "f words" or extensive use of sexual content or explicit nudity I was
really wondering why the film was R. A mild R to put it to the least, but even
if your under 17 or above at least 13 this film is good enough for you to see.
Don't try to be one of those people who make so much of a film that they do not
like it, just sit back, laugh and enjoy the movie. 
Reviewed by Brandon Herring December 9, 1999
Brandon Herring
Http://www.geocities.com/hollywood/movie/3160/moviereviewheaven.html

Title
Review for Matrix, The (1999)
Picture: * * *˝
The picture on this DVD in incredible. Besides a few moments where it is a
little dark, the picture is sharp and clear. Without having any lines or
anything. To me the picture could have been mastered a bit brighter in some
scenes, but then again the film in the theatre was dark too.
Sound- * * * *
Incredible. The film has 3 ch. English Dolby Surround 5.1, with music-only
audio only tracks and commentaries during the film from the cast and crew. When
you are in a theatre with great sound and the sound is behind you, even if you
have only 2 speakers, the 5.1 surround really is around you and amazing. I
would recommend getting audio equipment or speakers for best expierience.
Special Features- * * * *
The best feature of the DVD is the special features. It contains bio's of the
crew, including awards they've won, films they were in where they were born and
so on. It also has a great feature called 'Follow The White Rabbit' in which a
little rabbit icon appears at the bottom of the screen and when you press
select the DVD shows you how they made that certain special effect. Also it
contains the HBO First Look: The Matrix, a documentary of the making of the
film, 'Take the Red Pills' which shows you more of the making of the film
including the bullet scene. It also has scene selection, english subtitles,
Interactive menus, and enhanced features for your DVD-Rom PC, which includes
Are You The One? Challenge, Screenplay, Storyboards, and the genre essays 'Do
you know kung fu" Original theatrical website and sampler trailers.
Film Rating- * * *
Some may be disappointed with The Matrix. I'll tell you I was. I sat there and
sat there and sat there waiting for something to happen. Now wait wait, I know
most of you loved it, and I'm not saying I didn't like it. What I'm saying is
the first half was extremely slow. Now seeing the trailer it makes you think
the whole entire movie is one big special effects show. Don't be fooled, this
movie has a big story. And big chunks of talky moments. But I will admit the
special effects and the acting were above par, deserving the rating above.
Ok now to the story. Well this may take a while. Ok first of all, our world we
live in now, is not the real world, actually we live inside a computer
generated world known as The Matrix. A man played by Keanu Reeves is about to
find that out, when is kidnapped and almost coaxed to go into the real world.
He does so, and finds out that he can do anything, be anything he wants to be.
But he has to fight a 'Matrix skipping' bad guy, who wants to send him back to
his own world or destroy him.
Laurence Fishburne, his guide of sorts plays his character well as does Keanu
Reeves. But I sat in the theatre for over and hour wondering where all the
special effects were. Yeah there were some in the first half but not enough.
The trailer for this movie was really decieving making people think that this
was a special effects laden movie.
Now for the second half, it is explosive, and saves the movie. Some of the
special effects and fighting were breathtaking. The sound, the music, and all
the effects were effective, and the last hour kept us entertained. But with a
running time of 2 hours and 20 minutes, this movie is at least 40 minutes too
long. One would have wished for a better 'Matrix', but I do have to say, I did
like it and I was entertained.
Overall DVD Rating- * * *˝
The Special Features, sound, picture and film are all good on the DVD. Though
the film wasn't as great as I thought it would be and a bit slow in parts the
special effects were definately amazing. The 5.1 Surround was absolutely
incredible, and I would definately recommend the DVD of 'The Matrix.
Reviewed by Brandon Herring September 28, 1999.
Brandon Herring
Movie Review Heaven
(http://www.geocities.com/hollywood/movie/3160/moviereviewheaven.html

Title
Review for Lake Placid (1999)
Rated R for violence and gore, and for language.
Starring: Bill Pullman, Oliver Platt, Bridget Fonda.
'Lake Placid' is definately not your typical creature attacking people movie,
ok so maybe it is, but this one is enjoyable, and clever. Actually it comes off
more of a comedy than a horror film. Well the ending is kinda scary, but in
most horror/comedies they are. I will admit that 'Lake Placid' isn't an Oscar
Worthy film, but it does come off as an inventive movie that is original and
funny.
Bridget Fonda plays a palentologist who after finding out her boyfriend is
cheating, is forced to go to Lake Placid and investigate a tooth, after a man
is bit in half. She gets there but really doesn't understand why she is there.
Bill Pullman plays a man also investigating what happened, along with the
sherriff and a rich croc obsessed man, they go out and find what is going on.
What they find though isn't great. A huge and I mean huge crocodile is living
in Lake Placid, over 150 years old, he has migrated here for who knows why. 
They have to fight against the croc and try to trap him so they can study him
and see where he came from. Betty White plays a woman who lives on the shores
of Lake Placid, and well you'll have to see the movie to find out. Her
character is very funny and foul-mouthed, which is surprising to hear Betty
spew words and phrases that are pretty bad, but funny. 
To me the movie came off as a spoof of Jaws. With the opening sequence, and
some others, it is not original and is. When you watch this movie, you
definately notice the smartness and cleverness of it. David E. Kelly who is the
mastermind of The Practice and Ally McBeal, writes this movie with ease and
surprisingly does a great job. The characters have smartmouths, two foul, and
some great one-liners. 
But believe me, don't take 'Lake Placid' too seriously or you won't like it.
But it is a movie that can be enjoyed as a fun 'popcorn' type movie. But I
guess it rates above the 'popcorn' rating. Sit back, watch the movie, laugh,
scream, and whatever you want. Even though the movie is R, and I put violence
and gore. There's really not that much gore, but what there is might seem kinda
gross to some. 'Lake Placid' is a smart, clever, funny, and scary movie that I
enjoyed and I think you will too.
Reviewed: July 21, 1999.
Brandon Herring
Movie Review Heaven
(http://www.geocities.com/hollywood/movie/3160/moviereviewheaven.html

Title
Review for Superstar (1999)
Starring: Molly Shannon, Will Ferrell, Elaine Hendrix, Harland Williams, Mark
McKinney, Glynis Johns.
Rated PG-13 for sexual humor and language.
As an avid SNL (Saturday Night Live) viewer I sadly never got to see 'A Night
at the Roxbury'. The two brothers from that skit always cracked me up and I
enjoyed them on SNL. Of course they are silly, dumb and plotless but SNL films
are always funny and entertaining. 'Superstar' is one of those films. It's a
surprisingly warm and good-spirited movie that doesn't even feel like an SNL
movie. It has heart and at the same time lots of laughs. Molly Shannon's Mary
Katherine Gallagher character is a riot and at the same time a lovable, sweet
character that we instantly fall in love with.
Mary Katherine Gallagher is a young high school girl in hopes of big things.
One day she would like to be a superstar and has always wanted to have a big
screen kiss. She's not a very liked person in school. One of her worst enemies
is Evion (Elaine Hendrix) the head cheerleader and major bimbo. She's going out
with Skye (Will Ferrel) the most popular guy in school and captain of the
football team. Mary has always had a crush on Skye and one day would like to
kiss him. She lives a normal life, she has friends, she has a job and she has a
loving grandma whom she lives with. When she hears that there is auditions for
a talent show she knows she HAS to try out and prove to everyone she's a
superstar. 
Her grandmother disapproves of it, but Mary tries out anyway. Rather she makes
it or not is what you'll find out when you see the movie. It's a clever movie
with plenty of laughs, as well as heart. Molly Shannon is a extremely talented
actress who makes us believe who she is and what she does. She has very funny
moments including make-out scenes with a tree, yes I said that right as well as
a stop sign. 
Not surprisingly other critics are panning this movie and calling it dumb and
lame. But what people have to understand is that the film isn't supposed to be
an Oscar Worthy movie. All they planned when making this film was fun and
entertainment and that is what they made. I found many of the skits in the film
funny and the overall tone of the movie was surprisingly sweet. There's a few
offensive jokes (especially towards Catholic people) but none of them are
scarring or on bad terms.
Mary Katherine Gallagher is a sweet young girl who has many priceless lines
towards Evion. The ending is very satisfying and makes a warm, fuzzy feeling go
over us as we realize even movies like this can make us feel good. There are
still some good SNL characters who need their own movies. I know I was glad to
see this movie and I might even see it again. It's a great acted, funny, warm
and engaging film that works on many levels that appealed to me and may to you.
As long as you don't take it to heart 'Superstar' is a good movie. It actually
contains a good message embedded in it's storyline: People should not listen to
others on how they look or how they should act. They need to look inside
themselves and find the good things rather than the bad ones which is a real
winner. See 'Superstar' for fast-paced fun and entertainment with heart, no
more.
Reviewed by Brandon Herring October 13, 1999.
Brandon Herring
Movie Review Heaven
(http://www.geocities.com/hollywood/movie/3160/moviereviewheaven.html

Title
Review for Fight Club (1999)
Note: Just a little of the plot is explained!
Rated: R for graphic violence and gore, strong language, sexuality and some
nudity.
Starring: Edward Nortan, Brad Pitt, Helena Bonham Carter, Meat Loaf, Jared
Leto.
"The first rule of Fight Club is, you'd don't talk about Fight Club, the second
rule of Fight Club is you DON'T TALK about Fight Club"
Well Ok I won't talk about Fight Club. I will say that it is one of the most
incredibly original movie ever made, that is at the same time energetic, funny,
violent, intense and sad. Brad Pitt give his best performance to date as does
Edward Nortan and Helena Bonham Carter. Being a David Fincher movie (Seven) I
was expecting a messed up, demented yet artistic piece of art that to my
surprise instantly to me became a masterpiece that had an exploding soundtrack
to back it up as well as a story that was amazingly original.
Ok let me try to tell the plot without giving too much of it away: Edward
Nortan our narrator whom we never find out the name let's just call him Jack is
a normal guy lives a normal life, except one day when he cannot sleep. He then
starts visiting group therapies, going under false names just to try and get
out his depression and emotions. He goes to groups for stuff he doesn't even
have: Testicular Cancer being a standout. That's where he meets her: Marla
(played by the always great Helena Bonham Carter)a bad girl with a sweet side.
She too going to groups for what she doesn't have.
Then the fun begins, on his way to a business thing 'Jack' meets a person who
will change his life forever. He meets Tyler Durden (Brad Pitt). They instantly
hit it off and 'Jack' moves in with Tyler. The two decide to start a club, a
fight club for people who like to get together and well fight. The club gets
underway but things start to get a little out of hand. From here on I ain't
saying nothing else. The whole movie is a cinematic classic. Nothing less we
can always too call it a masterpiece cause that's's what it was too. David
Fincher gives the movie just that right touch to make us believe we are living
in the film rather than watching it. What we don't know is the best thing. The
audience has to think of what they want and believe what they want, because you
really can't go wrong.
Brad Pitt is one of the most skilled actors in Hollywood and makes Tyler Durden
my favorite character in a movie. He's one of those people everyone wants to be
like. Brad Pitt just brings out the character even more and has us believing
that he is Tyler Durden. Oscar Worthy work here. Edward Nortan who gave a
terrific performance in 'American History X' gives a great performance here as
our main character. The way he relates to his character and plays him out makes
us think that he should be picked as best actor. Helena Bonham Carter gives the
performance of her career as Marla the whacked out woman Jack falls for.
The writing in the movie was constantly smart and clever. It has a bit of
everything: Profanity and satire. Both mixing into one quite perfectly might I
add. All the dialogue that comes from the characters are realistic and never
pretentious. Another thing I found excellent about the movie was the way it was
made. It came away from the MTV style editing and went into the hardcore rock
video type thing. It has a dark, gritty atmosphere that makes us part of the
story and made me at least believe it was almost real. This stuff can happen
and does happen. By the end we are left with out jaws hanging down close to the
ground getting dirty. The last 30 minutes have many twists that make us wonder
why movies like this just can't be made anymore?
The bottom line is Fight Club is a new masterpiece for a new generation. Every
so often a move comes along that changed movie-goers lived forever. Fight Club
is that movie. A very controversial movie but deals with the issues of fascism,
violence and secret clubs. Should these things go on? Should we really have
clubs where you beat each other to bloody pulps? That isn't for me to decide.
But as far as I'm concerned good luck.
If you think this movie is nothing but violence and a group of men beating each
other to an inch of their lives. Forget it this is a movie with in-depth
character studies as well as a story that gets so involved by the time the end
credits role I was ready to watch it again just to be amazed. The movie has a
side to it that most don't, it seems like a movie with mean-spirit and ends up
being a movie with a messed up personality to it that we can somehow all relate
to. But remember when you see Fight Club, there are two rules, First Rule: You
don't talk about Fight Club, Second rule: You DON'T TALK about Fight Club. See
it, live it, experience it, be amazed.
Reviewed by Brandon Herring November 3, 1999.
Brandon Herring
Movie Review Heaven
(http://www.geocities.com/hollywood/movie/3160/moviereviewheaven.html

Title
Review for Halloween (1978)
Rated R for intense violence, sexuality and some nudity.
Starring: Jamie Lee Curtis, Donald Pleasance, Nancy Loomis, P.J. Soles.
Once in a great while a brilliant horror film will come out, this year we've
had the new classic 'The Blair Witch Project' which has been hailed as the
scariest film ever made. While one of the scariest, Halloween still reigns
supreme as the most horrifying movie ever put on film strip. It's whole
approach to horror movies are the most amazing thing of the film is that it
needs no gore, no explicit violence and no excess blood to scare the hell out
of us, instead it relies on genuine scares and atmosphere to make us pee our
pants with fright. The score of the film is also a big thing too. Sometimes the
score is what scares us the most, along with Michael Myers we have no mercy
from this terrifying motion picture masterpiece.
The film starts out with a creepy opening sequence to which has the now classic
and creepy score by Writer/Director/Producer John Carpenter who in my mind is a
brilliant director, he really is. He wrote this film, he directed this film, he
produced this film and he made the excessively creepy score to this film. I
think he is and always will be famous for this classic which after 21 years has
not lost it's popularity or it's ability to scare the wits out of people. I
think I have seen 'Halloween' over 100 times and each time I find something new
and brilliant, and each time I am scared even though I know what is going to
happen. I own three different versions of the film: A VHS regular version that
came with a limited edition 20th Anniversary t-shirt, a boxed edition VHS in a
hardcover case digitally re-mastered with the original theatrical widescreen
presentation, in a nifty plastic picture decorated box with a numbered
snow-globe.
In other words I am completely and utterly obsessed with the film. It has
changed horror movies forever and spawned six sequels with only 2, 4, and 7
being truly good. It also spawned several cheap imitations of the film that
were offensive in some ways to a true Halloween Fan. Since I heard about
Halloween being released on DVD in a limited edition of 30,000 copies, I knew I
had to buy one no matter what! I did and man to me it's the best DVD ever
manufactured with the brilliance of the film. No words can describe the DVD.
In 'Halloween' Michael Myers is a evil person whom killed his sister in cold
blood 16 years ago in 1963. Now in 1978 grown up and in a mental hospital
Michael Myers escapes to go back to his hometown of Haddonfield, Illinois,
followed by his past doctor Sam Loomis. The person Michael is targeting is
Laurie Strode who is played by Jamie Lee Curtis in her film debut. Why is he
stalking her? Check out Halloween II it explains it all. On this unholy night
on October 31, 1978 Laurie Strode and her two friends are going to have the
time of their lives, which is trying to stay alive. The whole film is filled
with terrifying moments most coming from just seeing Michael Myers walk. Nick
Castle who played The Shape in the first movie did an incredible job, and no
other person in any other Halloween flick can do what he did.
What John Carpenter did in 1978 is made a ground-breaking new film, with
scares, wit, and style. The movie is flawless if not perfect. No other movie or
sequel has lived up to this one, and in my opinion never will. 'Halloween' will
be like 'Psycho' and still be extremely popular even almost 40 years later. I
just hope someday 'Halloween' will be released in a new Dolby Soundtrack with
the 4 extra scenes on the DVD edition. 'Halloween' isn't just another
slice-and-dice horror flick, it's an intelligent, horrifying and best film
experience ever made. See 'Halloween' and be scared....then watch it again!
Reviewed by Brandon Herring October 7, 1999.
Ratings for the other Halloween Movies:
Halloween II- * * *˝
Halloween III- Zero Stars
Halloween 4: The Return of Michael Myers- * * *
Halloween 5: The Revenge of Michael Myers- * *
Halloween: The Curse of Michael Myers- * *
Halloween: H20- * * * *
Brandon Herring
Movie Review Heaven
(http://www.geocities.com/hollywood/movie/3160/moviereviewheaven.html

Title
Review for Being John Malkovich (1999)
Starring: John Cusack, Cameron Diaz, Catherine Keener, John Malkovich (Who
Else?), Orsen Bean, and a slew of star cameos.
WOW! What a movie. It's everything a movie can be: funny, dramatic,
interesting, weird, funny, weird and strikingly original. Yep that pretty much
describes this movie. It starts out like a regular movie and ends up being one
of the weirdest, funniest most original movies I have ever seen. It boggles the
mind and some have to wonder why we cannot get movies like this more often.
Besides being one of the best films of the year, Being John Malkovich may as
well be one of the best movies ever. Period. Then again there are so many good
movies, that one cannot pick an all time favorite.
John Cusack plays a puppeteer Craig Schwartz a man out of a job, in search of a
job. His wife Lotte Schwartz who is played by a completely un-noticeable
Cameron Diaz who looks like something off the streets is an animal lover and
has about every kind of animal you could think of. Craig finds a job as a file
at the 7˝ floor of a business building...you have to pry open the elevator
doors open before it reaches floor eight, the 7˝ floor is just a floor between
7 and 8. He is hired by his 105 year old boss (Orsen Bean) to be a filer. In
his office, he discovers a little door, to which was boarded up and hidden.
To his curiosity he opens it and starts to crawl toward it, he then gets sucked
to the end and ends up in John Malkovich's mind. Fifteen minutes later he is
shot out onto the side of the New Jersey Turnpike. He returns to tell his
co-worker Maxine (Catherine Keener) that he has found a portal that will lead
him into John Malkovich's mind, she doesn't believe him but after she sees it
it changes her mind. Lotte also finds out about the portal and discovers that
being someone else is good after all. John Malkovich of course has no idea what
is going on, and by the end of this bizarre film there are so many twists and
turns, that we don't know what really happened.
John Cusack is outstanding and utterly believeable in a role only he himself
could play. He fits the role perfectly and to me was brilliantly cast. Cameron
Diaz is outstanding and utterly one of the world's most prettiest women, is
made up here unnoticeable and very unattractive. She however gives a very comic
performance and this could easily be her best role to date. Catherine Keener is
very funny and sexy as Maxine and of course the best thing of the movie is the
magic himself John Malkovich who is very brilliant and this movie plays big
time homage to the master himself. The whole group combined gives us a
wonderfully funny movie that is also smart and clever.
Spike Jonze (Three Kings) makes his fabulous directing debut, and did a
fantastic job of directing this new classic film. He lets the viewer go on the
trip as well as let the viewer know they are watching a movie. By the time the
ending rolled around my head was spinning from disbelief of how good this film
was. The screenplay written by Charlie Kaufman was hilarious and often
thought-provoking. The film also had a soft side to it and even though the
ending is very surprising it is also a little sad and heart-warming.
The whole movie was fantastic and had me rolling in the isles. From Cameron
Diaz's appearence to John Malkovich's explorations I laughed very hard, and it
may as well be as funny as As Good As It Gets (The FUNNIEST!). There isn't a
slow point in the movie, or an overused idea. There are no cliches except for
the fact that this is the most original, inventie, witty, and smart movie I've
seen in a long time. I found myself amazed by everything: The direction,
acting, writing and the whole idea of the movie.
By the end I had to wonder why Hollywood doesn't want to make movies like this
anymore. Or why they don't. All filmmakers watch this movie and get some ideas
of movies to come out. This was a surprise hit as was American Beauty. 'Being
John Malkovich' is in the top 5 movies of the year, and in the top 10 best
films ever made. It has something that no other movies playing now has. In fact
it may as well be the best movie out right now. I highly recommend 'Being John
Malkovich' and have no doubts you will be disappointed.
Reviewed by Brandon Herring November 20, 1999.
Brandon Herring
Http://www.geocities.com/hollywood/movie/3160/moviereviewheaven.html

Title
Review for Bone Collector, The (1999)
Rated R for strong violence and gore, disturbing images and some language.
Starring: Denzel Washington, Angelina Jolie, Queen Latifah, Michael Rooker.
There has been films in the recent past that have changed us forever. In
example 'Silence of the Lambs' is a classic or the movies, Seven scared up
box-office records and grossed 100m+. Now we have another thriller, one which
by the trailers looked like a scary and great thriller that actually turned out
to be a slow-moving character plotted thriller with holes galore and good
acting. It suffers mostly from it's lack of intensity and trying to make it's
characters stick out more than anything and at times you wonder why even care
about the killer? We have these such strong characters there really is no use
for those other people. Sadly you can't help but compare this
so-called-thriller to 'Kiss The Girls' which has so many strong likenesses that
it may as well be called Kiss The Girls 2: The Bone Collector. 
The plot is very intruiging however: A cop (Denzel Washington) Lincoln Rhyme is
a homicide detective that does forensics on crime scenes. When trying to
investigate the murder of a police officer he is struck by a large piece of
something and crippled. After a series of murders start Amelia Donaghy is
called in to help with the investigation a regular street cop she is, Lincoln
must have her go to the scenes of the crimes and try and figure out what is
happening and what is going on. The killer is a clever one and leaves many
puzzle pieces to say at his crime scenes for the police to figure out what he
is doing. Amelia and Lincoln team up Amelia psychically, Lincoln by radio in
his bed and try to stop this killer before someone else dies....or before they
do.
Even it's clever idea of a movie cannot seem to get it through in this tired,
formulic and muddled thriller that seems more like a piece of trash than it
does of an original or entertaining movie. It does have some high points, it's
homicide scenes are well produced and the setting is also well done. The acting
in the movie isn't terribly above average but Angelina Jolie seems to save it
from being a total bust. The script is well-written with tons of shadowing that
you find out is there at the end naturally in a mystery like this. However
sometimes we see something and are left still after the credits role wondering
what that was or what it had to do with the story.
Some problems with this movie include the fact that all the good parts are in
the trailer for the movie itself which leaves it open to disappointment. The
plot itself is good but at times unbelievable and the movie itself becomes too
conventional and predictable and by the first hour I already guessed the
killer. The ending is another bad thing which to me goes way to fast and isn't
even really that suspenseful. Some of the acting in the movie is pencil thin
with miscasts galore. Michael Rooker as an annoying cop did a great job but was
severely miscast. Second of all I don't think Denzel Washington did what he
could with his role and was a little stale. Ed O'Neil and Angelina Jolie
probably gave the best performances in this two hour movie.
Sadly the film makers on this movie wasted Queen Latifah and it took itself way
too seriously. The Bone Collector disappointed me, from it's good plot line
that was wasted in the process to the ending that is confused, to the boring
parts that seem to go on and on and on. The Bone Collector isn't a horrible
movie, it isn't a good movie, it's just an OK movie that could have been so
much better had it added more suspense and some original ideas. There are
cliches galore along with predictability that you know was or is going to
happen. When you see The Bone Collector I suggest not to be too hyped up. Then
again that's just my opinion.
Reviewed by Brandon Herring    November 11, 1999.
Brandon Herring
Http://www.geocities.com/hollywood/movie/3160/moviereviewheaven.html

Title
Review for Stigmata (1999)
Rated R for violence and gore, some language and sexuality.
Starring: Patricia Arquette, Gabriel Byrne, Nia Long, Jonathan Pryce, Ann
Cusack.
Let me see this is what the millionth movie made about possession? Let me
rephrase the movie title: The Exorcist 4: Stigmata, no nevermind. Although
'Stigmata' might as well be Exorcist 4 is has everything to do it, priest,
possessed woman, ending about possession. It only lacks one thing: scares. The
film was not scary but more freaky that jumps at you and makes you jump instead
of being truly scared. It has a good plot and an original idea, but the way the
movie is conceived and way the movie is directed is way over the edge with
overblown visual style.
The movie starts in Brazil where Father Andrew Keirnan who is investigating a
statue of mary crying blood. The loved priest of that town had died, which was
what he was supposed to be looking at he however heard of the crying statue.
Then we see a woman buying the cross-necklace which belonged to the now
deceased preist. That woman is the mom of Frankie Page (Patricia Arqutte) whom
gives Frankie the necklace. Frankie lives a normal life, she's a hairdresser,
has a best friend and a boyfriend.
One night she's taking a bath, all of a sudden we see flashes of someone
getting their hands nailed down to something, and we see frankies wrists have
holes in them. She is rushed to the hospital and the doctors patch her all up
and make her feel better. When the priests overseas hear about this they send
Andrew in to investigate. When another attack comes upon Frankie in a subway a
priest on the bus sees it whom tells the priests that he thinks she has
stigmata. Andrew talks to the girl and asks her if she believes in God, she
replies 'no'. He explains to her that only deeply religious people are
inflicted with Stigmata. What is Stigmata you ask? Well it's when a person
exhibits the wounds of Christ, in example holes through the wrists, gashes on
the forehead, holes in feet, slash marks on back and finally a spear through
the side.
Why does Frankie have Stigmata? Well I shouldn't tell cause it will ruin the
movie, but it's really not a great plot twist in the movie or very surprising.
The movie has what some will call 'MTV style editing' with rock music and fast
flashes of stuff. What really got me was how much Patricia Arquette was miscast
in the role of Frankie, however she does the best she can and does a good job
of what she has to work with. Gabriel Byrne is the same thing and ironically
plays Satan in the upcoming End Of Days.
The visual style of the film is good for a while, then you get kind of tired of
it. Slow motion, close-ups of something someone touches. The movies direction
was good, but was a little hokey at times. Screenplay for the film was
well-conceived as well as the plot, but the movie isn't as good as the plot. It
has some holes that leaves us asking questions and wanting to know stuff that
it doesn't explain. Sadly the movie isn't too scary, some of the Stigmata
attacks mostly the subway one is probably the scariest if even that of the
film.
The movie is far from being bad it's just that it is a big let-down. Another
problem with the movie was that it had too many endings and not enough
substance to back them up. In fact some of the sequences and talky scenes were
downright boring and un-interesting. The last thirty minutes of the movie are a
waste and really waste the movie. The final climatic scene is quite un-scary
and goes way to fast. If your in the mood for a good, loud thriller 'Stigmata'
is for you. But if your like me and really don't feel like seeing an Exorcist 4
then don't. It has the style, the acting and the story however the substance is
missing as well as it's impact on the audience. Go see 'The Sixth Sense' before
anything, it has to be the best of the year!
Reviewed by Brandon Herring October 19, 1999.
Brandon Herring
Movie Review Heaven
(http://www.geocities.com/hollywood/movie/3160/moviereviewheaven.html
