Authors
Michael Yagnow
Number of Reviews
2

Title
Review for Private Parts (1997)
     This movie IS NOT a two-hour radio show. Stern-lovers as well as
haters will love this comedy, whether they like it or not. It is a
touching love story and the journey of a nerd to the top.
"Private Parts" begins with several comedic scenes that grip you
and pull you into the movie. Several people remark on how much they love
or hate Stern in funny, documentary-like scenes.
For the fans, there are plenty of scenes you'd expect of Stern:
there is a scene where Stern sees Carol Alt's breasts practically burst
out of her bra; there is an orgasm scene in which a fully nude woman
rips off her shirt while on top of a speaker; there is the infamous
bathtub scene; and there is, of course, the Jenna Jameson scene, in
which we see everything (EVERYTHING) she has to offer.
And, for the non-fans, there is a touching love story between Stern
and his wife, Alison, played wonderfully by Mary McCormack.
The performances are the best they can be, with Stern playing
himself, Robin Quivers playing herself, Paul Giamatti playing "Pig
Vomit," the villain, Jenna Jameson playing Mandy, the first nude woman
in radio, and, of course, Fred Norris, who steals the movie from his
first scene.
In "Private Parts," Stern show us his PRIVATE PARTS! It is a movie
for everyone (except the kids). Despite the raunchy Stern we know, he is
a really nice guy, who will keep us laughing long after we've left the
theatre.

Title
Review for Liar Liar (1997)
   The last time Jim Carrey popped up on the big screen was is THE CABLE
GUY, a total waste of time. After THE MASK, DUNB & DUMBER, THE CABLE
GUY, and the same Ace Ventura movie made twice, I (along with most of
America over ten years old) was ready to give up on the goofy actor.
   I must say, though, LIAR, LIAR really surprised me. It actually had a
point, a message! The movie is about Fletcher Reid, a lawyer, father,
and pathological liar. After Fletcher (played by Carrey) misses his son,
Max's, birthday party, Max makes a wish that his father can't tell a lie
for one day.
   The next shot is of a clock: 8:15. The camera moves to Fletcher in
bed with a woman to his left. When asked how his recent sexual
experience was, he answers: "I've had better."
   So begins the plot: Fletcher Reid can't lie for twenty-four hours. So
how can he win his case for bimbo/adultress Virginia Cole (Jennifer
Tilly) when the only way to do it is to lie? How can he stop this curse
before he goes to court?
   LIAR, LIAR unfolds into a series of comic and, suprisingly,
heartwarming scenes with Fletcher, his son, his wife, his wife's
boyfriend, and Virginia Cole. The movie makes us face the truth that we
tell hundreds of little white lies every day. What if we couldn't?
   LIAR, LIAR is definitely Jim Carrey's best to date. Though it is not
one of my favorite movies, it is definitely worth seeing.
Rating: *** out of a possible ****
MPAA: PG-13 for profanity, sexual humor, and some mild violence
