Authors
Peter Booth
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Star Wars: Episode I - The Phantom Menace (1999)
OK, let me start off by saying that this movie is of an entirely
different calibre to the "previous" three. No, I'm not talking about the
millions of dollars more injected into it, or the plethora of
mind-bending special effects, but the feel.
It is one seriously disjointed film, and in places, ceases to make sense
and becomes somewhat incoherent. The pre-release hype and marketing does
the actual film almost zero justice. Darth Maul, portrayed as the next
version of the Ultimate Bad Guy by fans and some elements of the press
is largely a mute non-event...he says about three lines of dialogue in
total and is hardly an imposing character, despite his devilish makeup.
Nevertheless the scenes in which he actually fights are excellently
choreographed and make the sabre duels of the "previous" three films
look wooden and contrived. 
Back to the disjointed bit...well, the movie is about a trade
embargo...ho hum, yawn yawn to most people. The trouble is, the actual
embargo of Naboo doesn't seem to truly affect its citizens, nor is their
any evidence of the "my people are dying" or "the deathtoll is
catastrophic" allegations made earlier in the film...you just have to
believe that this trade embargo is a Bad Thing. Why Darth
Sidious/Senator Palpatine has bankrolled this manoeuvre in order to gain
ascendancy is an odd decision. It is patently obvious that there must be
better ways. It sort of flies in the face of what we are told in "The
Journal of the Whills" back-story presented in the original Star Wars
novelisation done in 1977...still, Star Wars is Lucas and he can do what
he likes...and that's precisely what he has done here. One very large
act of self-indulgence totally paid for by himself.
It is chiefly disjointed by the almost total lack of character building.
None of the protagonists of the film could be described as fleshed out,
especially Qui-Gon Jinn and moreso Obi Wan Kenobi. They are virtually
marionettes acting out Lucas' fairytale. Faceless folks running on
rails, as it were. Ewan McGregor is woefully under-utilised, almost in a
role of Neeson's yes-man and sidekick...both men are exceptional actors
clearly struggling to portray characters which could only be classified
as cardboard cut-outs...
...and kudos to anyone who understood Jar Jar Binks on first
viewing...Ahmed Best makes him sound like some digital Charlie Chan on a
bumbling excapade through life.
The younger actors, Natalie Portman and Jake Lloyd do quite well, by
comparison. I can't agree with elements out there that say Lloyd's
performance was hammy and hollow. He is quite good in his role as
boyhood Darth Vader even if at times, you feel he's playing some
outrageous video game.
Portman lends the film an air of gravitas; surprising for an actress of
her age and experience with her steadfast denouncements of Federation
intentions...
Ian McDiarmid plays his dual roles as well as expected, especially as
Senator Palpatine, representative of Naboo...the consummate politician,
appeasing all comers and all sides.
Well, I've been all negative so far...what good was in this film?
Everything else, essentially. There have been enough reviews of the
jaw-dropping SFX posted for me to make further impression, but they are
eminently effective, and don't necessarily drown out the uneven plot and
development. The "flight" of the Gungan craft as it swims through the
planet's core is excellent, with amazing creatures seeking to make this
ship their next meal...quite awesome.
The pod race is simply amazing too, not only for the vertiginous ride it
gives you, but the hilarity in the alien participants...the
Humpty-Dumpty look-a-like who stalls at the start had me in stitches as
did the expression on the face of another as he is about to collide with
a canyon outcropping...
...and then we had Tusken Raiders taking potshots at racers along the
way...
...and a two-headed race commentator...
The entire pod race sequence is quite a delight. Sebulba is the ultimate
win at all costs hot rodder, and a bizarre little creature who walks on
his hands.
Lucas goes for laughs quite often in his battle sequences...the
Federation's droids coming undone at the hands of blue electric balls
unleashed by the Gungans is comical, as is Lucas' penchant for severed
limbs and people going bump on things they shouldn't...
In essence, the Phantom Menace is a good film...nothing phenomenal or
abysmal...simply a good film that needed some serious ironing out,
especially in the categories of plot and character development...you are
left feeling that none of these players can be taken seriously,
something hammered into you in the "previous" three films...you did take
Darth Vader seriously...Darth Maul or the Viceroy of the Trade
Federation? Cartoons...
On a final note...I swear I saw E.T's in the Republican Senate
chamber...this has probably been discussed in various SW
forums/newsgroups to death and is possibly common knowledge among SW
cognoscenti, but as I don't frequent them, i don't know if that' in fact
what they were. Wouldn't surprise me considering Lucas' friendship with
Spielberg.
In summary...a wooden, cartoony movie giving a taste of more serious
matters to come in 2002 and 2005. Don't pick holes in the plot, for
you'll find them in plenitude, don't admire the characterisation of the
protagonists too closely, but sit back, and simply enjoy a visual and
aural blast of a film...
