Authors
Oystein Brekke
Number of Reviews
4

Title
Review for Wide Awake (1998)
Director: M. Night Shyamalan
With: Joseph Cross, Timothy Reifsnyder, Rosie O'Donnell, Robert Loggia,
Denis Leary
First of all: Forget the tagline for this movie. It is for some reason
trying to portray this film as a standard
kids-getting-into-trouble-at-school comedy, when it is in fact so much
more. Yes, it is funny, but calling it a comedy is an oversimplification at
best. Somewhat like calling Shyamalan's later work, "The sixth sense" a
ghost story, and nothing more.
The setting and time-span of this film is a year at a catholic boy's
school. But fifth-grader Joshua Beal (Joseph Cross), has quite different
things in mind than playing outrageous pranks on the teachers. That role is
left to his best friend Dave (Timothy Reifsnyder). Just before school
started, Joshua lost his grandfather (Robert Loggia in several flashbacks).
The two of them were obviously very close, and his death has hit Joshua
hard. The grandfather was a religious man, and firmly believed that he
would be going to a better place when he left this world. Joshua wishes he
was as certain. He is a very precocious kid, in one scene leaving his
religion-teacher (Rosie O'Donnell in a mainly pointless humorous role),
lost for words after asking if his aunt, who isn't baptized, will go to
hell when she dies ("Look, nobody is going to hell, OK?" "You mean the
Bible is wrong?" "...No, the Bible is not wrong." "I don't get it!"). So,
he decides to go on a mission: He must find God, so that he can ask him is
grandfather is OK. Of course, this isn't as easy as he hopes.
The quest for God soon occupies all of Joshua's attention. He tries
practicing all the religious rituals he can think off, and not just
christian ones. He tries to persuade his parents to go to Rome on vacation
so he can meet the pope. His parents (Denis Leary as the father), and
teachers worry, but are unable to completely understand him. 
In spite of Joshua's precociousness, the film avoids the trap of portraying
as nothing but a small adult. While troubled by heavy questions, he is
still just a child. ("When my mum dropped me off [at the birthday party]
she said: 'Try and have a good time.' Why did she say that? I knew I'd have
a good time!").
The film is not perfect, the contrast is sometimes big between the
school-comedy bits, and the religious/philosophical bits. Mostly it works
fine though, and Shyamalan deserves praise for portraying children as
thinking and emotionally complex beings, just like adults are. Cross and
Reifsnyder both deliver good performances, and the narrative progresses in
a natural and unhurried way. In particular the relationship between Joshua
and his grandfather is brought across in a skilfull, and discrete way. It
is a quite spiritual film, and it may come as a surprise to some that the
writer/director himself was not brought up as a christian (he is Indian).
Who should see this film: People who are not afraid of religious subjects,
people who don't mind some sentimentality in movies, people who want to
watch a comedy with some more depth than Dumb & Dumber.

Title
Review for Life of Brian (1979)
Director: Terry Jones
With: Graham Chapman, John Cleese, Eric Idle, Terry Jones, Michael Palin,
Terry Gilliam
In the BBC's satirical show "Not the 9 o'clock news", there was a sketch in
which an anglican bishop has to defend himself from accusations that the
general synod's latest movie "Life of Christ" is a blatant parody on Monty
Python. The Life of Brian stirred up some controversy when it first came
out, in Norway it was initially banned for blasphemy, and only released in
1982. What was all the fuss about? The second full-length motion picture
from the English comedy-group Monty Python (Chapman, Cleese, Idle, Jones,
Palin and Gilliam). 
Their first film, "Monty Python and the Holy Grail" tackled the Arthurian
cycle from the Middle Ages. For this one, they turned to the new testament.
A brilliant idea, and one certain to raise controversy. Some people will
always think that the Bible simply shouldn't be a topic of comedy. Monty
Python thought differently, and the result was a hilarious movie that is -
at least to my mind - free of any real blasphemy. Christ himself is never
treated with disrespect, indeed he is only a peripheral figure in this
film. The comedy is mainly at the expense of ordinary people, in high
places or in low, and the things that they do. And some of it is just plain
crazy.
As one would expect, the film is basically one long sequence of sketches,
tied together by the story of Brian (Graham Chapman). Brian is born in a
stable in Bethlehem in the year 0. (Not _the_ stable though, that's the one
next door!) His life is completely ordinary, until he joins the People's
Front of Judea, an extreme terrorist organization, devoted to driving the
Romans out, toppling the Roman Empire and then taking over the world.
Romani ite domum! Eventually he is captured by the Romans, escapes and,
completely randomly and involuntarily, gains a large following of people
who believe he is the Messiah. And all he ever wanted to do was make an
impression on the beautiful Judith...
Monty Python's style of comedy is one that you either love or hate. More
precisely, you either become a fanatical devotee, and start tracking down
tapes of all the TV-shows and movies, or you just don't understand what's
so funny. The latter group seems to be in a minority though, and
understandably so. Monty Python's comedy has something for all. One part
physical comedy (John Cleese hopping, Terry Jones naked), one part verbal
humour and word-plays, ("Blessed are the cheesemakers. Well, he was
obviously referring to makers of dairy-products in general!") gently
sprinkled with Terry Gilliam's crazy animations. And the diversity of
characters: everything from the snobbish Romans to the dominating mother,
to the haggling shopkeeper, to the would-be revolutionaries - all
character-types we can instantly recognize from our own lives or our own
societies.
Who should see this film: Anyone who has ever laughed, or wanted to laugh,
at a comedy. A note to Christian fundamentalists: Remember that crucifixion
_was_ a common punishment in the Roman Empire.

Title
Review for Bringing Out the Dead (1999)
Nicholas Cage is Frank Pierce, an ambulance driver in a rough area of New
York City. We follow him during three nights at work. For five years he has
been an ambulance driver, working the night shift, and it is starting to
get to him. Every night he sees the worst of human suffering and
depredation, trying to save the lives of assorted slum-dwellers,
drug-addicts and victims of gang-shootings. Professional detachment is
getting harder and harder to maintain. What makes the job worthwile is the
feeling he gets after saving a life. It makes him feel like God. But now,
he hasn't saved anyone in months, and he's getting to the point where he
tries to avoid calls, so he won't have to face losing another patient. He
is also haunted by the memory of one particular girl that he couldn't save,
and has started to see her face in people around him. A nervous breakdown
seems imminent, and Frank knows it, but he can't seem to get away from the
job. 
Onto the scene comes Mary Burke (Patricia Arquette), whose father is being
kept artificially alive in hospital after being initially kept alive by
Frank. Frank is attracted to her, but he is also troubled as to her father,
who goes into cardiac arrest several times a day - is it right to keep him
artificially alive? 
Every night he is partnered with a different co-worker (John Goodman, Ving
Rhames and Tom Sizemore). They can tell he is on the edge, but they
themselves range from the wildly eccentric to the barking mad. If only he
could save a life again, maybe the ghosts would go away...
The New York of this movie is a bleak place. The streets are lined with
prostitutes and homeless people, the buildings are sometimes practically
ruins and the hospital is overcrowded, underequipped and understaffed. The
gloom is not alleviated by the fact that practically all the scenes take
place at night. It is not a pleasant movie to watch. But, of course, it's
not supposed to be. Nicholas Cage is well suited for the part of the
burnt-out ambulance driver. He is good at displaying Frank's caring for his
patients, and at the same time his general exhaustedness. Other members of
the cast are also good, special mention goes to Cliff Curtis in the role of
a super-cool drug-dealer. 
A possible minus about the film is a certain lack of purpose - there is not
really a clear cut storyline, the whole thing comes across more like a
series of snapshots. Obviously this could be a completely valid way of
making a film - not all films need clear cut storylines - but I think this
films ends up as something a bit undecided. There is a storyline in there,
among all the snapshots, but it can be difficult to see among all the other
things that are going on, and so it can be difficult to find out what
exactly the movie wants to bring across. All in all though, I would say the
end-result is quite good. It is certainly difficult to remain unaffected -
and that is always a good sign in a film.
Who should see this film: People who want to see a good film, and are
prepared not to come out of the cinema smiling. Europeans who want
confirmation of their belief that the USA is, socially, a third-world
country.

Title
Review for Ghost Dog: The Way of the Samurai (1999)
GHOST DOG - THE WAY OF THE SAMURAI (1999)
Director: Jim Jarmusch
With: Forest Whitaker, John Tormey, Tricia Vessey, Isaach De Bankolé.
In a shack on a rooftop in a nameless big city, together with a flock of
pigeons, lives Ghost Dog (Forest Whitaker). He spends his time meditating,
practicing Japanese martial arts, and reading a book called "The Way of the
Samurai." His life is completely removed from other people and the rest of
the world that he is living in. His best friend is a French
icecream-seller, Raymond (Isaach De Bankolé) who doesn't speak a word of
English. And no, Ghost Dog does not speak French. He lives by the codes of
the samurai, as described in the book. He never goes anywhere without his
black briefcase. What is in the briefcase, only he himself knows. Guns,
knives, burglay equipment. The tools of his trade, because Ghost Dog is a
hitman for the mafia.
He doesn't see it that way himself though. When he was young, mafioso Louie
(John Tormey) one day saved his life when he was being beaten up by a gang.
Several years later, Ghost Dog seeks out Louie, and offers him his services
as his "retainer". Ghost Dog sees the relationship between the two as one
between a samurai and his master, and he has no dealings with anyone else
in the mafia. Louie is bemused by the arrangement, but accepts it. Then one
day, something goes wrong. Ghost Dog leaves a witness to one of his
assassinations, and the witness is the mafia boss' daughter (Tricia
Vessey). To save face, the mafia set out to kill Ghost Dog. He, in turn,
sets out to kill them.
Seeing as the director's name is Jim Jarmusch, it will hardly come as a
surprise that the movie does not develop into a fast and furious
action-adventure. Rather, it is a study of people trying to live in a world
that is not the world around them. Ghost Dog behaves as if he lives in
ancient Japan. He commits his killings without emotion or feelings of
guilt, he is a samurai, and must serve his master. The mafiosi on the other
hand, are also portrayed as relics of the past. They are a bunch of tired
old men, confused by the changing society around them, nagged on by the
landlord for not paying the rent, while trying to live according to a code
of their own. Thus they and the mafia develop a sort of respect for each
other: "You know one good thing about this Ghost Dog? He is going after us
in the old way," says one of the mafiosi.
It is not a straightforward movie, and not something that should be chosen
for a relaxing evening's entertainment. The film has deeper levels which
every viewer will have to try and work out for himself. It is however
entertaining, at times funny, and with some good action-scenes as well, and
Forest Whitaker does a good job as Ghost Dog. 
Who should see this film: People who have seen too many Hollywood films
lately, and is looking for something refreshingly different - fans of
mafia-movies in particular.
