Authors
Samir Roy
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Psycho III (1986)
For a long time, this film has been misunderstood and dismissed as nothing
more than a slice 'em dice 'em bloodfest.  WRONG.  The film has, for those
willing to accept it, an unexpected modicum of depth and ingenuity, and a
passionate, risky stylization that works marvelously.  The spectacle of
Anthony Perkins directing himself in the role for which he will be most
remembered was enough to attract my attention, and I wasn't disappointed.
It is just a month after the disapperance of Mrs. Spool (from PSYCHO II) and
Norman is still out at his motel.  A young woman named Maureen Coyle who has
started to question her faith in the her Mother, the Virgin Mary, arrives at
the motel, after being thrown out of the car she was hithchiking in for
rejecting the sexual advances of the aspiring rock musician who now works at
the motel.  Norman is attracted to her, but her initals and resemblance to
one of his previous victims, (need I say which one) ressurect painful
memories and dissaproval from Mother.  But he persists in shyly courting
Maureen as their paths cross, which eventually ends in tragedy.
The film is primarily a black comedy, a fact which somehow escaped most
critics at the time.  Apparently critics believed that Perkins was trying
ONLY for horror, and didn't know what he was doing, resulting in
unintentional camp humor.  On the contrary, he was AIMING for this effect. 
PSYCHO III is a maliciously funny, tragic and at turns scary movie.  The
scares are kept to a minimum as the focus of the story is on Norman and his
differing interaction with various people which don't end in murder.  Many
complained that Perkins was courting cliche in having a party of drunken
jerks come to stay at the motel, yet they failed to notice how Perkins
subverted this cliche by having them survive.  In an ordinary 80's horror
film, all of them, at least the unkind ones, would have certainly been
slaughtered, but only one, and the only nice one at that, gets killed while
the others just leave after their stay.  It is also argued by some,
particularly Dave Kehr of the Chicago Reader, that Perkins has made Mother a
"pure camp figure" and a "bloodthirsty monster, which is as far from
Hitchcock's original intention as possible".  Quite the contrary, again. 
True, Mother does stop to straighten a painting on the way to a killing,
(which is undeniably campy, but just as undeniably hilarious and unique in
the filmic context in which it is placed)  Mother, as created in Norman's
mind, is a reflection of HIS perception of her.  Seeing that "Mother" has
killed everyone that Norman ever cared about or was attracted to, it is
perfectly natural for him to think that his mother was nothing more than a
bloodthirsty monster; even though "she" says she's doing it protect him, the
consistency with which she kills anyone that comes close to Norman physically
and emotionally should logically lead him to believe otherwise. When Norman
is "Mother" he is behaving in the way he believes his "Mother" behaves, and
if he thinks that she is a "bloodthirsty monster" which he has every reason
to, than he will BE a bloodthirsty monster when he is "Mother".
Aside from that beautifully complex thematic structure that Perkins created
with Norman, he has also given the film a deep and striking visual style to
match his daring thematic style.  Occasionally he mixes colorful references
to Hitchcock and Argento, but he has a very unique style all his own.  He has
different sets built together, connected by either a door ar a hall so that
instead of dissolving into the next scene, or just cutting straight to it, he
will segue into scenes from other scenes in different sets by merely walking
through the door or down the hall, and in one instance moving into a close up
of a television in a bar, then as the camera pulls back, without cutting, we
are suddenly in Norman's parlor.  Perkins also has an adroit sense of
lighting patterns, knowing just what type and color of light to use in each
scene; sometimes chiaroscuro in a film noirish sense and sometimes wild and
vibrant as in the sequence in which he discovers the body of a young woman in
the parlor bathroom: the green neon light from the motel sign is filling the
room, and he walks INTO that green light, half his face masked in darkness
the other half lit in such a way that it exposes all his wrinkles and signs
of aging in a green flesh which makes him appear monstrous yet deeply
sympathetic, a brilliant exposition of the character of Norman Bates.
Perkins as actor is equally masterful, somehow managing to add nuance to his
immortal portrayal of Norman.  Watch as Norman and Maureen lay down together
in her bed, and Norman, at first underneath, runs his trembling hands down
her back, pandering unknowingly, before he somewhat unassuredly rolls over on
top.  Perkins demeanor during this incredible sequence clearly conveys that
this must be the first time Norman has ever attempted to make love to a
woman, and he's not sure how he should go about it.  Finally he admits that
he can't do this and the view of the two merely embracing as Perkins sinks
his face into the mattress is puctuated by the image at the bottom of the
screen clutching the edge of the bed, in unbearable anguish.  That may be one
of the best moments of acting he has ever done.
The rest of the cast is very good, particularly Diana Scarwid as the would be
nun, and Roberta Maxwell, in a characterization reminiscent of the late great
Thelma Ritter, as the pushy reporter out to prove that Norman is off his
rocker again.  Please don't skip this film on account of the party line that
believe it to be stupid and unworthy of your time.  And don't miss two of the
best set-pieces from that year, even beating out the many in SOMETHING WILD,
one involving ice-cubes and the other, a thematically brilliant visualization
of Norman and Marion's paths crossing.
-----== Posted via Deja News, The Leader in Internet Discussion ==-----
http://www.dejanews.com/rg_mkgrp.xp   Create Your Own Free Member Forum
