Authors
R. L. Strong
Number of Reviews
14

Title
Review for Lost in Space (1998)
New Line Cinema Presents A Prelude Pictures Production in association
with Irwin Allen Productions  A Stephen Hopkins film   Gary Oldman
William Hurt  "LOST IN SPACE" Matt LeBlanc  Mimi Rogers   Heather
Graham   Lacey Chabert   Jack Johnson  Jared Harris     Music by Bruce
Broughton    Animatronic Creatures by Jim Henson's Creature Shop
Edited by Ray Lovejoy     Production Design by Norman Garwood
Director of Photography Peter Levy, A.C.E.   Co-Executive Producer
Michael Ilitch, Executive Producers: Mace Neufeld  Bob Rehme  Richard
Saperstein, Michael De Luca JR   Produced by: Akiva Goldsman, Stephen
Hopkins, Mark W. Koch & Carla Fry   Screenplay by Akiva Goldsman
Directed by Stephen Hopkins
Running Time: 130 minutes  Rated PG-13 for scenes of violence and
offensive language
    First off, let me state categorically, that I was never a fan of the
original TV series "Lost in Space" or it's Disney source "Swiss Family
Robinson". That being said, let me sum up this review in as few words as
possible... Tedious, Meandering, and worse of all, Boring.
    We are introduced to the plot with a spectacularly dizzying space
battle between Earth's forces defending their under-construction space
warp portal, from an unknown group of terrorists. Matt LaBlanc as Major
Don West commands one of the fighter ships and easily destroys the
attackers and rescues his best friend without so much as building a
sweat. The reasoning for this Space Warp Portal is for the eventual
evacuation of planet Earth for the greener pastures of another planet in
a far distant galaxy. It seems that Earth is on the verge of
environmental collapse and it's up to renowned scientist John Robinson
to journey to the distant planet to establish the construction of a
second Portal. This is explained in such a way that it sets up the drama
but also leaves a tremendous plot hole. John Robinson has decided to
take his entire family with him on this excursion to a distant world.
But on a ship as large as the Jupiter 2 you would expect a full crew of
technicians and mechanics and laborers to help facilitate this enormous
project. But no, only the Robinson family and their new pilot Don West
are set to be on board.
    Dr. Zachary Smith is in the employ of the terrorists intent on
destroying the space portal (for what purpose is never explained).
Having botched an earlier attempt, Smith is plied into sabotaging the
Jupiter 2's Robot, re-programming it to destroy the Jupiter 2 and kill
the Robinson family. Dr. Smith boards the ship without so much as a beep
from any security system (which is highly unlikely considering the
war-like atmosphere surrounding the project), and succeeds in doing his
dirty work. And just to make maters worse, his employer then calls him
on his holographic cell phone and zaps him into unconsciousness.
    Now of course the ship takes off in a blaze of pyrotechnics and CGI
effects. The Robot dutifully emerges from it's storage compartment
ominously repeating "Destroy the Robinson's.. Destroy.. Destroy". The
Robinson's having enclosed themselves in hyperbolic chambers for the 10
year journey to their new planet, are unaware that the Robot is
destroying their navigational system. Just in time, our hero's wake up
and stop the Robot before it can cause enough damage as to endanger the
franchise.
    I'm not going to give out anymore of the plot, as from here on the
film becomes very episodic. It is paced like a miniseries, with one
cliff-hanger coming every 15 minutes. The problem is, these cliffhangers
are not suspenseful. Scenes of attacking metallic spiders are almost
comical. One interesting bit of short sightedness on the part of the
production is that a reference is made that these spider creatures
devour their dead. But we never see this. So where this choice piece of
information comes from is anybody's guess. But it does make for a nice
solution towards the end of the film. And the introduction of a Computer
generated monkey like creature is used solely for the purpose of
marketing. You can see the plush toys lining the selves, as kids across
the country line up to own their very own Blaap (that's what it's
called, don't ask me why). This annoyingly cute beastie pops up when you
least expect it and for no purpose other that to remind the audience
that it's there!
    The film is loaded with every conceivable clichi. It's familial
drama revolves around John Robinson's emotional detachment from his son,
Will. Now of course, Will is a technical genius, (Cannon Films Alert!)
having build his own Time Machine for a school science project, which
for some inexplicable reason comes into play later on in the plot. After
the destruction of the Robot, it takes Will Robinson only a few hours to
re-build and re-program the machine into a familiar and friendlier
companion. Don West is portrayed as an over sexed pre-teen. The dialogue
the Matt LaBlanc utters in his attempt to woo Judy Robinson (played by
Heather Graham - the Rollergirl from 'Boogie Nights') is utterly
childish and unlikable. It's almost like a ten year old impersonating
Andrew Dice Clay without the vulgarity. If not for his skills as a
pilot, Major Don West would be a strong candidate for Euthanasia.
    Dr. Zachary Smith is locked in his room for the majority of the
film. His character is only brought out when something needs to happen
to move the story forward. When he is first locked in his quarters, he
smashes everything in his room, for what purpose, we are never told. The
women in the film are giving even less to do as the story progresses,
becoming by the end of the film nothing more that furniture. While the
men are outside of the ship trying to discover an answer to their
situation, the women sit back in the spaceship and wait, occasionally
looking out through a window. Maureen Robinson, (played by Mimi Rogers)
wife to Professor John Robinson is given so little to do, you wonder
what the character was included for in the first place. She has neither
the warmth nor, seemingly the caring of June Lockhart's character in the
original series. Heather Graham, is as well given nothing to do other
that to make faces at Matt LaBlanc, in a vain attempt to create sexual
tension. I'm sorry to say, but maybe if she had roller skates on..
    Gary Oldman is completely wasted in what has become the most enjoyed
character in camp celebrity. Oldman's portrayal of  Dr. Smith is neither
effeminate or masculine. The character is neutered from the start. And
having him off screen for more than half of the film is painfully
evident, as the picture only really tends to come to life when Oldman is
on screen. When Goldman becomes fused with the mechanical spiders later
in the plot (which strains credibility on more than one front) his
performance is limited to only voice work as physically he is replaced
by a not very effective special effect. But credit must be given to
Director Hopkins, he has done the one thing no other director has been
able to do.. get a bad, and subdued performance from Gary Oldman. Think
about it. Oldman may have given poor performances before. But they were
always memorable ('Leon' comes to mind, as does 'Bram Stoker's
Dracula'), but he's never been boring. Until now that is.
    William Hurt gives a sleep inducing performance that would have been
more convincing had he called it in. While there are moments where Hurt
seems to be getting into the camp spirit of the piece, the film
resolutely refuses to cater to that. Therefore, Hurt's performance is
not given the spotlight the character demands. As for the child actors
in the film, the less said the better. While  Lacey Chabert (Penny
Robinson) and Jack Johnson (Will Robinson) are attractive and
personable, again the script short shifts them with superfluous teen
angst.
    Director Hopkins handles the film well enough. But the film seems
overly long and disjointed. This is a case of poor editing as the tempo
of the film changes constantly in mid-scene. The spider attack sequence
is a case in point. While there is some degree of suspense built up to
the spider's appearance, it is drained of that energy by the
introduction of the aforementioned Blaap creature. And having Will
Robinson take control of the Robot and use it like a video game
controller to blast the spiders points up a fundamental problem. How can
a child handle a problem that an adult cannot. If a 11 year old kid can
beat these critters like he was playing a video game, where is the
danger?! Hopkins is a director who has shown considerable ability. His
earlier films "A Nightmare on Elm Street 5", the underrated "Blown Away"
and "The Ghost and the Darkness" proves he is a director capable of
handling actors and effects with a sure and steady hand. But here, it's
only fair to say that he is overwhelmed.
    The biggest question I have about the film is the credit of
Animatronic Creatures by Jim Henson's Creature Shop. What animatronics
were there? If there were any, other than a limb of a spider or the top
of Blaap's head, I didnt notice one live effect. So it that isn't the
case, I'm afraid we may still be subjected to a Director's cut of this
film later on which may include a full grown Blaap. The mind shudders.
    This film has proven to me, beyond a shadow of a doubt that Avika
Goldsman's script for "A Time To Kill" was a fluke! I'm sorry to say,
but Mr. Goldsman is rapidly becoming as inept a writer as Joe Esterhaus
has ever been. The entire structure of the plot is so convoluted and
meandering as to be mind numbing. Scenes are set up without any
resolution or explanation (Dr. Smith's breaking of everything in his
room), and Character development is ignored until it is required by the
plot, which at times contradicts the character.  I never thought that I
would see a film as poorly written as "BATMAN & ROBIN" again in my
lifetime. I guess it pays to be cynical.
    All in all "Lost in Space" has only one thing going for it. And
that's is it's visual effects which are the only reason to see the film.
But at 2 hour and 10 minutes. There aren't enough effects to keep ones
attention diverted away from how poor this film really is. As much as I
disliked the original TV series.. I would definitely recommend those old
shows to this overblown tripe.
On a scale of ***** "Lost in Space" rates *=
This may not be the worst film of the year. But it's definitely in the
running.
Copyright 1998 R. L Strong
Nothing in this article may be quoted or re-printed with the express
written permission of the author.

Title
Review for X Files, The (1998)
20th Century Fox Film Corporation presents a Ten Thirteen Productions
David Duchovny Gillian Anderson  
"THE X-FILES: FIGHT THE FUTURE"  
Mitch Pileggi    Blythe Danner William B. Davis    Armin Mueller-Stahl   
John Neville  &  Martin Landau as  Dr. Alvin Kurtzweil
Music by Mark Snow  Special Make-Up Effects by Alec Gillis & Tom Woodruff, Jr.  Co-Producer: Frank Spotnitz
Edited by Stephen Mark   Production Designer Christopher Nowak  Cinematography by Ward Russell
Executive Producer: Lata Ryan   Produced by Chris Carter & Daniel Sackheim
Screenplay by Chris Carter   Story by Chris Carter & Frank Spotnitz   Directed by Rob Bowman
In an era when most Summer Event films combine the most elaborate
special effects with the most insignificant story lines, it is indeed
a slap in the face to the industry when a television series can show
them how it show and can be done. This is no faint praise. "X-Files:
Fight the Future" is so far the best Summer thrill ride.
The plot opens in the prehistoric past as two Neanderthal men run
across the frozen tundra of Texas (!?) hunting down a strange
creature. Finally reaching it's cave, the two Dawn Men search the
caverns. One is attacked and killed by the unseen creature. The second
Neanderthal, manages to kill the beast. But it is here that the
mythology of the 'X-FILES' comes into play. The survivor is infected
by the creatures blood, which swarms like leaches under the ape man's
skin. We flash forward to present day Texas, where four boys are
playing in a field, looking for fossils. One of the boys (Lucas Black
of TV's 'American Gothic') falls into a cave and is, himself infected
by the black blood.
Fox Mulder and Dana Scully are introduced while investigating a bomb
threat at a Federal Building in Houston. Unable to stop the explosion
from accruing, Mulder and Scully escape within a hares breath of
becoming part of the rubble (a marvelously suspenseful scene that
gives the viewer a real feeling of danger). Contact with the enigmatic
Dr.  Alvin Kurtzweil (played marvelously by Martin Landau), leads
Mulder back into his old habits. The difference this time is that
Scully is starting to believe as well.
I don't want to give away anymore of the plot as that would rob you of
one of this summers most enjoyable thrillers. If you are a fan of the
television series, I feel that you may be a little disappointed as the
film answers some of the shows more interesting questions. But it
also, brings up as many new ones. And that is as it should be. The
never been an avid follower of the series, I believe that, that has
changed for me. To say that the concept intrigues me is to be
redundant. This is one of the most well thought out scripts of this
year. Kudos to Chris Carter and Frank Spotnitz for such fine writing.
The performances of David Duchovny and Gillian Anderson are top
notch. Gillian proves more than worthy of the Emmy's she has won for
her portrayal of the analytical Dana Scully. David Ducovny is no
slouch either. Mulder develops into a more involved individual in this
film. He is forced to become less of a loner. His self mocking and
indifferent attitude about anything other than the X-Files is given a
serious shock here. The chemistry between Mulder and Scully is, shall
we say reserved romance. These two characters are obviously very fond
of one another. I'm not going to say that Mulder and Scully consummate
their relationship, but I can say that as of this film it is more than
professional.
The supporting cast is equally good with surprising cameos by some
very talented actors. Of course, William B. Davis returns as the
Cigarette Smoking Man (I still prefer the moniker 'Cancer Man'), and
is as sinister as he's ever been.  But the big surprise is John
Neville as The Well-Manicured Man, we get to know a bit more about
this character here. And his change of heart (?) is nothing if not
believable. The cameos by Blythe Danner, Glenne Headly and Terry
O'Quinn are marvelous surprises and their brief appearances are
wonderfully timed presentations.
Rob Bowman reveals himself to be a very strong director. His visual
style is not intrusive, but at the same time carries a marvelous use
of space and shadow. The cinematography by Ward Russel is
sumptuous. You've never seen corn fields look this ominous. The
collaboration between these two individuals has fostered one of the
most enjoyable adaptations of a TV series since 'Star Trek 2: The
Wrath of Khan'. The effects (both visual and physical) are
stunning. It's almost impossible to tell where one takes up. This is
seamless work and kudos go to all involved. A special note of praise
to the make-up effects team of Alec Gillis & Tom Woodruff . They have
done the impossible. They have given us an alien being that we have
never seen before. One that you'll believe to be real.
"X-Files: Fight the Future" is just what we've needed this summer. A
serious genre picture that does not dumb down to the lowest common
denominator. This is as good a conspiracy film as "JFK", but
fortunately not nearly as plausible. Or is it?!
Copyright 1998 R. L Strong
Nothing in this article may be quoted or re-printed without the express written permission of the author.

Title
Review for Vampires (1998)
John Carpenter's VAMPIRES
James Woods,  Daniel Baldwin,  Sheryl Lee,
Thomas Ian Griffith,   Maximilian Schell,  Tim Guinee
Executive Producer: Barr B. Potter  Original music by John Carpenter
Cinematography by Gary B. Kibbe   Costume Design by Robin Michel Bush
Production Design by Thomas A. Walsh    Film Editing by Edward A.
Warschilka
Co-Producer:  Don Jakoby   Produced by Sandy King
Screenplay by  Don Jakoby Directed by John Carpenter
Vampire films, today, are about as passe' as Westerns. The genre has been
revisited so many times with so many incarnations that their seems very
little left to derive from the classic creature. The history of the
creature goes far back into mans past. Legends and mythologies abounding in
many different cultures in every part of the globe. All of these various
incarnations of vampiric ancestry all deal with two basic tenants.. first
they all live off the blood of the living. Secondly, they are the polar
opposite of religious faith.
With John Carpenter's latest release "VAMPIRES", we are given a slightly
new variation of the Vampire myth. One which is so intriguing and thought
provoking as to be worthy of a film all it's own.
The film opens in New Mexico where a distaff group of mercenaries approach
a dilapidated home in an abandoned town. We are introduced to Jack Crow
(marvelously played by James Woods), through a series of ever increasing
close ups, while his team prepares for what may well be Armageddon. Without
a line of dialogue, Jack Crow is shown to be a man driven by a revenge so
all encompassing,  that the simplest human courtesies are almost
non-existent.
The raid on the house reveals it to be a nest of vampires. They are
systematically shoot staked and dragged out into the afternoon sunlight,
with only the slightest concern of faith. The lone Priest (Thomas Rosales),
with the group, performs an almost indifferent last rite as each Vampire is
burned. After the siege, Jack Crow is still curious as to why these
vampires were only minions and that there was no master vampire at the
site.
During a celebratory party at a small hotel on the outskirts of a small
town, the Master Vampire shows himself. Valek (Thomas Ian Griffith) firstly
attacks Katrina (Sheryl Lee), a prostitute, while she waits for Jack in
another room. As the vampire hunters celebrate, Valek attacks, viciously
eviscerating the team, leaving only Jack Crow and second in command Tony
Montoya (Daniel Baldwin) alive. Rescuing Katrina, the three men escape as
the sun rises, leaven them safe from Valek's attack.
It is from here that the film starts to take a turn with it's plot. There
is a growing sense of conspiracy throughout the film, as information is
given in only tensely voiced bits of dialogue. Returning to the a Church,
Jack Crow receives orders to assemble a new team of vampire hunters.
Balking at the orders, he leaves put is saddled with a new Priest, Father
Adam Guiteau (Tim Guinee), who may know more about the situation than he
claims.
"Vampires" is more of an action film than a tried and true horror exercise.
If a comparison needed to be made, you could compare the film to 'From Dusk
'Till Dawn', but that would be doing this film a great disservice.
Carpenter's direction and manipulation of the plot is as intricate as
anything he has done. He discloses only enough information as to propel the
story forward, much in the way that John Ford (or a better comparison,
Samuel Fuller) would. This leaves the viewer with much grist to contemplate
after the film has ended. As Carpenter has done before, with such films as
"Assault on Precinct 13", "Prince of Darkness" and "They Live"; all we know
of the villain is a cursory biography of what made them what they are and
what their ultimate goal is. Carpenter's villains are always purely evil,
and completely self absorbed.
James Woods is one of the most underrated character actors in the business.
His portrayal of Jack Crow is a man caught between two worlds. His
affiliation with the Church is at complete odds with his life style. He
curses, drinks, and coerces others into a life of sin. This is a man who is
not fighting for his soul, because he lost it at childhood. He's soul
purpose in life is death.
Daniel Baldwin as Tony Montoya is an interesting characterization. Here is
a man with no emotional connection to anyone until he is forced by
infection to. His relationship with the vampirized Katrina is almost
heartbreaking. While Baldwin does a capable job, the part could have used a
more intuitive performance.
Sheryl Lee as Katrina is the most underwritten character in the film. We
really know nothing about her other than she is a prostitute. What Ms. Lee
is able to do with this role is outright remarkable. Her change from fear
and loathing to acceptance is remarkably subtle and believable. Here is a
woman who would rather die than face the immortality promised by Vampirism.
There is a nice Aids parallel here in that those who face the disease must
cope with the fact that they will always have it and that they will always
be under treatment. Death is no longer as fearful, as the prospect of
needing constant treatment for the disease.
The sole disappointment in the film is Thomas Ian Griffin as the vampire,
Valek. While Mr. Griffin does a more than a capable job of bringing
passionate life to the character; Valek is so underwritten as to be
obviously nothing more than what could be called a McGuffin. A plot device
used solely to propel the plot forward. There are some wonderful thoughts
brought up about the character, but we are told nothing more than what is
needed to move the plot towards it's unequivocal end.
The script by Dan Jacoby does a fine job of redefining the vampire
mythology. WE are told that these creatures do not respond to anything
other than being staked in the heart or being dragged into the sunlight.
Religious beliefs have no effect as the creatures were created as a result
of the Church. This is one of the most fascinating indictments of religion
ever put on screen. While completely fictional, it does bring up questions
about the role of the Church in world economics and politics.
How does this film fit into John Carpenter's overe? The best answer is very
well. The film continues his subversive slant on moral doctrine and
complacency. He shows his characters drinking and carousing with
prostitutes all in the presents of a priest. These men have no boundaries
concerning themselves. While they have a familial respect and camaraderie
to one another, their only concern is on personal freedom. Vampirism from
that point of view becomes pure subservient, completely destroying the
individual to become nothing more than a servant or slave to the Vampire
master. Is "Vampires' political in tone. Yes, very much so. But it's
politics are subliminal, never intruding on the story. But they are always
there in subtext, strong and willful.
"Vampires" is a very enjoyable film. Taken as a purely escapist  romp, the
film serves up it's action and horror set pieces with a verve and passion
that delivers. 'Vampires' also delivers in ways unexpected. You may find
yourself talking about the film long after you've left the theater.
On a scale of 1 to 5, "John Carpenter's VAMPIRES" rates a solid 4. Rated
'R' for extreme violence, nudity and profanity.
Copyright 1998 R. L Strong
Nothing in this article may be quoted or re-printed without the express
written permission of the author.

Title
Review for Blade (1998)
New line Cinema presents an AMEN RA FILMS production
in association with Peter Frankfurt a Stephen Norrington  Picture  
Wesley Snipes  Stephen Dorff  "BLADE"
Kris Kristofferson   N'Bushe Wright   Donal Logue  
Co-Producers: Andrew J. Horne and Jon Divens
Costume Designer: Sanja Milkovic Hays  
Music by Mark Isham  
Edited by Paul Rubin, A.C.E.
Prodcution Designer: Kirk M. Petruccelli  
Director of Phography: Theo Van De Sande, A.S.C.
Executive Producers: Stan Lee, Avi Arad, Joseph Calamari, Lynn Harris
Produced by Peter Frankfurt, Wesley Snipes, Robert Engelman  
Writen by David S. Goyer
Blade and Deacon Frost characters created for Marvel Comics by Marv
Wolfman & Gene Colan
Directed by Stephen Norrington
Translating the world of the graphic novel or comic to the screen has
never been an easy task. Most filmmakers don't understand the
intricacies and character development which are the life blood of this
form of art. Most films of this type either go for high camp ('Batman
& Robin'), or wallow in excessive nihilism ('The Crow'). With the
release of New Line's new film "BLADE", there is hope that the genre
may becoming more involving.
"BLADE" opens with a young woman in 1968, her throat torn open going
into labor. Flash forward to present day New York, where a young man
is being led to an underground rave by a ravishing young woman (Traci
Lords). Once inside the club, the young man is buffeted and confronted
by most of the congregation. Shortly thereafter, the true purpose of
this gathering is revealed when the D.J. turns on the stage lights
illuminating a banner which read "Bloodbath". Immediately, the
sprinkler system inside the club starts spraying everyone with
blood. It is now that the young man realizes that he is going to be
the next victim of a troupe of vampires.
Screaming for his life, the young man cowers in the center of the
club. Suddenly everyone steps away from him except for one lone man in
black. The rain of blood stops. As the young man looks up, he sees
Blade (Wesley Snipes) standing in front of him. He picks the boy up
and tells him to get out. Blade systematically starts to kill and maim
all of the vampires in the club.
Blade is half human/ half vampire. The product of his mother's death
at the hands of a vampire. He has become a one man demolition squad,
determined to eradicate all vampires.  It seems that the vampires (in
the mythology of this film) have existed along side man for centuries,
working with high ranking officials to gain monetary control of the
worlds riches and power yet never venturing out into the open,
preferring to remain secretive and unobserved.
This conflicts with the desires of one vampire, Deacon Frost (Stephen
Dorff) who plans to rule the world of man by reviving the ancient
demigod, the Blood Demon.
The plot for "BLADE" is very complex and invigorating. For once, here
is a film of fantasy and action that wants you to pay attention to
it's plot. While not being as tightly constructed as it could have
been, "BLADE" earns a nod for attempting something different. While
there are marvelous plot constructions in the film, and the action
scenes are some of the best we've seen on U.S. screens in years,
"BLADE" ultimately fails to deliver the promise of it's goal, by not
having a soul.
The problems with "BLADE" are two-fold. Firstly, it's plot is so
intricate and delicate that the slightest misstep causes one to forget
relevant pieces of information.  Secondly, scenes and characters are
developed without any emotional content.
Wesley Snipes is a fine actor, possibly one of the cinema's most
underrated performers. But here, in "BLADE", he is not called upon to
do anything other that stand stoically and / or fight. N'Bushe Wright,
is fine in what is basically a woman in distress role. Again the same
situation exits for her performance as for Blade, no one is remotely
concerned about their fate. This is brought to fore most painfully by
the character of Abraham Whistler (Kris Kristofferson), Blade's weapon
supplier and mentor. Whistler, it is revealed near the end of the
film, to be dying of cancer. But there is no urgency to the character,
no rush to complete his calling. It's as if everyone is not the least
bit concerned with their own impending demise.
This brings us to Stephen Dorff as the vampire Deacon Frost. Mr. Dorff
is riveting. He is one of the best screen villains since Gary Busey in
the original "Lethal Weapon".  When Mr. Dorff is on-screen, "BLADE"
comes to life (if you'll pardon the pun).
The Cinematography by Theo Van De Sande is remarkably inventive. There
is a subtlety of color used in the film with the exception of blood
(which has never been redder). There is a very interesting use of
under-cracking during the fight scenes, reminiscent of the action
films from Hong Kong which give "BLADE" the kinetic energy that it
needs. All of the tech credits are very well served in the film. The
art direction and special effects are models of both creativity and
function. The demise of the vampires as they are killed is remarkable
inventive, eliminating the always troublesome flaw in most films of
this type, ie: the massive amounts of severed body parts that no one
ever seems to question or find.
Director Stephen Norrington has staged an interestingly flawed
film. Some scenes drag out for much longer then they should strictly
for shock value (the torture of the horribly obese Vampire Librarian
with an ultra violet lamp is a prime example). Other scenes are
glanced over (Karen's realization that she may yet become a vampire
and have to take her own life). And one glaring misstep relating to
Blade's past which has no emotional dimension to it at all.
Blade is one of those films which is really hard to review. These are
filmmakers that obviously cared about what they were doing and worked
hard to deliver a spectacle equal to their desire. While "BLADE" looks
and moves with a great amount of energy and style, what it really
needs.. is a beating heart.
On a scale of *****, "BLADE" rates **1/2
Copyright 1998 R.L. Strong
Nothing in this review may be copied of duplicated either in whole of in part, without the express written permission of the author.

Title
Review for Bian Lian (1996)
"The King Of Masks"
('Bian Lian')
Shaw Brothers Ltd. presents a Mona Fong production of a
Wu Tian-Ming film  'THE KING OF MASKS'  Zhu Xu
Zhou Ren-ying   Zhang Zhi-gang    Cinematographer: Mu Da-Yuan
Music by Zhao Ji-ping   Produced by Mona Fong & Titus Ho
Written by Wei Ming-lun   Directed by Wu Tian-Ming
Most of us are familiar with the works of Hong Kong filmmakers, such
as John Woo and Jackie Chan but there is so much more to Hong Kong
cinema than the action and Wu-Shu genre that floods the video stores
here in the west. "The King of Masks" is one of those rare films that
embraces it's cultural identity while making it identifiable for
anyone.  Director Wu Tian-ming ('Life' - 1984) has crafted one of the
most moving drama about China that we've ever seen. While not on a
production level of "Farewell, My Concubine", 'The King of Masks' is
solid film making by one of the art forms true masters.
The story is pretty straight forward.  Wang Bian-lian (Zhu Xu) is an
aging street performer trained in the Sichuan opera technique of face
changing, rapidly applying and removing elaborately decorated paper
masks. Un-married and without children Bian-lian is resigned to the
fact that he will not be able to pass his art down as he has no heir.
One evening, after a performance he comes across a destitute man who
is willing to sell his son. The two men barter out a price, and
Bian-lian returns to his houseboat with his new adoptive son, whom he
nick-names 'Doggie' (Zhou Ren-ying). Immediately showing the youngster
the tricks of the trade, the new family start their life
together. After several street performances, Bian-lian gambles at a
street market, showing his ability cutting bamboo. He is tricked by
the head merchant and accidentally cuts his foot. He asks for his new
grandson, 'Doggie' to urinate on the ashes of burnt cloth to help stop
the bleeding. Doggie refuses, finally confessing that he is in reality
a girl.  Bian-lian is heartbroken. It is against tradition to train
women in a family art, as only men can perform. Bian-lian tries to
leave Doggie behind, but his groaning love for the child causes him to
keep her on as hired help and not as family. As the relationship
between these two grows both closer and more distant, Doggie takes it
on herself to kidnap a young boy she finds lost in the streets one
day. She presents the boy to his estranged foster grandfather and then
leaves to fend for herself.  Bian-lian is both overjoyed and
heartbroken. He has now gained an heir that he can pass his art onto,
but he has now lost a child that he truly loved. The story takes a
heart rending turn when, finding the young boy, the local officials
arrest Bian-lian and charge him with child slavery and kidnapping of
several missing children (helping the local officials to close these
unsolved cases and maintain their positions in the
government). Bian-lian is sentenced to death until Doggie returns and
with the help of Opera star Luo Sulan, convinces the corrupt officials
to release the old man.
The above plot breakdown does nothing to express the rich, emotional
depth of this film. "King of Mask" does not become maudlin or
syrupy. It's characters capture you with their believability and
depth. This is a film that will challenge the most hardened of
hearts. The performances of Zhu Xu and Zhou Ren-ying are remarkably
fine tuned. Zhou Ren-ying puts in a performance that belays her mere 8
years of age. Her command of her emotions are absolutely
remarkable. We have never seen a child actor this talented and this
believable. Zhu Xu as the aging performer is also astounding. making
us believe in a magical art, long since vanished from our world and
yet remaining steadfastly human, with all of the encompassing
frailties, insecurities, and hope that we could only aspire to.
The script by Wei Ming-lun is wonderfully constructed. Simplistic in
it's set up and effortlessly delivered. This is a story that traverses
national and cultural boundaries.  This is a story of the heart, and
an indictment against a sexist tradition that still lingers in some
parts of the world.
Director Wu Tian-Ming returns to his beloved China after spending 6
years in exile in America on behalf of his political views. His return
to filmmaking is a triumphant success. Images and sounds of such
emotional power linger throughout this film and it is a shame that it
may not get the wide release here in the U.S. it so richly deserves.
"The King of Mask" is a modern classic. A story that will be
remembered years after it is seen.
On a scale of *****, "BIAN LIAN" (The King of Masks) rates a full *****.
copyright ) 1998 R. L. Strong
Nothing in this review may be copied without the written permission 
of the author.

Title
Review for Big Hit, The (1998)
A Sony Pictures Entertainment release of a Tri-Star Pictures
  of an Amen Ra Films/Zide-Perry/Lion Rock production.
   Mark Wahlberg, Lou Diamond Phillips  "THE BIG HIT"
 Christina Applegate, Avery Brooks, Bokeem Woodbine, Lela Rochon, China
               Terence Chang, John Eckert.
 Co-producers, Craig Perry, Victor McGauley, Roger Garcia.. Screenplay,
 We've seen lost of black comedies about gangsters in resent years.
Films such as "2 Days in the Valley",
"Grosse Point Blank", and the film that started it all "Pulp Fiction".
Now we have a new entry in the genre, with Chi-Kirk Wong's humorous send
up "The Big Hit". While the film is far from perfect, it is an enjoyable
exercise in escapism, with tongue firmly in cheek.
 The film opens with Vinnie (Antonio Sabato Jr.) dropping off two bags
of body parts for Melvin Surley (Mark Wahlberg) to dispose of as a
favor. The comedic nature of the film is set up immediately as when
dragging the bags from his car into his bathroom, Melvin complains about
the cheep plastic, which causes blood to leak out onto his driveway.
Melvin lives in a suburban neighborhood, where everyone mows his or her
lawns at the same time. His lover is Chantel (Lela Rochon) who is
constantly whining about money, which Melvin is too happy to supply her.
However, the real surprise is Melvin's fiancie Pam (played with
wonderful glee by Christina Applegate). A Jewish American Princess of
the highest order who is more concerned with her outward appearance and
the impressions of others as to be almost void of her own personality.
Melvin is a man with a distinct problem; he is the complete antithesis
of his surname.
 Melvin is a hit man by profession. But he is so concerned with being
liked that he submits to his friends and co-workers at every turn. After
going on a job, where he does all of the killing while his associates
stand by drinking coffee, Melvin gives up his payment after being made
to feel guilty by Cisco (Lou Diamond Phillips). Their employer, Paris is
a strong man with no determined business affiliation. Moreover, for once
it's doesn't matter.
 The plot takes a turn when Cisco devises a plan for a quick payoff,
kidnapping the daughter of rich Japanese industrialist Jiro Nishi (Sab
Shimono). Unfortunately, Jiro is now bankrupt, having blown his fortunes
on an ill-advised Motion Picture investment, which he also directed and
stared in (a marvelously inventive literal translation of "Taste My
Golden Spray"). Well the kidnapping of Keiko Nishi (China Chow) takes
place. Unfortunately, it turns out that Paris is the girl's godfather,
and he demands revenge. He orders Cisco to find the kidnapper and kill
him. In an effort to save his self, Cisco fingers Melvin.
 Now the plot as stated is not much of a stretch. Nevertheless, the
character writing and situations developed within the plot are so
wonderfully quirky and absurd that they are hilariously charming. "The
Big Hit" is a rarity for an action film, in that its simple plot is just
a means to set up wonderfully comedic character interplay.
 One surprising and welcome performance comes from Elliott Gould as Mort
Schulman, Pam's Father. Mr. Gould brings this little part to such
wonderful life as to be one of the many character highlights of the
film. In fact Mort Schulman could almost be an aged version of Gould's
character Alfred Chamberlain from Alan Arkin's film "Little Murders"
(1971).  Lainie Kazan as Mrs. Schulman is hilariously stereotypical. She
is the ultimate Jewish matron. "The Big Hit" is sure to cause some
concerns with the PC watchdog group. Lou Diamond Phillips rages as
Cisco, eating scenery with more ravenous energy than Peter Sellers could
in his prime. This is not what you would call a great performance.
However, it is a performance of such high satirical tenor that you
cannot help but either be amused or repulsed. Christina Applegate shows
a wonderful sense of timing, both verbally and physically in the film.
Her character of Pam is independent but soon shows that her mother holds
much more sway over her that she is willing to admit.
 This brings us to Mark Wahlberg. His Melvin is a variation on Jim
Carrey's character from "The Mask". A complete milquetoast until called
upon to act violently. While this performance will not go down as one of
his best, ('Boogie Nights' still holds that distinction), Mr. Wahlberg
shows a sweetness and comic flair that up until now was unseen. His
scenes with China Chow (as kidnapped Keiko Nishi) are hilarious,
especially a scene in which, handcuffed together, she helps Melvin
prepare a Kosher Chicken dinner for his future in-laws. As they marinate
and stuff the bird, the erotic electricity becomes so comical as to be
disgusting.
 Director Chi-Kirk Wong has created a marvelously structured comedy/
action film. His knowing references to other Honk Kong films may be lost
on most viewers, but for those who are familiar; these asides are
plentiful and joyously reverent. Director Wong has made a name for
himself as being one of Hong Kong's most notable stylists of action
films. He guided Jackie Chan through one of his best performances in
"Crime Story" and created one of cinema's best police dramas in "Rock
'n' Roll Cop". While there are surly others who can direct an action
scene, we have not witnessed a combination of character and action this
well tuned since John Woo's "The Killer".
 "The Big Hit", while not a great film, is a fine piece of
entertainment.
On a scale of ***** "The Big Hit" rates ***.  It is a surprising dark
comedy with some of the best action moments since John Woo's "Face Off",
and moments of laugh out loud absurdity.
Copyright 1998 R. L Strong
Nothing in this article may be quoted or re-printed without the express
written permission of the author.

Title
Review for Wild Things (1998)
Mandalay Entertainment presents a John McNaughton film. "Wild Things"
Kevin Bacon. Matt Dillon, Neve Campbell, Theresa Russell, Denise
Richards, Daphne Rubin-Vega, Robert Wagner, Carrie Snodgress,  and Bill
Murray. Written by Kem Nunn & Stephen Peters. Cinematography by Jeffrey
L. Kimball. Music by George S. Clinton. Production Design by Edward T.
McAvoy. Costume Design by Kimberly A. Tillman. Edited by Elena Maganini.
Produced Steven A. Jones & Rodney M. Liber. Executive Producer: Kevin
Bacon. Directed by John McNaughton a Columbia Pictures release.  Rated R
   John McNaughton has fashioned one of the most joyful and funniest
thrillers in the past decade. Taking a very skewed look at the trend
towards 'film noir', "Wild Things" does for the thriller genre what Wes
Craven's "Scream" did for horror. That being, reinventing the genre by
using it's conventions to laugh with us at the absurdity of it.
   "Wild Things" starts off with a tense, playfulness. Sam Lombardo
(Matt Dillon) is a guidance counselor at a local college in Florida. He
is a heartthrob for the female student body. He leads an assembly
introducing some students to the local detectives, Ray Duquette (Kevin
Bacon) and Gloria Perez (Daphne Rubin-Vega) for a discussion on Sex
Crimes. Tension mounts immediately when Suzie Toller leaves the
auditorium cursing on behalf of Duquette, (for what reason, we won't
learn until much later in the plot).
   The plot starts in earnest when Kelly Van Ryan (Denice Richards) and
her friend Nicole show up at Sam's home to wash his car (part of a
school credit program). Kelly has an obvious crush on Sam, and conspires
with her friend to be left alone with him.
   Events start to take a drastic turn when Sam is accused of rape. He
is suspended from his job, loses his home and is outcast from the port
town he lives.
   That's all of the plot that I'm going to reveal here. To give you any
more would be a great disservice to you. This is a film that has to be
savored and embraced. The performances are all top notch except for one.
Matt Dillon carries the film, with a marvelously subdued performance
that keeps you guessing as to the moral character of Sam Lombardo. Kevin
Bacon captures the angst and passion of a cop who is so disenchanted
with his job that he'd be willing to risk termination and possibly
prison to get out of it. The surprise performance is from up and comer
Neve Campbell. Having cut her teeth on the television series 'Party of
Five' and the films "SCREAM" and "SCREAM 2",  Ms. Campbell shows a rich
sense of drama and risk taking that most actresses would shy away from.
   The surprising supporting cast is a joy to watch. Seeing Theresa
Russell,  Robert Wagner  and Carrie Snodgress is only part of the magic
that "Wild Things" performs. The surprising and welcome cameo by Bill
Murray is one of the films most joyful and welcome surprises. His sleazy
attorney Ken Bowden is classic Murray, carrying the same screen
capturing quality of his earlier performances in "Caddyshack", "Mad Dog
& Glory" and "Groundhog Day". The standout performance here is from
newcomer Daphne Rubin-Vega. Cast as Det. Gloria Perez, Ms. Rubin-Vega
almost single-handedly holds the film from going over the edge into it's
sleazy undercurrent. Her performance is subtle and well defined and I
would be surprised if we don't see more of her in films to come, a
marvelous fresh new face. Additional credit must be given to director
John McNaughton, who handles this talented and diverse cast with all the
skill and dexterity of a Zubin Mehta holding sway over the Los Angeles
Philharmonic. The only false note in this film and a minor one is Denise
Richards. Her performance is not up to the caliber of the other cast
members, but she does try gamely. This being only her second major film,
Ms. Richards has a quality that captures the camera. While her
performance here is not as effectual as the others, it gives solid
evidence of a talent on the rise.
  The script by Kem Nunn & Stephen Peters is such a marvelously
constructed thriller, that the comedic qualities inherent in this genre
come to the forefront. This is what gives the film it's flow and energy.
Without that comedic touch, "Wild Things" would be only another in a
long line of dreary, generic erotic thrillers. The dialogue sparkles
with nuance and character, you almost feel that the lines are spoken
live and not rehearsed. While there is nothing here Tarrantino-like.
This is not dialogue that calls attention to itself. This is real people
speaking in the way people speak. Not everything is revealed in their
words, but is alluded to.
   The final kudos go to John McNaughton, who wrote and directed the
truly frightening "Henry, Portrait of a Serial Killer." and handled the
reigns of both "Mad Dog & Glory" and the under-rated "A Normal Life",
brings a true spirit of recklessness to the film. He knows when to punch
up the comedy and when to settle into suspense, sometimes crossing those
lines with such verve and skill that you can expect to be surprised come
Oscar time in '99.
   "Wild Things" is one of the most enjoyable films so far this year.
Hip, and knowingly so. But never so much so that it gives it's best
surprises away to it's audience without first winking at us. Just
remember to stay through the end credits for some very, very
entertaining  (and funny) tie ups to a  few loose ends.

Title
Review for Rush Hour (1998)
NEW LINE CINEMA PRESENTS AN ARTHUR SARKISSIAN AND ROGER BIRNBAUM
PRESENTS A BRETT RATNER FILM JACKIE CHAN CHRIS TUCKER "RUSH HOUR" TOM
WILKINSON WITH CHRIS PENN AND ELIZABETH PEQA CASTING BY MATHEW BARRY,
C.S.A. AND NANCY GREEN-KEYS COSTUME DESIGNER SHAREN DAVIS MUSIC
SUPERVISOR GARY JONES MUSIC BY LALO SCHIFRIN EDITED BY MARK HELFRICH,
A.C.E.  PRODUCTION DESIGNER ROBB WILSON KING DIRECTOR OF PHOTOGRAPHY
ADAM GREENBERG, A.S.C.  CO-EXECUTIVE PRODUCER LEON DUDEVOIR EXECUTIVE
PRODUCER JAY STERN CO-PRODUCER ART SCHAEFER PRODUCED BY ROGER BIRNBAUM
ARTHUR SARKISSIAN AND JONATHAN CLICKMAN STORY BY ROSS LAMANNA
SCREENPLAY BY JIM KOUF AND ROSS LAMANNA DIRECTED BY BRETT RATNER
He does his own stunts. He has broken almost every bone in his
body. He has survived hardships that no one can imagine. But for the
past 18 years, Jackie Chan has not survived the importation to
America. While his previous films have been enjoyable (some are
classics of the genre), their inherent foreignness has left Middle
America with a lukewarm appreciation of the man and his
abilities. Compiled with the fact that all of his previous films have
been severely edited for western consumption, have left most viewers
with only a glimpse of what Jackie Chan is.
Jackie has tried to enter the U.S. market before. Back in 1979 with
the release of "The Big Brawl" which while amusing was a half baked
concoction of ideas, that never really let Jackie's abilities shine
through. Add to this, the embarrassing "Cannonball Run" films and you
can pretty much appreciate why no one out side of the coasts knew who
this funny looking Asian was. A pitiful attempt to mold Jackie into a
'Dirty Harry' character in the James Glickenhaus directed
embarrassment "The Protector" did nothing here stateside, in fact
almost becoming a direct to video release.
In 1996, New Line Cinema released "Rumble in the Bronx"
nationwide. The film opened at # 1 in the box-office becoming the
first dubbed in English foreign film in history to do so. It stayed on
top long enough to make over $30 million. Jackie was now a star in the
U.S. But there was still a problem. American studios still felt that
his films were too foreign for the multiplexes in North Dakota and
Wisconsin. So all of Jackie's subsequent releases have been truncated,
reprocessed and re-imagined for the American Market. Now after all of
this tampering and off-handed redesigning of who is called the modern
day successor to Buster Keaton, we have New Line's latest release
'RUSH HOUR'.
"Rush Hour" starts off in Hong Kong on the eve of the British handover
of the Island colony to mainland China. Detective Inspector Lee
(Jackie Chan) busts a smuggling operation in the harbor, recovering
millions of dollars worth of Chinese art and historical artifacts from
the criminal mastermind Juntao. Detective Lee reports to his superior
Consul Han (Tzi Ma) during a celebratory dinner in honor of his new
position as American Consul to the U.S. for the new government. Upon
arriving in America, Consul Han's daughter, Soo Yung (Julia Hsu), is
kidnapped and held for ransom.
We cut to downtown Los Angeles where Detective James Carter (Chris
Tucker) is undercover making a buy of illegal
explosives. Unfortunately, everything goes wrong and Carter is on
reprimand until the FBI request his aid in retaining Detective
Inspector Lee who is on his way to Los Angeles to help his friend
Consul Han and his unofficial goddaughter Soo Yung.
As the plot develops, it seems that the villain, Juntao is responsible
for the kidnapping. The constant bickering and animosity between
Carter and Lee creates more confusion than help, until the two men
grudgingly decide to work together, outside of the official
investigation.
The plot of "Rush Hour" is workable if not too demanding. There are a
couple of surprises, but nothing that we haven't seen before. As
written by Jim Kouf and Ross LaManna the plot moves along at a fast
clip making for an enjoyable diversion. What makes the film work is
the casting of Jackie Chan and Chris Tucker as polar
opposites. Tucker's character is a voracious self promoter, always
ready to spin his destructive procedures into positive ones by coning
his way through reprimands. Jackie's, on the other hand is an
honorable policeman, upholding his duty and his responsibility to both
his title and his friends. The humor that develops through these
situations is what makes 'Rush Hour' so enjoyable. Chris Tucker is
from the same mold as Eddie Murphy in the '48 hours' films, fast
talking and always ready to prove himself in a foolish attempt of
machismo. It's the inclusion of Jackie Chan (who is reigned in here,
not so much by the script but by insurance concerns), that brings this
film up to a higher level. As the two characters conspire against each
other, it's Jackie that takes center stage with his trade make fight
choreography (absolutely some of the most startling and inventive
fight scenes in an American film). A fight in a seedy pool hall is a
tour de force of jay dropping amusement.
Unfortunately, Brett Ratner's direction is rather flatly
handled. Everything is standard framing with nothing to enliven the
action or emphasize the drama. In most cases the camera is locked down
with little or no movement. The cinematography by Adam Greenberg
(Terminator, Terminator 2) is acceptable in as much as this film is
produced with the video release kept close at hand. Everything is
framed within the center of the frame with very little moving off to
the outer edges. This is the most maddening essence of the film and
one of the damming situations that the video entertainment industry
has left us with. Very few filmmakers now, film for the theatrical
screen.
But all that aside, how does "Rush Hour" fit into the overi of Jackie
Chan? Well to be honest, this is less a Jackie Chan film as it is a
Chris Tucker film. But that being said, Jackie is anything but window
dressing in the film. This is no where as unimpressive as 'The Big
Brawl' or as insulting as "The Protector". Jackie's character while
being a harder edge man than is usual in his films, still manages to
apply his light hearted approach to action. Also, the handling of
Jackie's accent and difficulty with the English language is used to
remarkably humorous result (wait till you hear his rendition of the
rock classic "WAR.. what's it good for"). There are some scenes of
racial insensitivity, but those are in keeping with the stranger in a
strange land essence of Jackie's character and Chris Tucker's
loudmouth fast-talker. There is nothing here that is meanspirited or
offensive in and of itself.
And Jackie does get two or three great scenes to show of his daring
do, and since most Western audiences have yet to witness Jackie at his
most intense (check out "POLICE STORY" or "DRAGON'S FOREVER") for some
hair-raising action), "Rush Hour is a fine introduction to the man and
his mania.
Despite it's short comings "Rush Hour" delivers a solid two hours of
entertainment. While some of the language is harsh, this is much more
friendly than any other buddy cop movie that's come down the pike in
the last ten years.
On a scale of 5 stars. 'Rush Hour' rates 3 and one half.
A fun and enjoyable piece of escapism that serves both stars well.
Now.. when does Jackie get to direct?!
Copyright 1998 R.L. Strong.
Nothing in this article may be reprinted, copied  or altered without the expressed written permission of the author.

Title
Review for Lethal Weapon 4 (1998)
Warner Brothers presents a Silver Pictures production in association with
Donner/Schuler-Donner Productions   
Mel Gibson   Danny Glover  
a Richard Donner film
"LETHAL WEAPON 4"    
Joe Pesci   Rene Russo    Chris Rock   Jet Li   Steve Kahan
Kim Chan  Darlene Love   
Co-Producers: Dan Cracchiolo & J. Mills Goodloe
Edited by Dallas Puett & Frank J. Urioste  
Cinematographer:  Andrzej Bartkowiak
Original Music by Eric Clapton, Michael Kamen & David Sanborn
Production Designer: J. Michael Riva   Costume Designer: Ha Nguyen
Associate Producers: Spencer Franklin,  Jennifer Gwartz &  Ilyse A. Reutlinger
Executive Producers: Steve Perry & Jim Van Wyck  
Produced by Richard Donner & Joel Silver
Original Story by Johnathan Lemkin  
Screenplay by Alfred Gough, Miles Millar, Channing Gibson and Shane Black   
Directed by Richard Donner
Rated R       Running time: 127 minutes
Sequels are not usually a promising commodity. In most cases it's an
exercise in excess. More action, more violence, more noise,
etc. etc. What is hoped for in these franchises is that you have
something to connect with. And hopefully that is the characters that
made the original film so enjoyable. With the release of Richard
Donner's fourth and final entry in the LETHAL WEAPON series we are
given a serviceable plot with more character interaction than any of
the previous films in the series.
The story opens with our heroic trio Riggs, Murtaugh and Leo Getz
enjoying a late night out on Roger's finished boat. Unfortunately they
run afoul of an uncharted cargo ship which wrecks their fishing
boat. Giving chase, they crash the ship onto the docks. Riggs suffers
a surprise attack by an asian martial artist (James Lew), and is
unable to catch any of the bad guys. Murtaugh and Getz manage to save
themselves and soon the three discover that the cargo ships hold is
filled with illegal aliens from China. After the police arrive,
Murtaugh discovers a family of Chinese hiding in one of the row
boats. Feeling a sense of familial responsibility, Murtaugh takes the
family (against proper procedure) under his wing, giving them
sanctuary in his own home.
It is soon learned that there is an underground market for slave labor
from China in L.A. A custom of paying a debt through labor. But there
is more to this incident than that. As Murtaugh and Riggs investigate
the situation further they find more evidence leading to the purchase
of four Triad leaders from mainland China. But there is even more
subterfuge involved. The cost of rescuing these four criminals is
millions of dollars in Chinese currency. What the Triads have done is
hired through debt, a Chinese artist to counterfeit Chinese
currency. These plates are to be used to print the money with which
the Triads are to pay the corrupt Chinese officials. The debt being
paid is the delivery of his Brother's family to America.
"Lethal Weapon 4" is a wonderfully entertaining continuation of the
popular franchise. While the plot is a little light in development, it
holds your attention. What makes this film so enjoyable is, of coarse
the chemistry between Gibson and Glover. The friendship between these
two characters has moved beyond the standard homo-erotic essence of
the earliest films. These men are now family, brothers of
spirit. Riggs in the film plays with a zen like philosophy of mental
will power. He is coming to terms with his mortality. This is
amplified by the pregnancy of Larna Cole (Rene Russo). Riggs must lay
down his loss and his mania, if he is to survive. And it is this act
of conformity that almost costs him his life. As in the earlier
sequels, Riggs is becoming less of a lethal weapon, while Murtaugh is
becoming more of one. Murtaugh in each succeeding film has placed his
family in more and more danger, and that is because he is also a
lethal weapon, like Riggs but has conformed and masked that quality in
himself ("I'm too old for this shit"), but always manages to return to
what may have been a former self in times of stress and need. With
this film both characters are questioning their age and what their
life is going to become. Hence, this may be the last film in the
series, since Riggs and Murtaugh have to convince themselves that
'They are not too old'.
The main villain Wah Sing Ku is played by Hong Kong superstar Jet Li,
and his inclusion in this film is revolutionary. Never on U.S. screens
have we seen this masterful a presentation of martial artistry since
Bruce Lee. This man looks deadly. His calm, seemingly emotionless
demeanor is simply a mask hiding a raging tiger. When Mr. Li lets
loose, you can only be certain that you'll want to see more of this
incredibly talented man.
Chris Rock is added to the cast as Lee Butters, and he brings his
trademark style of rapid fire comedy to the team. The secret to his
character is that he is married to Murtaugh's daughter (unknown to
Murtaugh), and treats his stepfather with so much respect, that
Murtaugh mistakes the younger mans attention as possibly homosexual in
context.
All of the characters in the film act on behalf of their families. So,
while Jet Li may be the villain of the piece, he has as strong a
conviction and moral purpose as Riggs or Murtaugh. This is the best
development in the script.
Richard Donner continues to prove that he can direct an action film in
his sleep. His style is so effortless and uncomplicated that the film
moves with a brisk and flawless pace. This is no faint
praise. Mr. Donner is becoming of of our best Directors. The script by
Alfred Gough, Miles Millar, Channing Gibson and Shane Black is
remarkably tight considering the differing styles of each author. This
is a credit to producer Joel Silver and Richard Donner, who's sense of
story and character is as strong as ever.
Lethal Weapon 4 is a fine piece of entertainment and a worthy finish
to a classic series. Why do I call this the last of the series. Well
durring the end credits, we are shown a photo album with photos past
and present of all four films. The last shot is of the book
closing.. on the series.
On a scale of *****, "Lethal Weapon 4' rates ****.
Copyright 1998 R. L. Strong.Nothing in this article may be reprinted
or copied without the expressed written permission of the author.

Title
Review for Godzilla (1998)
"GODZILLA"
Review by R. L. Strong
TriStar Pictures presents a Fried Films/ Centropolis Film Production
in association with Independent Pictures
Matthew Broderick    Jean Reno    Maria Pitillo    Hank Azaria    Kevin Dunn
Cinematography by Ueli Steiger.    Original Score by David Arnold.
Production Design by Oliver Scholl.
Edited by  Peter Amundson and David Siegel.
Special Visual Effects by Volker Engel.
Godzilla Design and Supervision by Patrick Tatopoulos.
Co-Executive Producers  Robert N. Fried  & Cary Woods.  
Co-Produced by Peter Winther, & Kelly Van Horn.
Executive Producers: William Fay, Ute Emmerich, and Roland Emmerich.
Produced by Dean Devlin.
Story by  Ted Elliott & Terry Rossio, Roland Emmerich & Dean Devlin.
Screenplay by Dean Devlin and Roland Emmerich.
Directed by Roland Emmerich.
Running time: 138 minutes.   Rated PG-13
Let's get this one over with as quickly as possible. If there was a
possibility to receive a refund, this review would not be
forthcoming. But as it is, "Godzilla" is without a doubt the loudest,
longest, and ultimately most amateurishly written film ever released
through a major studio. Producer Dean Devlin and Director Roland
Emmerich should be ashamed of themselves, and as penance be forced to
return to film school to watch "Last Year at Merienbad" until they can
grasp the idea of content and plot. No amount of hype, no amount of
money can hide the fact that these filmmakers are the 90s equivalent
to William Beaudine (Billy the Kid VS. Dracula).
"Godzilla" opens with stock footage of the Bikini Atoll nuclear tests
interspersed with footage of iguanas playfully swimming and nuzzling
their eggs. We are then introduced to the crew of a Japanese fish
canning ship (a questionable enterprise considering that tuna
processing is supposed to be supervised to eliminate the netting of
dolphins).  Well, the ship is attacked and sunk by an unseen
creature. Later, a group of Frenchmen led by Philippe Roache (Jean
Reno) interview the sole survivor. In a state of shock, the only thing
the man can utter is the word "Gojira" (the Japanese name of the famed
beast).
We are then introduced to Dr. Nick Tatopoulos (Matthew Broderick, with
a moniker obviously taken from the effects designer of the film). He
is currently studying the effects that the Chernobyl disaster has had
on the local earthworm population. He is immediately drafted by the
U.S. military and taken to Panama where he is shown the huge
footprints of a creature.
In a short amount of time, another fishing boat (loaded with canned
tuna from the U.S. and Korea for some reason) is found grounded in
Jamaica. Well, it seems that whatever is eating these ships is headed
for New York. When the beast finally appears, he tears up one
building, stomps a couple of trucks and makes life hell for the
Incumbent Mayor Ebert (thumbs up for New York). The military, with
Dr. Tatopoulos's help, have two tons of fresh fish dumped in the
middle of New York to lure the beast out of its hiding place in the
New York subway system. It finally comes crashing through the city
streets and has a cute face to face with Dr. Tatopoulos who snaps the
beast's picture. The monster eats the fish, the military starts
shooting, and the chase is on, with the Army causing 90% of the
ensuing damage.
Working from a hunch as to why Godzilla has decided to come to the Big
Apple, Dr.Totopoulos buys a few home pregnancy kits from a local
drugstore that has chosen to remain open (even though New York has
been evacuated). Well the test proves that the monster is a
hermaphrodite and is pregnant. Needless to say, no one believes the
good doctor about his discovery, so he must join up with the renegade
French Secret Service agents and find the monster's nesting site and
destroy the eggs before the Mayor starts letting the populous back
into the city (even though the monster isn't dead yet).
I sincerely hope that I've completely spoiled any interest anyone
might have of seeing this film. I gave away the relevant plot so that
I could spare those of you courageous (or foolish) enough to drop down
an hour's wage on this tripe. Everything about "Godzilla" reeks almost
as bad as the piles of rotting fish used to trap the beast. The script
(and let's be clear here) by Devlin and Emmerich is so full of plot
holes and non characters as to be sure to be the recipient of next
years "Razzie" award. The dialogue between Maria Pitillo (as Audrey
Timmonds, Dr. Tatopoulos' estranged girlfriend) and Mr. Broderick is
so adolescent, it makes teenagers giggle in disbelief (as happened
during the screening I witnessed). The film could be enjoyably campy
if it didn't take itself so damn seriously. But to what end, as there
is no commentary on humanities foibles against nature, nor is there
any reference about Godzilla being some sort of retaliation against
mankind. No. Godzilla is just a big dummy that got knocked up by some
French immigrants and decided to let the state of New York pay for it.
The film is bleak and ugly looking. Taking place at night during a
rain storm, the movie has little or no depth. Everything is ugly and
dark. New York has never looked so inhospitable since "Death Wish". In
an attempt to give the film some color, Audrey Timmonds carries a
bright red umbrella which is unique in that everyone else in the film
carries the standard gray issue. The only moment of composition and
color is during the brief scenes on Jamaica, where Dr. Tatopoulos
finds himself standing in a giant footprint. The scene is nicely
photographed but poorly set up. You know from the outset that Nick is
standing in a footprint. For a scientist, this is very poor
observation. Let's look at some of the more interesting plot holes in
the film (this activity, is becoming almost as popular as the Kevin
Bacon Game):
1.) Why does the French nuclear tests only affect one clutch of Iguana
eggs, and how do those eggs fuse into one beast?
2.) Why would a cold blooded creature choose a cold climate (such as
New York) to nest? I don't think iguana's have a habit of migrating.
3.) How can Godzilla crawl through the New York Subway system, slice a
submarine in half, yet be unable to extricate himself from some thin
(in comparison) steel cable on the Brooklyn Bridge?
4.) The Brooklyn Bridge is the only suspension bridge in existence
that does not need it's suspension cables.
5.) Did Godzilla carry all two hundred eggs in her belly? If so, then
radioactive mutations surely are wondrous creatures. (NOTE: each egg
is 10 feet tall and almost as wide.  Godzilla would have to be over
1,000 feet tall to carry them all).
6.) Godzilla can crush ships and eat helicopters, but New York cabs
are made of stronger steel.
7.) Godzilla can out maneuver Helicopters, bullets, torpedoes and
missiles, but can't catch you on foot.
9.) Godzilla can burrow through the subway system but can't tear
through the Park Avenue Tunnel.
10.) Why was nothing else mutated by the nuclear test as quickly as
Godzilla? Maybe a giant hermit crab in the sequel.
11.) Galapagos Iguana's actually live in the French Polynesian Islands?
12.) Why was Dr. Tatopoulos brought in by the military if they were
not going to listen to him anyway?
13.) How did they evacuate New York Island in less than a day, and how
did they convince those New Yorkers to go to New Jersey?
14.) New York Television stations use VHS tape for both filming and
broadcasting. New Yorkers hate Beta cam.
I could go on and on, but that would only serve to make the film seem
more enjoyable than it is. Don't be fooled, this film has less gray
matter than any episode of "America's Funniest Home Videos".
The performances in the film are singularly bland. Not one performance
belays any awe or fear in the face of this two hundred foot tall
terror. The characters, in the midst of the onslaught, have time to
stop and discuss the lack of good coffee, failed relationships, career
choices. The only common occurrence that doesn't take place here is
having one of the characters have a bowel movement, but then that
would have made them believable.
Godzilla for the most part is okay. The design of the beast is funky,
if not Very memorable. One thing that comes to mind-- the major
redirection of Godzilla in this film is to remove his most familiar
trademark, namely his atomic breath. Now, I for one can't quite fathom
how you can call this monster Godzilla without that little trait. A
good comparison would be to make a Superman film and eliminate his
ability to fly. There is so much wrong with this film that I can't
really recall anything recently that has left me this cold hearted
(except for my divorce). Any film that can have a two ton lizard
slipping on gum balls has got to be envisioned under the influence of
Prozac. The addition of the baby raptors (ah, I meant Godzillas), are
nothing but a direct rip off of 'Jurassic Park", but with none of that
film's suspense or tension. Suffice to say that, "Godzilla" is without
a doubt the most brain dead motion picture of the decade. This is a
film that needed the hype. With the current level of writing and
directing, nothing else about the film succeeds. If you've seen the
trailers, you've seen the best parts.
My only suggestion for Mr. D and Mr. E. is that they could always go
back to selling shoes.
1/2 out of *****. This film could be the next "Rocky Horror". Only it's not funny!
Copyright 1998 R. L. Strong.
Nothing in this article may be reprinted or copied without the expressed written permission of the author.

Title
Review for Avengers, The (1998)
The world is in chaos. Civilization is on the brink of destruction. It is
time for tea!
Warner Brothers delayed the release of this film until late summer, and for
good reason. In a year that has seen some of the most imbecilic and tired
plots ever projected on a theater screen, "The Avengers" hold true to the
adage of "those that do not remember the past, are doomed to repeat it".
The film opens with the introduction of John Steed, agent for the British
Ministry who handily manages through an obstacle course of assorted
assassins. Steed is then requested to see his superior, "Mother" (played
indifferently by Nicholas Woodeson) who has a special assignment for him.
It seems that a Sir August de Wynter (Sean Connery) has gained control of a
weather control device (I won't go into details here, the film has enough
of them). With the aid of Mrs. Emma Peal (Uma Thurman), the creator of the
prototype for the device. Sir de Wynter's goal is to hold the world ransom
by threatening all the nations with destructive weather until they agree to
pay him his demand of 10 per cent of their gross national product each.
Needless to say, it is up to Mrs. Peal and Mr. Steed to save the day.
The above plot synopsis pretty much should give you all that you need to
know about the film. The entire enterprise is so bereft of suspense as to
be sleep inducing. This is not to say there are not some nice moments in
the film. An attack by mechanical insects is enjoyable in a silly sort of
way. But the sequence has no suspense or buildup. We never know where these
machines come from or how they came to be and why they were built in the
first place.
As the villain, Sir August de Wynter; Sean Connery gives what could best be
described as a lackluster performance. His mincing and grimacing is more in
line with Burt Reynolds in 'Stroker Ace' than anything else. It seems that
Mr. Connery has a unique method of informing his audience that he is not
taking his role seriously, and that method is the preponderance of him
lisp. Not since Boris Karloff uttered the famed line: "He has an irrational
fear of caths", in the film "The Black Cat" (1933), has a lisp been so
prominent.
Ralph Fiennes performance as John Steed is stiff and unappealing. The
performance couldn't have been blander if it had been dubbed. And Uma
Thurman proves beyond a shadow of a doubt that she is completely
uncomfortable with her sex symbol image. Her delivery of the numerous
sexual innuendoes which pepper Steed's and Peal's conversations, have all
the come hither appeal of a patient in a hospital asking a nurse for a bed
pan. There is absolutely no chemistry between these characters.
This brings us to the biggest question mark in the film. As De Wynter's
henchman, Eddie Izzard is, to be compassionate, the most non-threatening
screen villain seen since Tim Curry.  This presence (it in no way can be
called a performance) is so lacking in any quality whatsoever as to be
almost somnambulant. The climatic battle between Izzard's Bailey character
and Thurman's Mrs. Peal is almost as exciting and intense as a car wash.
The plot of the film is very abrupt, seeming to have been severely edited.
But, don't be confused into thinking that a restored director's cut might
improve this film. At 85 minutes, 'The Avengers' is one of the longest
films to sit through. Situations are dropped in without the slightest
advance, the equivalent of telling us the punch line but not the joke.
Admittedly, the art direction and visual effects are wonderful. But they
are photographed so unimaginatively that they don't really linger. Also,
one marvelously hilarious scene in which Mr. Steed is caught in an
artificial blizzard is the most absurd practical effect in the film. The
scene is shot in such a way as to completely reveal the artificiality of
the plastic flake snow. Also, with the budget allotted this film, you'd
except to see the actors breath in the freezing cold. Not here, Mr. Steed
actually has perspiration on his forehead.
The little tag line of mine at the start of this column sums up my entire
opinion of Jeremiah Chechik's updated version of that perennial British
television chestnut 'The Avengers'. There is a lot going on here in this
film. But ten minutes with a good warm drink is ultimately more satisfying.
On a scale on 5, "The Avengers' rates 1. Not as bad as this years worst
film (That remains Tristars 'Godzilla'), but a complete waste of all the
talent involved.
Copyright 1998 R. L Strong
Nothing in this article may be quoted or re-printed without the express
written permission of the author.

Title
Review for Mask of Zorro, The (1998)
TriStar Pictures in association with Zorro Productions and Amblin Entertainment
Antonio Banderas  Anthony Hopkins  "THE MASK OF ZORRO"
Catherine Zeta Jones   Stuart Wilson    Matthew Letscher
Co-Producer: John Gertz   Cinematography by Phil Meheux   Edited by Thom Noble
Music by James Horner   Production Designer: Cecilia Montiel
Costume Designer: Graciela Mazsn   Associate Producer: Tava R. Maloy
Executive Producers: Steven Spielberg, Walter F. Parkes, Laurie MacDonald
Produced by Doug Claybourne & David Foster    Original Story by Ted Elliott, Terry Rossio &
Randall Jahnson  Screenplay by: John Eskow, Ted Elliott  & Terry Rossio
Directed by Martin Campbell
136 minutes  Rated PG-13
Since 1920 with the release of Douglas Fairbank's classic adventure,
the character of Zorro has been one of the most portrayed characters
in film history. Most people are only familiar with the famed Mexican
hero through the Walt Disney series of 1957 which stared future 'Lost
in Space" dad.. Guy Williams. The character of Zorro has been
portrayed by a wide range of actors and all of them have been
serviceable at the least (with the exception of George Hamilton in the
disappointing 'Zorro, the Gay Blade'). Antonio Banderas is the latest
actor to don the black mask and cape, and the results are enthralling.
The story begins with Zorro rescuing a group of peasants from public
execution. Now this entire is simply a trap set to capture Zorro. But
Zorro is saved, himself by the intervention of two young
brothers. Zorro thanks the boys by giving the oldest a
medallion. Zorro returns home and his true identity of Don Diego de la
Vega. Greeting his wife, he goes to his newborn daughter, Elena and
continues to tell her the legend of the famed Zorro. It is then that
the corrupt Don Rafael Montero invades Don Diego's home.  Now knowing
the true identity of his enemy, Don Rafael fights with Don Diego and
in the course of battle, Esperenza de la Vega (Don Diego's wife) is
killed. Don Diego is arrested and taken to prison. Don Rafael, who was
also in love Esperenza de la Vega takes the child and vows to raise
the girl as his own daughter.
20 years pass. And Mexico has been under oppressive Spanish
rule. Three bandits are ambushed by the local police, Alejandro
Murrieta (Banderas), Joaquin Murrieta (Victor Rivers) and American
expatriate Three Fingered Jack (L.Q. Jones). Joaquin is murdered by
American Captain Harrison Love (Matthew Letscher) during an escape
attempt. Alejandro returns to accept his fate, but not before
retrieving the medallion Joaquin has around his neck, the gift from
Zorro.
Montero returns from Spain with his daughter (?), Elena. Don Diego has
escaped from prison and only stops murdering Montero upon seeing his
now grown child. Alejandro has also managed to escape his captors, and
the two men form a bond. After some deliberation Don Diego accepts
Alejandro as his pupil and tells him the truth about the legend of
Zorro.  After much arduous training, Alejandro takes the cape and the
mask and a new Zorro returns to save the people of Mexico.
Directed with a marvelous eye for style and simplicity, Martin
Campbell ('Goldeneye') pays glorious tribute to the memories of
Michael Curtiz and Douglas Fairbanks. There is nothing in this film
that stands out over itself, drawing attention away from the story and
it's characters. For once we can no longer, honestly say, "They don't
make movies like that anymore", because with this film, they do.. and
they do it triumphantly. The film takes it's time setting up it's plot
of stolen riches, familial debts and blood oaths. Mr. Campbell
deserves full credit for delivering a masterfully composed
film. Scribes John Eskow, Ted Elliott & Terry Rossio have fashioned a
grand tribute to the classic films of the thirties and forties. With
rich and strong character development and expert plotting, 'The Mask
of Zorro' should be a reminder to everyone that a film does not need
millions of dollars of special effects and pyrotechnics to enthrall
them. Good story telling remains, good story telling.
The performances in the film are exemplary. Anthony Hopkins is heroic
as Don Diego do la Vega. Here is a man who is true to his family and
his country and is willing to risk his life for both. His passion for
revenge becomes tempered by the moral conflict of his daughter Elena
(Catherine Zeta-Jones) not knowing him as family. The heartbreak in
Hopkins' eyes as he confronts his Daughter with the truth, is
honest. Mr. Hopkins deserves the title (unashamedly) of greatest
living actor today. Antonio Banderas shows a growing charm and ability
that was only hinted at in "Desperado". His fine turn turn as the
reborn Zorro is so enlivening and glorious that you'll only envision
him as Zorro from now on, the same way as only Christopher Reeve is
Superman and Michael Keaton is Batman. Banderas owns this character.
The real discovery in the film is Catherine Zeta-Jones, previously
only noted for her turn as a paid assassin in the disappointing "The
Phantom". Ms. Jones turns in a marvelously mischievous and seductive
performance as Elena. Her charm and poise throughout the film is
refreshing and gives the entire picture a fresh jolt every time she is
on screen.
Everything about "The Mask of Zorro" cries out in it's goal of pure
entertainment. There is nothing dumbed down for the audience. This is
the truest adventure we've seen since "Raiders of the Lost Ark". Kudos
to all involved. No faint praise in saying that this film will (and
should) become a classic piece of filmaking.
Copyright 1998 R. L. Strong
Nothing in this article may be reprinted or duplicated, either in part or
in whole without the express written permission of the author.

Title
Review for Ngo hai sui (1998)

TriStar Pictures presents a Golden Harvest / Leonard K. C. Ho Production
Jackie Chan  WHO AM I?  Michelle Ferre    Mira Yamamoto   Ron Smerczak
Ed Nelson   Tom Pompert   Yannick Mbali   Washington Xisolo
Music by Nathan Wang    Cinematography by  Hang-Sang Poon
Edited by  Peter Cheung & Yau Chi Wai   Executive Producer: Leonard Ho
Produced by Barbie Tung   Screenplay by  Jackie Chan  Susan Chan  Lee Reynolds
Directed by  Benny Chan &  Jackie Chan
Since Jackie Chan broke onto the U.S. film scene with 1996's "Rumble
in the Bronx", we've been subjected to a rather mixed bag of films
starring the famed go for broke action star. The main problem with the
majority of Jackie's films is that (as many other critics have noted),
his films don't have a very strong plot line. But first and foremost,
Jackie has always been the reason to see these films. With the
upcoming release of "Who Am I?", we are witness to a vital change in
Jackie's screen trade. This time we have a plot.
The plot of the film starts off with the discovery of a strange isotope
from a meteorite found in a deep cave in some un-named location. The
isotope is checked and discovered to have unlimited energy potential.
As the isotope is being transported through South Africa, the scientist
are ambushed by an elite team of commandos (one of which is Jackie).
Stealing the computer information which could lead to harnessing this
energy, the commandoes  helicopter crashing into the brush.
Jackie awakens slowly over an undisclosed period of time. He has been
nursed back to health by an African tribe. As Jackie regains full
consciousness, he is asked by the tribesman who he is and where he
comes from. Jackie, suffering from amnesia, cannot remember his name
or how he came to be in the village. He asks the Village Chief
(Washington Xisolo), who am I? Misunderstanding him, the Chief believes
Jackie's name to be "Whoami", and this is what they call him.
Jackie is adopted by the tribe. He learns their language and their
culture, becoming a part of their society. During this time, Whoami
(Jackie Chan) regains bits and pieces of him memory. Realizing that
he most go back to civilization to discover his past, Jackie leaves
the tribe and goes off in search of himself.
This is the initial setup for the film, and I found this to be so
enjoyably quirky and different that I found myself wanting more.
Jackie's performance in the film is as good as anything he's ever
done. But those scenes in the African village are truly unique in
that we (U.S. movie-goers) finally get to see that Jackie is much
more than a high kicking stunt man. He IS an actor. The other
performances in the film are a hit and miss affair, but there is
nothing here that is as embarrassing as any of the gangsters in
"MR. NICE GUY" (1998). In fact on of the surprises of the film is
the return of Ed Nelson ("Attack of the Crab Monsters" )to the
screen as the corrupt General Sherman. Mr. Nelson is obviously
enjoying his role in this film and tries his best to give a
Cormanesque performance. The two female leads Mira Yamamoto as
race driver Yuki and Michelle Ferre as undercover CIA operative,
Christine are both working on screen for the first time and are
not called upon to do anything very strenuous, but they are
appealing and easy on the eyes.  The remainder of the cast are up
to the task, with Ron Smerczak doing a fine job as the evil arms
broker, Morgan.
Now of course everyone knows that Jackie does all of his own stunts,
and this film is no different. That "Oh My God" quality is still there
in abundance. Jackie is still the hardest working star on screen
today. We've heard other actors claim to do their own stunts, but no
one has that "go for it" attitude that Jackie has. Some critics have
called Jackie a Human yo-yo, and in one absolutely amazing stunt,
literally proves it. Trust me! Your mouth will remain open in
amazement for the next five minutes. There are fight scenes here that
are just unbelievably complex and inventively funny. A classic example
is a fight in the streets of Rotterdam with a set of Wooden Shoes.
The script by Jackie, Susan Chan and Lee Reynolds is remarkably
tight. Once the power of the isotope is explained, it becomes less of
an issue. The driving issue is tied to Jackie's attempts to rediscover
his own identity and the growing conflict he is having his past and
adoptive personality. As the film progresses, flashbacks are used to
fill in the blanks in the plot, creating a sense of urgency that is
very enjoyable. The direction by Benny Chan is reminiscent of some of
the more extreme work of Sammo Hung Kam-po. There is as much camera
movement as in any John Carpenter film, and it's use is marvelously
inventive. Co-Directed by Jackie himself (obviously handling the
action scenes) the film is a solid whole. In the past, Jackie has had
many disagreements with his directors, but here it seems that a mutual
cooperation is at work for the film holds together much better that
any of Jackie previous films since "Drunken Master 2".
The Cinematography by Hang-Sang Poon is beautiful. Africa has not
looked this majestic since "The Naked Prey" or "Born Free". Scenes of
the tribesmen shot from on high are sumptuous in their presentation,
giving these native people and their land a regal quality that is awe
inspiring.
One of the most appealing aspects of the film are the scenes with the
African villagers. In the past, it could be said that Jackie (and most
Hong Kong filmmakers) were a bit insensitive to other customs and
cultures. Here, there is nothing but honor and respect. This un-named
African tribe is presented with honor for both their customs and
individuals. The scenes of ritual dance are wonderful to watch. These
scene make you want so much more.
"Who Am I?" is a grand return from Jackie, a few mis-steps. A film
that honors Jackie's past achievements and points to a very promising
future.
Nothing in this article may be reprinted or copied without the expressed written permission of the author.
Article ) 1998 R.L. Strong

Title
Review for Halloween H20: Twenty Years Later (1998)
Dimension Films presents a Nightfall Production of a Steve Miner film
Jamie Lee Curtis  HALLOWEEN H20   Michelle Williams     Josh Hartnett     Adam Arkin     Jodi Lyn O'Keefe
Adam Hann-Byrd     Janet Leigh    and  LL Cool J    Cinematography by Daryn Okada
Music by John Ottman   Production Designer John Willett   Costume Designer Deborah Everton  Edited by Patrick Lussier  Associate Producer: Malek Akkad  Executive Producer:
Moustapha Akkad  Produced by John Carpenter, Paul Freeman, and Debra Hill Original story by Robert Zappia  Screenplay by Robert Zappia and Matt Greenberg  Directed by Steve
Miner
Well, we knew it was going to happen. When a franchise is doing even
remotely well, it behooves the producers to continue running the
series into the ground. We've seen this with almost every horror
franchise since the original 'Frankenstein'. Now there have been
exceptions to the rule. Such films as "New Nightmare" and "The Bride
of Frankenstein" have actually been superior to their originators. But
the 'Halloween' has not been so lucky. While trying to breath fresh
blood into the series, Moustapha Akkad had created an increasingly
absurd complex scenario. What makes this entry in the series is two
remarkable things. Firstly, the return of Jamie Lee Curtis to the role
that started her career, and secondly (and most importantly) a script
that disavows the previous sequels.
The film opens on October 29th. 1998. Nurse Marion Chambers (Nancy
Stephens, returning from the original film) arrives home to find her
home broken into. She gains the assistants of her two teenage
neighbors to call the Police. One of the boys investigates the home
and finds Nurse Chambers' study ransacked. Returning home, the boys
leave Ms.  Chambers to wait for the Police. She finds that her study
has indeed been vandalized and more importantly that the file of
Laurie Stroud has been stolen. Seeing a stranger in the hallway, she
narrow escapes to her neighbor's house. There she finds that the two
boys have already been murdered. The Shape (AKA: Michael Myers)
attacks and kills the nurse as the police arrive.
We are then introduced to Jamie Lee's character Laurie Stroud. She is
the Dean of a private school in Northern California. Divorced and
suffering from anxiety from her earlier experience, she has taken on a
false identity after faking her own death in an attempt to hide from
her murderous brother. Well, her son has recently turned 17, the same
age Laurie was, when Michael he escaped from the asylum back in
'78. Laurie attempts to deal with her fear by irrationally trying to
protect her son from danger. Well in due time, Michael finds his
siblings, and the battle begins.
Horror films for the most part are very, very predictable. You know
all of the set ups by heart. Lights the don't work, cars that refuse
to start when danger is near, etc., etc. All of these are in ample
supply here. The difference between this film and others of it's ink
is Jamie Lee Curtis. Ms. Curtis has always been a fine if not a
remarkable actress. her past performances have always been enlivening
and enjoyable (think 'True Lies', she was the only shinning light in
that ponderous and misogynistic film). Here, Ms. Curtis is center
stage, and she carries the film with a strength and determination that
is refreshingly honest to the character.
The screenplay by scribes Robert Zappia and Matt Greenberg (with
un-credited assistance from Kevin Williamson of 'Scream' fame) is very
tight, with a nicely set up premise and credible (for the most part)
situations. The inclusion of Janet Leigh as Norma (the maintenance
director of the private school) complaining about the drains in the
Girls' shower room being clogged is a marvelously funny tribute to
'Psycho' and a smack in the face to every other filmmaker who has
ripped off that famous scene. References to other works are remarkable
very slight in this film. It's not as jokey as the "Scream" films, in
that "Halloween H20" takes itself seriously. While most of the
characters are not very deeply written, they don't need to be as these
people are recognizable to most of us. What is most refreshing here is
that this film does it's best to do away with the body count mentality
of most horror films. Situations are set up wherein a character is
placed in mortal danger and is not killed. This simple idea leads to a
lot more suspense, and identifies the audience with the main
characters more intimately. Michael Myers is after one person, he only
kills those that get in the way of his goal.
Directed with a sure and steady hand by Steve Miner, Halloween H20 has
lots to offer it's audience. Mr. Miner is no stranger to the horror
genre having helmed the (arguably) best entry in the 'Friday the 13th'
series ("Friday the 13th: 3D"). Having moved onto more mainstream
films ('Forever Young' also with Ms. Curtis, and 'My Father is a
Hero') Mr. Miner shows a true love for the trappings of the genre,
making grand use of lighting and shadow throughout the film. His
handling of his actors is fine, with surprising performances put in by
relative newcomer Josh Hartnett as John Tate, Laurie Stroud's
son. Adam Arkin is fine as school counselor Will Brennan, bringing a
light touch of humor to the proceedings.
Halloween H20 is a fine entry in the horror sweepstakes and a fitting
end to a series that was starting to wear out it's welcome. There's a
lesson to be learned here for Hollywood. It's the writing.. dummies!
On a scale ***** "Halloween H20" rates ***=
Copyright ) 1998 R. L. StrongNothing in this article may be quoted or re-printedwithout the expressed written permission of the author.
