Authors
Paul W. Cashman
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Mars Attacks! (1996)
Summary:  see it at a matinee price; it might not be for everyone.
I'd only seen one quick ad for this film before seeing a sneak preview
on December 1st, so I had few preconceptions about it.  I knew that
Tim Burton was involved and that it looked like a send-up of B-movies,
a genre with which I'm passingly familiar, but that's about it.
For me, this film didn't -quite- work.   There were some really funny
moments, but many of the stereotype portrayals were a bit over the
top, at least for me.  Jack Nicholson turns in a truly scary
performance as the President -- I'd be scared if he were in office! --
and the lampooning of various other institutions, groups and cultures 
continues, to the point where underneath its veneer the movie seems to
be lecturing us.......
--Which would be fine if it weren't trying to be uproariously campy 
at the same time, and it was trying.  Maybe TOO campy; some of the effects
were intentionally cheesy but distracted from the flow because of
that.   Some scenes were so over-the-top campy that the audience could
do nothing else but groan.  Unfortunately, the average movie-goer
won't get all the gags -- some will get fewer than half -- and so we
doubted afterwards the movie would "fly."
MARS ATTACKS! includes cameo performances from a number of actors
including Danny DeVito (fine if somewhat predictable, in-character 
as a Vegas shark) and crooner Tom Jones (also part of the Vegas scenes).
No major complaints about the acting, but we wondered afterwards what
some of these 'big guns' were doing in this particular film. 
Overall, I thought the movie was so-so.  It didn't quite work for me
but for other genre fans, especially those more familiar with the
lurid pulps and B-films, it might appeal more.    The score, by Danny
Elfman, is almost worth a matinee admission price in itself.  Elfman
and Burton received applause during the opening credits.
It's hard to give a best scene without revealing a spoiler, but the
scene where the Easter Island statues are bowled over -- literally --
by the Martians is pretty funny.  Many of the best scenes already 
appear in the previews, anyway.    
Conclusion:  see it with genre-loving friends at a matinee price.  
You could wait for it to come to video, but some of the effects 
-are- worth seeing on the large screen, and Elfman's score is worth
it, too.
