Authors
Ed Arnold
Number of Reviews
2

Title
Review for My Left Foot (1989)
     (I recently posted a recommendation for the movie MY LEFT FOOT in
misc.handicap, and received an inquiry from someone on the net who was
perplexed about the cryptic newspaper ads for the movie and the lack of
explanation about the movie's subject in my posting.  For those who want to
know a little more about the content of the movie before plopping down their
money, here's the message I sent in reply.)
     Christy Brown was born in 1932 in Dublin, Ireland.  As you might guess,
prenatal and delivery care was lousy for the kids of poor families at that
time, and there obviously weren't any electronic monitors.  In fact, prenatal
care is still lousy for most poor people in Ireland, as shown by their rather
high incidence of cerebral palsy.  (In the case of Christy's family, his mother
was pregnant 22 times, but only 13 of the children survived.)
     Anyway, Christy was probably asphyxiated almost to the point of death
during labor & delivery, but survived.  He survived in a state in which his
mind was fully functional, but he had very little use of his body; only his
left foot functioned well enough to allow him any significant control over his
environment, thus the title.  Medically, he would probably be termed a
triplegic.
     With the use of his left foot, he eventually became a very good painter
and wrote some books, among them MY LEFT FOOT.
     (There has been another famous writer from Ireland recently, who also has
CP.  Christopher Nolan, who writes with a headstick, wrote a book a couple
years back entitled UNDER THE EYE OF THE CLOCK, which was widely acclaimed.)
     There is nothing glitzy about MY LEFT FOOT, but the emotional images are
stunning.  Here are some of them.  DON'T READ THESE BULLETED ITEMS IF YOU ARE
GOING TO GO SEE THE MOVIE AND WANT TO BE SURPRISED:
o  As a child, he is called a "half-wit" by people who don't understand
   that he has a bright mind in a disabled body.  The facial expression
   which the child actor was able to reproduce was remarkably accurate:
   a look of pain, accompanied by a downturned mouth/pouting look often
   seen in children with certain types of CP.
o  As a child, he finally makes it known to his parents that a lot is
   happening in his mind, by scratching out the word "MOTHER" on the floor
   with chalk held in his left foot.
o  As an adult, he is in love with the female doctor who was responsible
   for much of his rehabilitation, but is rejected by her.  The obvious
   pain he feels as he tells her that he's tired of platonic love (the
   phrase used in the movie is "f**k Plato"), that he's tired of
   being denied the expression and pleasure of his sexuality simply
   because his twisted body doesn't work like the average person's, is
   a real choker.
     I doubt that this would be a great movie for everyone.  I suspect there
are some people from the "Feeling Good" School of Life who would resent the
subject material.  Fact of the matter is, I'm biased for reasons I don't need
to go into here; taking that into account, I'll simply say that MY LEFT FOOT
is the best movie I've seen in 6 years.  As I've said before, it puts the glitz
of RAINMAN to shame.
Ed Arnold * era@ncar.ucar.edu * era@ncario [bitnet] * ...!ncar!era [uucp]

Title
Review for Hamlet (1990)
     Before giving you a review of this film, I must tell you that this
review is skewed.  The day before I went to Hamlet, I watched HENRY V on
video.  Now that's quite an adaptation to the big screen!
     As with any Shakespeare play, the key to any production are the
performances.  Face it, the actors are working with the best material
ever conceived by a man.  The only way to blow it is in the performance,
I guess a director could blow it, but that would be hard, most directors
know that the most they can do is bring visual depth to a product rich
in human depth.
     Well, it's sad to say, the performances is this film are definitely
not up to snuff.  Gibson stinks.  He does better in the action scenes,
but that's not the focus, and even in those scenes he lacks the strength
of projection needed for Hamlet.  He never is convincing, especially
when he's considering suicide.  Close's performance is not much better.
She plays Gertrude poorly, you never get the feeling that Gertrude is
evil, just so stupid she falls from one man to another.  Even when she
drinks the wine and dies, her death is overdone and overblown.  Granted
it's easy to take control of the screen when Gibson plays Hamlet so
badly.
     Now on a better note, Polonius (as played by Ian Holm) and the
woman who plays Ophelia are wonderful!  While I've read that others
thought  Ophelia was unconvincing in the first part of the film, I
thought she played it right on.  She was shy and overpowered by the
personalities around her, she was bewildered by the conflicting messages
and back-biting.  I think her performance became apparently stronger
over time because we saw more and more of her.  All in all a performance
worthy of a best supporting actress nomination!
     It's too bad I saw this film after watching HENRY V.  That was an
*incredible* performance.  I hope the actor who played "Harry" will do
another film with Shakespeare!
     Don't go see HAMLET, wait for the video and rent it some night when
you have nothing else to do.  Enjoy the supporting performances, but try
to live with the leads.
     If you want to see Shakespeare done right rent HENRY V or HAMLET as
done by Olivier.
