Authors
James Hursey
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Grumpy Old Men (1993)
     The film GRUMPY OLD MEN has been around a while but I have
deliberately avoided seeing it.  I suspected that it would simply be
another two-hour long, boring-after-the-first-five-minutes joke at the
expense of not just men, but of older men, and, for that matter, in
this case, of older men who happen not to have permanently sunny
dispositions.
     However, the video is now available and at my wife's insistence we
rented it, and I can say, after watching the film, that my worst
expectations were confirmed.
     But what was worse than being proven right was that apparently the
film was not simply meant to be funny, but was deliberately and
calculatingly meant to be derogatory and insulting to the title group.
     Now I like a joke as well as anyone and we can say that it was all
in fun, just a comedy to give us a few laughs in this generally not
very funny world.  And it may also be true that producers don't have a
lot of groups they can laugh at anymore so old men, particularly grumpy
ones, may be the only people left.
     Political correctness demands that we not make light of women,
ethnic groups, children (unless they are disgustingly precocious
brats), animals or spotted owls; that we respect the sensibilities of
those who are different, unfortunate or simply scarce.  Yet somehow it
is still okay to make fun of old men who, often, are all three.  With
the success of GOM, can we expect a spate of films on this subject
until such time as older males raise their voices, start protesting,
and picket a few theatres?
     Now obviously all humor, by definition, is at someone or
something's expense.  We cannot have jokes unless there is something to
joke about.  Not only old men but sex, too, is another of the few
things left that everybody still seems to think is funny.  So combine
them and you have the running joke throughout the film, which might
have been somewhat humorous the first time but got stale rather
quickly, about older men's supposed impotence.
     It is all simply a further demonstration of the age-as-decline
mystique that is the topic of Betty Friedan's book The Fountain of
Age:  the mistaken perception that old people are necessarily in mental
and physical decline, old people can't have sex, old people are
irascible, idle and by implication useless.  This, at bottom, is the
theme of the film.
     Why do you suppose the sport of fishing, among the many
possibilities, was chosen as the two retired protagonists' principle
time-filling activity? It was done with due thought and deliberation
because they wanted to show that these men were basically incapable of
doing anything other than fish or fight.  Walter Matthau's character,
when asked what he does, responds, rather gruffly, "I fish."  That's
all.  No explanation, no hint of joy, not even a rationalization of the
pleasures that fishing can, for many, give.  Fishing is really the only
thing we ever see them doing other than fighting with each other.
     Now I hope all those serious fishermen out there will not get too
upset, but I think most will have to admit that aside from a long
difficult struggle reeling in a swordfish in deep ocean water, or
spending a day casting flies in a remote mountain stream, neither of
which many fishermen get a chance to do, the vast majority of fishing
consists of sitting in a boat or on the shore (or, as in the movie, an
ice fishing shack), with a cooler of beer, a can of bait and simply
waiting for the bobber to jump.  Occasionally the line is pulled in,
re-baited, dropped back in the water and the fisherman sits back with
another cold one.  Not by any stretch of the imagination, a physically
or mentally challenging pursuit.
     Done this way, fishing is an activity with little other purpose
than to fill empty time, which, if that is one's purpose, it does
admirably, akin to sitting on a park bench feeding the squirrels and
pigeons.  Now, fishermen, vent your wrath at the producers who
exploited your sport in such a negative way, not at me.  I have dropped
a line myself occasionally and admit it can be a pleasant and relaxing
recreation.  But one of the points of the film was that these old men
(and we see a whole lake full of them just to make sure we get the
point) are clearly not enjoying it; they just sit there glumly,
drinking, bickering, staring into space as if the lake were just one
big frozen nursing home for the hopelessly senile.  Other than when the
younger woman catches the big fish, we see no one taking joy in the
sport.
     I submit that a similar film called GROUCHY OLD LADIES could never
be made or at least would never be as successful or considered as funny
as this one was because women would now allow it.  Feminists are much
more successful and united in protecting the image of their sex than
men are.  The very idea of "masculinists" is ridiculous.
     There would be nothing very funny about older women portrayed as
aged, half-decrepit, totally idle, with nothing to do but bicker,
fight, and, the equivalent of fishing, gossiping over a game of
bridge.  If such are shown in films they have never been, at least
recently, to my knowledge, since the age of liberation, as the butt of
an on-going, two-hour long joke.
     We get a bit of a sop at the end, of course, with the Jack Lemmon
character marrying the sexy neighbor.  But note how the scene was
rather abruptly and gratuitously thrown in.  They had milked the stale
joke as long as they could and figured they had better have an upbeat
ending or people might begin to see what they were really up to.  And,
anyway, the upbeat part amounted to about two minutes of the entire
film.  This is a further insult since it assumes the viewer would know
no better.
     I suppose one might start a movement, something on the order of
"old men of the world, unite!" but I don't think it would work.
OMOTWU!  Nah, just doesn't have a ring to it.  Guess I'm just getting
old and grumpy.  Think I'll go fishing.
