Authors
Darrell Rudmann
Number of Reviews
2

Title
Review for First Knight (1995)
     "Another King Arthur story?" I caught myself thinking, sitting in
the theatre waiting for the sneak preview to begin.  After being forced
to sit through hours of medieval films that my brother, a medieval
history freak and SCA member, made me watch through childhood, my
excitement of seeing this film was to say the least, lacking.  What
could FIRST KNIGHT add to the story of King Arthur that other stories
hadn't already done?  (And Richard Gere as Lancelot?  What the hell's
that all about?)
     Surprisingly, the entire film works very well (Gere does a fine
job) and adds much to existing King Arthur films.  It keeps the
sweeping scale of Excalibur, but focuses on the tight circle of the
three main characters.  Besides interesting choreography and sharp
action scenes, FIRST KNIGHT delves into the characters of Lancelot,
Lady Guenivere, and King Arthur farther than any other Camelot film
that comes to mind.  Richard Gere plays the enigmatic Lancelot, a
freelance swordfighter of sorts, who's fierce independence is tamed
only by his passionate interest for Lady Guenivere, played by Julia
Ormond.  Of course, before meeting Lancelot, she has promised her hand
in marriage to the reverent King of Camelot, Arthur, portrayed by Sean
Connery in a kind of role that he does best.  The two men clash, both
on the battlefield and off, resulting in a refreshingly intimate look
at the people behind the legend of Camelot.
     Unlike most action scenes nowadays, the fights were actually
entertaining and interesting to watch!  Large sets were employed to
give the viewer a true sense of being in the film--for example, a
large Round Table room was made complete with four walls, allowing for
camera shots that pan the entire room, instead of the usual "film a
corner here, film a corner there."  The film uses a number of night
shots, which are difficult to film but work wonderfully.  King Arthur's
troops, in silver armor, ambush another army in nothing but the
moonlight, in one scene.  The shiny reflections of the armor create an
unbelievable sea of twinkling light.  Also, look for the recreation of
the Gauntlet.
     This kind of film-making reminds me of other strong films like A
FEW GOOD MEN.  Strong acting, clean writing and directing produce a
story that is hard not to like.  I recommend this film to King Arthur
buffs and families alike.  Although not appropriate for small children,
the film is exciting and enjoyable, and does not employ foul language,
any nudity or unnecessary sexuality, nor any gore in the fighting
scenes.  Sounds impossible?  Watch it and see.  In wide release July
7th.

Title
Review for Sweethearts (1996)
** SWEETHEARTS (1996)
** Starring Janeane Garofalo, Mitch Rouse
** IMDB: http://us.imdb.com/Title?0120256
SWEETHEARTS is a direct-to-video film that aspires to be a tragic romantic
comedy that comes across like a film student's first year project.  Garofalo
gets to reprise her role as the date from hell (see BYE BYE LOVE, 1995) as
Jasmine, who has dealt with a lifetime of having bipolar depression.  Arliss
(Rouse) gets sucked into Jasmine's crazy world for one brief, dark evening.
And I do mean dark.  First, the comedy is quickly lost as the story gets
more involved with Jasmine's mental disorder and Arliss' desire to rescue
her.  Jasmine has decided to go on one last date before attempting suicide
to end her misery, and Arliss is the lucky date.  Arliss' character is never
completely realized; Arliss spends nearly the entire movie trying to rescue
Jasmine.  While understandable, it's not very captivating.  Perhaps the
story would have been stronger if, over the course of the evening, Arliss
comes to understand the extent of her disorder better (which was continually
referred to throughout the movie as 'bipolar manic depression,' which
incorrectly mixes two terms for the same disorder) and decides to go along
with her decision, supporting her despite his inner pain from liking her.
Instead, the film leaves the viewer with no real insight into the human
experience.
Second, the VHS format of the movie looks like it was shot in
candlelight-the film is literally dark.  Many of the scenes were pools of
red and black colors that spoke.  Finally, several scenes featuring the use
of guns are--probably unintentionally--heavier than they were meant to be,
given the recent spree of murder-suicides in the U.S.
However, the film represents an interesting departure from the usual
romantic comedy.  For Garofalo fans, or fans of Margaret Cho or Bobcat
Goldthwait, it's a must-see chance to see these comedians in an unusual
project.  Cho steals many of her scenes, but Goldthwait isn't given many
opportunities to use his comedic talent.
/* Spam-blocking in effect.  To send an e-mail reply
   to this address, put the word "review" anywhere
   in the subject line. */
