Authors
Paul Miller
Number of Reviews
15

Title
Review for Turbulence (1997)
The premise of TURBULENCE is I'm sure very familiar to us all.  We've
seen it before in Passenger 57, Executive Decision, and countless other
flicks that are good in there own way.  You know, terrorists take over a
plane, ask the police on the ground for what they what and so on.
TURBULENCE starts out with a "convict" Ray Liotta being accused of a
crime.  You think there is no way he could have done it, he's so open
and kind.  He is taken in and is subsequently transported on a
commerical plane to LA.  This is already a problem.  There is no way
that convicts would be transported on the same commercial flight that
normal passangers would be on.  Anyway, it is Christmas Eve and everyone
is waiting to get to LA and spend Christmas Eve there.  Well, convict
one manages to stop the flight in its proverbial "tracks" and Liotta,
still as calm as ever, takes the other convict out.  He also has eyes
for Lauren Holly, a flight attendent, and seems to grow closer to her.
I didn't like this movie because it seemed to be a rip off of every
other airplane movie I've ever seen.  At one point, Mr. Liotta looked
exactly like Jack Nicholson in THE SHINING (I'm serious!).  It was like
they stole for every other movie down to a "t".  The only reason I did
not give this 0 stars is because it had some okay stunts.  Don't even
bother!

Title
Review for Daylight (1996)
When I got to the ticket window, I thought to myself, after Stallones'
last film (the bomb Judge Dredd), do I really want to plop down $5 to
get in to see his new one DAYLIGHT.  I did, and am thankful for it.
Daylight starts out with two shady guys argueing about getting rid of
toxic chemicals in New Jersey.  The deal between the two is made and the
chemicals are taken away, down the Holland Tunnel.  (If you don't know
this is the underwater tunnel that links New York to New Jersey).
In the next scene, some punks steal a car from a business man.  The cops
catch up to these punks and they try to get away.  By doing this, they
wreck.  And wouldn't you know it, right into the explosive toxic waste.
Well, a fire (very similar to the ones in Independence Day) engulfs the
whole tunnel.  Few people are still alive.   And on top of that, the
Tunnel has collaped on the ends and is barely still standing in the
middle.
Bring in Sly.  He's an ex-EMF operator and was for some reason or
another fired (they do explain why in the movie) and is now a cab
driver.  He finds a way to enter the tunnel  to tries to lead the group
of about a dozen to safety. 
That as far as I'm going to go with plot details.  Here's why I enjoyed
this movie:
1.  Sly shows acting skills in what I thought was just going to be
another "Sly" action movie.  Don't get me wrong, I love Cliffhanger,
etc, but you really need to know how to act when you have special
effects on your side.
2.  Special effects.  Yes, I know this sounds like a contradiction, but
the special effects were first rate!  This are some of the best special
effects I have seen in a long time.  The fire especially amazed me!
3.  Twists in the action.  You think everyone is going to die, or do
you?  You think everyone is going to pull through, somehow they will
find a way, or will they?  This constant thought and suspence makes you
have to think through this movie.
I thought this was a super movie with outstanding special effects and
good acting.  I would recommend it to anyone.
**** - If you haven't seen this movie, something is terribly wrong.
***  - Excellent movie!  Take an afternoon off work and take in this
       flick.
**   - Don't waste your money
*    - Your reputation will be ruined if you are seen at this movie.

Title
Review for Devil's Own, The (1997)
This is definately a movie that has been through a lot even though it
just started out at the box office just 2 days ago.  Brad Pitt publicly
denouced the film because of its numerous script rewrites and plot
changes.  Well, in the end ....
The Devil's Own starts with Frankie (Pitt) as a small boy.  A mysterious
masked man enters, shoots his father, then leaves.  Flash ahead to 1992.
Apparatly Frankie is now IRA.  He has vowed to revenge his fathers death
by killing as many British army members as possible.  One problem, it
seems that every british soldier is after him now.
He leaves to go to the US.  A judge (I believe that the judge had IRA
ties although they never really say) hooks Frankie now called Rory up
with a NY police officer (Harrison Ford).  He finds something that leads
directly into Frankie past....
Anyway, you want more details...pay $5 and go see the movie.  I did.
Nonetheless, the movie starts out very slowly once we leaves Ireland but
picks up in not too long.  I think however, they could've done more with
the background between Frankie and the judge because you never really
understand that, you just know that they are together in some way.  I
also think that more could've been done with the relationship between
Frankie and the women (her name escapes me....).
I still liked the movie and am glad I went to see it, but it still
could've been better.

Title
Review for Metro (1997)
If you are anything like me, you have not read one good review for Eddie
Murphy's new movie METRO.  At least now this is no longer true.
Metro starts off in an interesting fashion.  Roper (Murphy) is a hostage
negotiator and has a case on his hands.  He asks for a dozen donuts (I
still don't know why) and proceeds to go to the crime scence.  
The plot stops here.  All I will say is that Roper has one heck of a
case on his hands.  He also must take on a new partner (the always great
Michael Rappaport) and train him the right and the wrong ways to
negotiate.
I can say, however, that this is an imaginative movie.  It incoporated
many different views into a whole, this movie.  This movie was good
because of the exact reason I did not like Murphy's BOOMERANG, that
reason being that it didn't stress the comedy.  In here it stressed
supsence and action.  The BEST thing about this movie is that it ALWAYS
leaves you guessing.  Do not think you know what will happen next,
because you don't.  Don't try either, you'll just end up being more
confused than you already are.
If you are an Eddie Murphy fan (such as I am) this may not be the best
movie for you to see.  This isn't the usual Eddie role because the
comedy isn't stressed.  One thing I can say is that Eddie does a good
job with the role.  I think someone else possibly could have played both
parts (Murphy's and Rappaport's) role slightly better, but I think that
would be a very difficult thing to do.
If you want a suspence filled two hours, go see Metro. If you want
classic Eddie Murphy, try renting the Distinquished Gentleman.

Title
Review for Beavis and Butt-head Do America (1996)
Okay, let me first say, this is a BEAVIS AND BUTTHEAD movie.  If you do
not like BEAVIS AND BUTTHEAD, DO NOT go to see this movie!!!!!  However,
if you do like them, I recommened you get out right now and go see it.  
The movie starts off with the boys wondering what happened to their TV.
They notice that it has been stolen and they vow to find it.  This wind
their way through America searching for Dallas (she is a woman).  They
look for her because as they are searching for the TV, they find a drunk
who wants them "to do" his wife.  Well, of course they think he wants
them to score with her when actually he wants them to kill her.  And the
fun starts their.
This movie is a mix of funny gags that anly Beavis and Butthead could
pull off.  It is quality entertainment that only fan of Beavis and
Butthead would enjoy.  I enjoyed this movie alot because Mike Judge knew
how to keep pace.  Even when they were crawling through the desert and I
thought the movie started to lag, he manages to keep the laughs coming. 
If you expecting changes from the show keep looking.  The same
character, the same voices, the same everything from the show and that's
what makes it good.  You might think with a movie from a TV show, you
can change a few things.  Often times this spells disaster for films
because the film makers veer away from what made the show popular in the
first place!

Title
Review for Vegas Vacation (1997)
As we all might have expected, another of the "Vacation" movie has
arisen.  If you think, some of the best movies of the past few years
have been with Clark, Ellen, Rusty, and Audrey.  Of course we've all
seen Christmas Vacation, sure to bring laughs to everyone.  I was hoping
for a lot with Vegas Vacation...
At the beginning of the movie, Clark earns a bonus for making a food
preservative that keeps cookies fresh for years.  He wants to go to Las
Vegas in hopes of remarriaing his wife.  The family doesn't really take
to the idea, but nonetheless go anyway.
This is where the fun begins.  They meet up with Eddie (of course, Randy
Quaid) who is always funny and doesn't leave me down.  They have a
stripper daughter, but that really doesn't matter.  They catch snakes,
etc.
I liked Vegas Vacation, but expected more out of it.  The parts of
vulgarity and partial nudity that made the first three fun wasn't
apparent.  In fact, besides the Hoover "Damn" scence with was on the
trailer, there wasn't much else in the way of vulgarity.  I think they
ruined the movie somewhat by making it more "family-oriented".
Anyway, I liked the movie and would recommended it even though it COULD
have been much better.

Title
Review for Volcano (1997)
I had been expecting more of this movie than the less than thrilling
TWISTER.  TWISTER was good but had no real plot and no one to simpithize
with.  But TWISTER had amazing effects and I was hoping so would VOLCANO
Volcano starts with Tommy Lee Jones at EMO.  He worrys about a small
earthquake enough to leave his daughter at home with a baby sitter.
There is one small quake then another quake.  Then a geologist points
out to Tommy that its takes a geologic event to heat millions of gallons
of water in 12 hours.  A few hours later large amount of ash start to
fall.  Then....it starts.  The volcanic eruption....
I liked this movie...but it was not as great as I hoped.  I was still
good none the less.  It had excellent special effects.  The best
view...the helecopters flying over the streets of volcanos. 
Also...there were interesting side stories that made the plot more
interesting.  So...It was good!!

Title
Review for Michael (1996)
Going to see a movie about an angel is not my idea of a good movie.  But
if that angel John Travolta and he drinks, smokes, and has sex with any
beautiful girl that he meets, I might reconsider.
The movie begins with William Hurt (Frank Quinlan) and Robert Pastorelli
(Huey Driscoll) working for a paper called the National Mirror.  (sort
of like the National Enquirer). While sifting through his fan mail one
day, Frank finds a letter from a women that claims to have an angel
living with her.  Of course, Frank and Huey are eager to check this out.
They want to clear it with they boss (Bob Hoskins) and they find out
that they can go, but they have to take a so-called angel expert with
them.  So Dorothy (Andie MacDowell) tags along.  
Soon, they find themselves in Iowa and they find there angel.  Only he's
like nothing they ever imagined.  As questioning begins to why he
doesn't fit the "norm" of what angels are supposed to be, he responds
with "I'm not that kind of angel.".  Well, it turns out he's an
archangel and his job was to battle Satan and put him where he belongs.
They take him back to the National Mirror so they can draw up a story
and on the way back they get into adventures and see being an angel is a
hard job.
There were many familiar faces in this movie past the four already
mentioned.  Teri Garr plays a judge in a small Iowa town and the LOVELY
Carla Gugino (from Spin City) plays a wasted role as a bride in one of
the bars they visit.
If I said that I didn't like this movie even a little bit, I would be
lying.  As a movie fan I would say this was a good movie with believable
characters and a plot that was sweet and innocent.  But as a movie
critic, I honestly have to say that there just wasn't much there.
It still enjoyed this movie, but there could have been more to it than
just the straight forward material that was there.

Title
Review for Trees Lounge (1996)
Trees Lounge is the directoral debut from one of my favorite actors,
Steve Buscemi.  He gave memorable performences in In the Soup, Fargo,
and Reservoir Dogs.  Now he tries his hand at writing, directing and
acting all in the same flick.
The movie starts out awfully slow with Tommy(Buscemi) hanging around a
local bar the "Trees Lounge" and him pestering his brother.  It's
obvious he a loser. But as he says "It's better I'm a loser and know I
am, then being a loser and not thinking I am."  Well put. 
The story starts to take off when his uncle dies, and Tommy, not having
a job, decides to drive an ice cream truck.  Well, the movie starts to
pick up with him finding a love interest in a 17 year old girl named
Debbie (Chloe Sevigny) and...
I liked this movie alot even though it did not reach my expectation. 
After you've seen him in Fargo and Reservoir Dogs, you know he is
capable of a better performence.  I think his brother, Michael, did an
excellent job for his debut performence.
Mr. Buscemi is off to a good career as a director!

Title
Review for My Fellow Americans (1996)
My Fellow Americans is a movie that at first glance looks to have little
substance (or a movie that we've all seen a million times), two lifetime
rivals thrown together and then the fun begins.  This is exactly what
happened in this movie, but fortunately, they managed to do it in an
interesting and funny way.
The movie starts with a quick (and I do mean quick) glance of two
presidents Russell Kramer (Jack Lemmon) and Matt Douglas (James Garner).
William Haney (Dan Aykroyd) and Ted Matthews (John Heard) are the new
President and Vice President.  There is a scandal that arises involving
a kickback from a contractor and Haney is positive that he buried that
years ago.  He finds a scapegoat in Kramer and now everyone wants Kramer
and Douglas dead.
This movie was exceptional for many reasons.  One being that they found
people (Lemmon and Garner) that have good chemisty together.  They
worked very well as a unit and they mirrored each other perfectly, one
being a ladies man and one being the old man (I'll let you fiqure which
is which).  Also, they found people that know their parts as govenment
officials well.  It seemed to me that Garner played almost exactly the
same role that he played in The Distinquished Gentleman (except then he
was a Congressman).  Experience counts for a lot!!

Title
Review for Lost World: Jurassic Park, The (1997)
Jurassic Park was a movie that revolutionized the way that we perceived
movies.  We began to think....what if we could clones dinosaurs again
after seeing this movie, we had to begin to think that we wouldn't
really want to.  The Lost World shows that not only would that be a
grave mistake but that it could lead to extintion of the human race.
The movie starts out with Ian Malcolm being "summoned" by John Hamond. 
John has a proposition...Go to Isla Sorna which is 80 miles SW of Isla
Nablar.  There is "Site B".  The Isla Nablar mueseum is for the best of
the best from Isla Sorna.  Jurassic Park were only the healthy dinos
that were bread at Sorna.  Hammond knew that eventually someone would
find it and it would be pilaged.  Ian refused until he found out that
his girlfriend, Sarah Harding was one of the four on the expedition.  He
went there, not for research, but to get his loved one out of harms way.
He goes there only to find his daughter has tagged along for the ride. 
He finds his girlfriend.  No sooner then he finds her then 10-15
helocopters land with jeeps, hummers, you name it.  They are INGEN, John
Hammonds corpoation.  They begin to mess up the island...trapping
dinosaurs, caging them, etc.  The leader is Hammonds Nephew.  His
sidekick if you will, is a hunter that wants nothing more than a Male
T-Rex.  
This movie was great...however not near as good as Jurassic Park.  You
will hear countless people say..."This was 1000x worse than the book." 
Well, here's how I look at it.  They are two completely different
stories.  The movie didn't follow the book at all except for bits and
pieces. You can't compare apples and oranges, which is what the book and
the movie were.  Looking solely at the movie, it was solid, well acted,
and amazing special effects.  If you loved Jurassic Park, you will love
the Lost World.
http://us.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?carson%40epix%2Enet%20%28Paul%20Miller%29

Title
Review for Scream (1996)
Only so rarely do I ever even rent a horror movie, I'm just not that big
into them.  Scream, directed by Wes Craven, is one of those rare horror
movies that appeals to me because the characters are not stupid.
Anyway, the movie starts out with Casey having an evening at home.  A
mysterious man calls on the phone and pesters her with question from
horror movie.  "Who was the killer from Halloween" "Michael Myers" she
bellows very scardly.  She then proceeds to find that her boyfriend
Steve has already been murdered.  The thing that has done this is now
after her.  She sub-sequently dies and is hung. 
The story shifts to the aftermath of the killings at the local high
school.  Everyone is freaked out after their best friends Casey and
Steve have been killed.  The next victim is Sydney (Neve Campbell). 
Sidney manages to survive the attempt and her boyfriend found on the
scene is taken away to prison.
The movie spirals beyond the point of no return with you thinking about
four different people commited the crime...and it turns out how actually
did it is no one you would have ever imagined.
The bright spot of this movie was Henry Winkler.  Someone in the theater
bursted out "Hey, that's the Fonz."  He played the lovable principle at
the high school.
I loved this movie because it mixed the perfect amount of suspense,
comedy (yes, comedy), and not too much gore that it becomes disgusting.
The gore is plentiful; but not excessive.  I would recommend going to
see this movie if you haven't yet, ir if you have, go see it again.

Title
Review for Jerry Maguire (1996)
On the way to the theater today, I was in a huge rush and I almost
missed the coming attractions (something I hate to do.)  In fact, I
almost said "skip this movie" all together.  But I'm glad I didn't.
This movie started out with Mr. Cruise himself playing sports agent
Jerry Maguire. He's a hot shot and a hotdogger all the way.  Until one
seemingly normal night he's watching TV.  He thinks for a second, then
starts writing on his computer.  He keeps writing for 25 pages until he
finally comes up with his "mission proposal".  He makes copies for
everyone.  The one quote everybody see "Less Clients, More Attention".
For saying this, he's fired from SMI, an office of agents, (I bet they
have one heck of a Christmas party!) and consequently lose almost every
client he has.
This is something I stick to, no plot details.  I think many reviewers
go too far and give away most of the movie, but not me.
Anyway, here's why I enjoyed this movie.
The cast was super.  Everyone and I mean EVERYONE turns in great
performances.  Especially Johnathan Lipnicki, a small tot, that couldn't
have been more than about 3 or 4.
Also, excellent writing and direction.  The script showed Maguires
downfall with in-your-face force, you can't help but leave your seat
without thinking about what you just saw.
Excellent cameos.  Sports stars from Troy Aikman to Roy Firestone and a
great cameo by Eric Stoltz.
This overall was a super movie.  It shows Mr. Cruise in a new, fresh way
that everyone will appreciate.

Title
Review for Mars Attacks! (1996)
As I went to the ticket window, I found myself very excited about Tim
Burton's new film, Mars Attacks!.  I thought this was going to be one of
the best films I have ever seen.  This is why they invented theatrical
trailers.  They make it look like the movie will be entertaining,
energetic, and fun, but this isn't always the case.
I'm sure if you've seen the trailer at one time or another, you would be
compelled to see this movie.  This is what sucked me in.  Congrats
Warner Bros., this is a super trailer.
Enough about the trailer, on with the movie.
The movies' first 45 minutes or so are about the most boring I've ever
seen.  Basically, it introduces most of the characters and manages to
kill off a few.  I was very disappointed when Michael J. Fox, who played
a news reporter, was killed off in the first half hour.  This set a sad
tone on the movie that would not be soon forgotten.
Anyway, the Martians surround Earth and they send us a signal that they
are friendly.  They land in a desert in Nevada and after a dove was let
off as a sign of peace, the ambush begins.
After a fake apology, the Martians take out Congress and the rest of the
movie unfolds as you might think, with different personalities joining
the mix.
This movie (in terms of structure) could be compared to From Dusk till
Dawn, in that there are two stories in one movie.  Dusk was critized
because the beginning developed characters masterfully then they got to
the bar only to fight vampires.  What I mean is the second part of this
movie is what I thought the whole darn thing would be like, funny,
imaginative, and hip.  But this is not what happened.
If the whole movie could have been like the second half, we could be
talking classic, but unfortunately this didn't happen.  As much as I
enjoyed the second part, the terseness of the first part overshadows
this and makes the movie worse than it should have been.
Another thing that upset me to a point was how the filmakers mislead you
before you even went inside the theater.  Glenn Close was given second
billing when actually she was only given about 15-20 minutes of screen
time.  Another thing was Danny DeVito was given fifth billing when he
was in the movie no more than three minutes.  Heck, Tom Jones and Jim
Brown were in the movie more.
All these criticisms seem make it seem like I hated this movie.  This
was not the case.  Simply, the movie was not as good as it could have
been, or actually should have been.

Title
Review for Breakdown (1997)
Well...I must admit this movie definately lived up to my expectations,
but in a deferent way that I had hoped...
The movie begins with Kirk Russel and his wife Katholan Quinlan as
"rich" Bostonites trying to make a fresh start in California.
Mysteriously, theit car breaks down and they are left at the side of the
road.  A man it an 18-wheeler comes by and offeres a ride into town.
Kirk is skeptical but lets his wife go while he stays behind.
Eventually he fiqures out what was wrong and goes about finding his
wife.
Hmm...this is where the action stops and it's my duty to stop telling
you plot details....
This movie (as I said) did live up to my expectations.  It showed the
length that a man would go to save his wife.  But so much of the movie
involves him getting revenge that I think the movie loses a little
focus.  Thats not that big of a deal.  I just think that if not for that
the movie could have been better (although at already was great).
