Authors
J. Tayloe Emery
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Last Supper, The (1995)
this review is also posted at 
http://moviereviews.com/coc-dave-rubitout.html 
Was it just coincidence that  "The Last Supper " was
released Easter Week?  Were they hoping to catch everyone in
that crucifiction spirit? Regardless,  "The Last Supper
" is a film that should have followed its own storyline and
killed itself, as well, before ever making it up on the screen.
Don't be fooled by the big-name cameos; the rushed plotline and
insensitive dialogue drowns this movie within the first ten
minutes.  

A group of Iowa grad students are sharing a house together and
every Sunday they get together and spew their idealized
philosophies.  That is until...he came over.  He
is Bill Paxton, most recent of Apollo 13 but still
affectionately known as "Chett" from  "Wierd Science.  "
 Paxton plays a knife wielding, ex-marine, child molester who of
all things gets invited to dinner after helping one of the
fellas with a flat tire.  Dinner conversation that evening
centers around the problems of the world and Paxton makes no
bones about who he thinks are the culprits...who else?  The
usual stereotypes; Jews; Women; and African-Americans.  Paxton's
views might win over a few in the truckstops across the
heartland, but does not sit well in the presence of the five
liberals who have two women, a jew, and a black in their ranks. 
Next thing you know, fists are raised; knives are drawn; Paxton
gets his.

This starts a long line of invited "guests" who come over for
Sunday dinner and end up in the vegetable garden pushing up
tomato plants.  Ten in all, and everyone of them seemingly worse
than the one before.  The Liberals are out to "put some action
behind our words."  Killing off right wing radicals seems like a
logical way way to do it, but it soon becomes very unbelievable
that no one in the town (save the inquisitive, yet slow, Sheriff
played by Nora Dunn) would catch on.  I mean even right wing
freaks have families and friends...don't they? In the end they
push their luck to far by inviting a Rush Limbaughish character
to dine, and he transcends the whole film.

This movie marks the directorial debut of a talented young lady,
Stacy Title.  An Academy Award Nominee for her short film,
"Down On the Waterfront, " this film may have been a bit
big to swallow for a major production.  My biggest problem is in
the acting; all five actors look as if they lost interest in
portraying real characters.  The stereotypes are so commonly
thrown around in this film that they end up sticking to the
characters, and cheapening their roles.   I hope Stacy's next
film is a strong effort. 

