Authors
jabii1
Number of Reviews
3

Title
Review for Black and White (1999)
I'm going to keep this one fairly short, folks. In fact, I'm not even going
to attempt a plot summary because there isn't any plot in "Black and White".
James Toback, previously responsible for releasing the atrocious "Two Girls
and a Guy" on unsuspecting audiences back in 1997, has created a true piece
of garbage here. This is the kind of movie that screams for an NC-17 rating,
being filled with fairly explicit sex scenes, constant violence, and more
foul language than you hear in any Quentin Tarantino film. The MPAA rating
system is supposed to keep kids from seeing a movie like this, but the
theater I saw it in was filled with young high school students. I know it's
naive to think that kids won't see a movie like this no matter what kind of
rating it has, yet I can't help but think an NC-17 rating would have
prevented at least a few kids from attending.
First I'll try to cover what I liked about this movie, which shouldn't take
too long. There are one or two slightly comical moments, though I can't seem
to remember what they involved. That about sums up what I liked about this
movie. I don't often award one or five star ratings, but I was very tempted
to give only one to this piece of filth. I knew I was in trouble as soon as
the film started with a semi-pornographic scene involving two of the main
characters (Bijou Phillips, Power) and one minor character in a threesome in
the middle of the woods. I suppose the purpose of this scene was to convey
how messed up these kids are, but it struck me as being present only for
shock value. In fact, there are several sex scenes sprinkled throughout
"Black and White" which enhance the so-called story in no way.
I will hand one thing to Toback, he pulled in quite a cast. Ben Stiller,
Robert Downey Jr., Brooke Shields, Claudia Schiffer, and the great Joe
Pantoliano all make appearances in this god forsaken movie. Stiller
("There's Something About Mary") plays a gambler (a somewhat
autobiographical decision by Toback I think) who appears very few times and
never quite fits in with the rest of the movie. Robert Downey Jr. (the
horrendous "Two Girls and a Guy") plays a gay man, who I believe was
intended to be humorous but was simply vulgar instead. Brooke Shields ("The
Blue Lagoon") and Claudia Schiffer both show up in very minor roles, which
distract the audience rather than add anything to the movie. Last, but
certainly not least, is Joe Pantoliano ("The Matrix", "Bound"), who is
completely wasted as a father of two of the young, stupid characters.
Showing up in a hilariously pointless cameo is Mike Tyson himself.
Allow me to now point out the half dozen or so items which make this a
horrendous movie. One, half the dialogue is completely unintelligble. The
characters banter back and forth, swearing every other word and saying
things which no one over the age of fifteen could possibly understand. Two,
there is no plot to speak of. There are a few subplots involving things like
sports gambling and coping with ones identity, but none of these side
stories are ever developed. Three, I think this was supposed to be a
profound look at racism and life in an inner city, but it succeeds only at
insulting members of both races. Fourth, there is no direction whatsoever.
The movie jumps aimlessly from person to person and situation to situation
without any idea where it is going. Lastly, the film's ending left me with a
sick feeling in my stomach. I normally don't give away plot points, but the
movie's ending seems to imply that family can triumph over anything by doing
things like pulling together to lie and cover up murders. "Black and White"
runs the longest 98 minutes you'll ever experience. I recommend it to
absolutely no one and give it one and a half out of five stars.
Comments? Feel free to e-mail them to: johnbeachem@dependentfilms.net
For past reviews, movie news, and other fun stuff, visit:
http://www.dependentfilms.net
* * * * * - One of the greatest movies ever made, see it now.
* * * * - Great flick, try and catch this one.
* * * - Okay movie, hits and misses.
* * - Pretty bad, see it only if you have nothing better to do.
* - One of the worst movies ever made. See it only if you enjoy pain.

Title
Review for Ready to Rumble (2000)
Walking into "Ready to Rumble", the new film from Hollywood's biggest
goofball, David Arquette ("Scream", those annoying 1-800-call-ATT
commercials), I figured there were two possibilities for this movie. It was
going to be stupid, the previews had already given that much away. The
question now, was whether it was going to be the sort of stupid which you
can't help but chuckle at, or the just plain moronic kind. It turns out that
the movie has a little of both. While there are a lot of faults, there are
also one or two really funny scenes and a few others you can't help but find
amusing no matter how low brow they might be. However, the film's biggest
problem is the premise itself. How can one make a movie that pokes fun at
professional wrestling when wrestling already pokes fun at itself?
Gordie (David Arquette) and Sean (Scott Caan) have only one great love in
their lives. This all consuming passion is professional wrestling, and
specifically worship for their idol, Jimmy "The King" King (Oliver Platt).
They have just obtained tickets to the latest match between The King and
Diamond Dallas Page (Page Falkinburg). They are horrified to find that
King's manager, Titus Sinclair (Joe Pantoliano), has rigged the match so
that King will not only lose, but will be ejected from the wrestling circuit
forever. Now Gordie and Sean have only one purpose in life: to get The King
his crown back. However, they soon discover that their idol may not be all
they thought he was, and professional wrestling may be *gasp* fake afterall!
When I said there are one or two really funny scenes in this movie I wasn't
kidding. Fortunately, there are enough mildly amusing scenes to make up for
this. The interesting thing is that, the best part of this movie isn't the
comedy, it's the massive wrestling match at the film's end. The problem with
this is that it's a long, and at times very dull, trip to that payoff.
Another problem is that while the majority of the jokes may fall flat, at
least the actors are trying their best to pull something out of them.
However, at other times the movie seems to be trying to convey some message
about wrestlers and their fans and this not only doesn't work, but seriously
detracts from the rest of the film. I suppose this is because anything
serious seems completely out of place in a movie this goofy.
As for the actors, I've never really cared for David Arquette. He may have
been somewhat entertaining in the "Scream" films, but I think this is
because Wes Craven kept him tightly reined in. Otherwise, he has a tendancy
to overact to the point where the audience expects him to rip out of the
screen and start bouncing off the walls. Scott Caan ("Boiler Room", "Black
and White") hasn't appeared in much till now, but he turns in a remarkably
restrained performance considering his co-star. As for Oliver Platt ("Lake
Placid"), whom I consider one of the better comic actors working in
Hollywood, he is woefully miscast as a professional wrestler. The problem
is, Platt is not particularly tall, rather overweight, and about as vicious
looking as a small dog. Being surrounded by real wrestlers, like Bill
Goldberg throughout the movie, only makes him look more ridiculous in this
role.
"Ready to Rumble" has a typical soundtrack for this type of movie. It's
filled with popular alternative music, and it was certainly a welcome change
from the constant rap soundtracks I've been hearing lately. Brian Robbins
("Varsity Blues") doesn't exactly seem to be directing this movie. He simply
seems to be allowing the actors to do whatever they feel like to try and get
a laugh out of Stephen Brill's ("The Mighty Ducks") rather weak script. I'm
not sure if this was a good idea, but keeping David Arquette under control
certainly couldn't have hurt the film. "Ready to Rumble" runs far too long
at 122 minutes, and should have been no more than 95. I'd recommend "Ready
to Rumble" to wrestling fans since they will most likely recognize a few
familiar faces and give it three out of five stars.
Comments? Feel free to e-mail them to: johnbeachem@dependentfilms.net
For past reviews, movie news, and other fun stuff, visit:
http://www.dependentfilms.net
* * * * * - One of the greatest movies ever made, see it now.
* * * * - Great flick, try and catch this one.
* * * - Okay movie, hits and misses.
* * - Pretty bad, see it only if you have nothing better to do.
* - One of the worst movies ever made. See it only if you enjoy pain.

Title
Review for Small Time Crooks (2000)
Ray Winkler (Woody Allen) is an ex-con who now works a menial job and
dreams of a better life. His latest lame-brain idea is to rent space
in a store across from a bank and tunnel under the street into the
bank's vault.  Ray brings three friends, Denny (Michael Rapaport),
Tommy (Tony Darrow), and Benny (Jon Lovitz), into his scheme to help
him dig the tunnel. His wife, Frenchy (Tracey Ullman), and her brain
dead cousin, May (Elaine May), work a cookie shop in the space they
have rented to hide Ray's activities. The plan doesn't work quite the
way Ray intended. In fact, it doesn't work at all.  The group has been
so busy tunnelling they haven't noticed what a hit Frenchy's cookies
are, and they decide to turn the little store into a huge
franchise. Ray and Frenchy are now rich beyond their wildest dreams,
but it affects them in two very different ways. Ray somehow turns into
even more of a slob, wanting nothing to do with a rich
lifestyle. Frenchy has become so completely infatuated with her new
way of life that she hires an art dealer, named David (Hugh Grant), to
teach her how to act like her new wealthy friends. Soon Ray and
Frenchy are drifting down very different paths, and Frenchy starts to
think she may have outgrown Ray.
Let me start by saying that I have never cared for Woody Allen's
films, thus my opinion of this movie may be a tad biased. I've never
understood Allen's humor - like when Frenchy says something sarcastic
to Ray, and he responds with "I'm this close to popping ya Frenchy,
just one more word." It wasn't funny back when Jackie Gleason said
something similar, and it's somehow even less funny when Allen says it
now.  The only funny thing about it is that I think Tracey Ullman
could probably beat Allen up. I will say this, "Small Time Crooks"
actually starts off rather funny, with Ullman given a few amusing,
witty comebacks to some of Allen's dumber statements. In fact, the
first third or so of the film is really quite funny. Watching the four
bumbling criminals try to carry out their plan is uproariously funny
at times, especially when they break a pipe in the wall and flood the
entire store. Unfortunately, once they make their fortunes, and the
whole rags-to-riches story takes over, all the humor is sapped out of
the movie. I suppose Allen was trying to show the benefits of a simple
life compared to an extravagant one; but if that's the case, he failed
miserably. Both lifestyles looked pretty horrendous.
Woody Allen has always seemed to be one of the more irritating actors
in Hollywood. I think his stuttering over every word and bumbling
around like a buffoon is supposed to be funny, but here's the fact of
the matter: Woody Allen is too smart to play a stupid character. I've
seen him in interviews, and the man is too intelligent to convincingly
play a bumbling idiot.  This may be why he has surrounded himself by
characters even dumber than Ray.  Michael Rapaport ("True Romance") is
notorious for playing brainless characters, and he plays more of the
same here. Jon Lovitz ("Trapped in Paradise") is infamous for playing
irritating characters, and Benny probably would have been fairly
annoying if given more screen time. Actually, nearly the entire
supporting cast is stupid (I mean that in an unfunny way), irritating,
or both. The only exceptions are Tracey Ullman, in the film's first
half, and Elaine May (you remember, she wrote and directed "Ishtar"
way back when) as the hilariously dense May. If it hadn't been for
Elaine May's presence, I probably would have rated this film quite a
bit lower.  She is so likeable and naive that she can't help but make
the movie at least somewhat enjoyable. Last, we have Hugh Grant
("Mickey Blue Eyes"), who serves no purpose and seems to realize this
judging by the performance he gives.
The thing which most bothered me about "Small Time Crooks" was that
Allen leaves a dozen or so loose ends. Characters vanish half way
through the film and are never heard from again; romantic angles arise
but are never dealt with; and the ending doesn't tie things up quite
the way I would have liked.  There are numerous other faults, though
they are fairly minor. There isn't much of a soundtrack; some of the
scenes feel rushed (the first dinner party and the aftermath of the
cookie company being created), while others seem to drag on forever
(any scene with Hugh Grant); and the comic pacing is non-existent at
the film's midpoint. The film's high points are Elaine May, Ullman's
occasional smart-alec comments, and the attempted bank robbery.
"Small Time Crooks" does run an admirable 94 minutes at a time when
films running less than two hours are becoming a rare breed. Fans of
the old Woody Allen films will probably enjoy it because he's back to
his screw-ball antics rather than the dramatic pictures of the last
few years. If, like me, you don't care for Allen's brand of humor, I'd
suggest you skip this one. I give it three out of five stars.
Any past movies you want me to review? Send to:
johnbeachem@dependentfilms.net
Past reviews can be found at either: http://www.dependentfilms.net or
http://us.imdb.com/ReviewsBy?John+Beachem
* * * * * - One of the best movies of the year.
* * * * - Great flick, try and catch this one.
* * * - Okay movie, hits and misses.
* * - Pretty bad, see it at your own risk.
* - See this one only if you enjoy pain.
