Authors
Jon Cohen
Number of Reviews
2

Title
Review for Miller's Crossing (1990)
     I thoroughly enjoyed MILLER'S CROSSING, a powerful, original, and
sometimes very funny gangster picture written, directed, and produced by
Joel and Ethan Coen, the same team that created BLOOD SIMPLE and RAISING
ARIZONA.
     The story is about rival gangs--Irish, Italian, and Jewish--and
their struggles to control the rackets, cops and politicians in a
nameless American city that might be Boston in the 1920s or early 1930s.
One of the impressive achievements of this film, I think, is how the
Coen brothers create a generic city of darkness and lawlessness that
refers as much to the history of gangster films as any real time and
place.
     These guys make movies with great style--lots of surprises, lots of
rolling cameras following characters around, moving in slowly on people
or chasing after them, constantly changing the audience's point of view.
No doubt, Alfred Hitchcock is one of the big influences on their style.
When they do a violent scene, it always contains a surprise of some kind,
an unpredictable and uncontrollable element,  sometimes a laugh: the
message, I think, is that violence is the height of human stupidity.
     The Coen brothers also have something to say about greed and
corruption in this movie.  We get a vision of life without love and
trust and the ethical codes that come from respect for other human
beings.  Characters are corrupted to different degrees.  We hear them
rationalize about the compromises they make, and some even take pride in
the "ethics" that they bring to their business of using, hurting,
robbing, and killing people.  The movie asks the audience to reflect on
its own compromises, its own fearful obedience to the system, our own
inabilities to love and trust.
     At the center of the film are great performances: the
always-wonderful Albert Finney as the Irish boss, whose soft heart is
his tragic flaw; Gabriel Byrne (remember this guy from SIESTA?)  as a
dark-hearted, black Irishman who is brilliant at the art of survival but
too damaged to love or trust anyone; and John Turturro (ferret-faced
actor who was Sal's racist son in DO THE RIGHT THING) as an especially
slippery and desperate Jewish punk.  There is also a great performance
by a bald-headed, fat actor as the Italian crime boss (anybody catch his
name?).  Also, the characters in the film often refer to Turturro's
character as a "Shmata" or "The Shmata."  Does anybody know what this
means--is it Jewish, Irish, Italian?  ["Schmata" is Yiddish for "rag."
--Moderator]
     Altogether, a memorable bunch of grotesque characters, lost in the
darkness.

Title
Review for State of Grace (1990)
     Late last year, three gangster movies involving some of the world's
best actors and directors were released at the same time: GOODFELLAS,
MILLER'S CROSSING and STATE OF GRACE.
     STATE OF GRACE may have received the least attention of the
three--at least, it was the one I did not catch in the theatres (I did
enjoy GOODFELLAS and MILLER'S CROSSING a lot and generally enjoy movies
about the psychology of criminals and the workings of organized crime).
     So I recently caught STATE OF GRACE on video and--although I don't
think it is as good as the other two films mentioned above--I thought it
offered some great moments--and a great performance by Gary Oldman.
     I don't know much about Gary Oldman.  He's British.  I saw him
recently in ROSENCRANTZ AND GUILDENSTERN ARE DEAD, where he gives
another great performance, and also in PRICK UP YOUR EARS.  Does anyone
know more about his film credits and background?.  He seems to have had
some training as a classical actor, as he jumps around with grace and
abandon and seems to know fencing.
     In STATE OF GRACE he broke my heart with his performance as a
slightly out of control, hyper-active, messy, violent, and alcoholic
gangster who visibly aches for love and something worth fighting for.
This is the sort of character that Eric Roberts plays so well--the kid
who could not sit still in class and whose life has gone straight down
hill since the third grade.  It's a memorable and manic performance--
and next to seeing Annette Bening naked in THE GRIFTERS--one of the
highlights of my movie year.
     I think Oldman outshines Sean Penn in STATE OF GRACE--one of Penn's
more low-key performances.  Penn can still communicate more with his
face and body language than most screen actors can do with a hundred
great lines.  But Oldman has the better part in this extremely violent
movie about Irish gangsters being swept away by changing times in lower
Manhattan.  Penn seems a little tired and depressed in this film--and he
shows some influence of Robert DeNiro, who he  seems to be imitating in
the way he reads certain lines.
     I also wasn't thrilled by the violence in STATE OF GRACE.  It
seemed gratuitous to me--lots of showy, bloody, slow-motion shoot-outs
with bags of fake blood exploding all over the place.  This sort of
cinema ultra-violence went out with Butch Cassidy and Bonnie and
Clyde--at least I thought so.
     Another problem with the movie--the script focused on an ethnic
subculture and old way of life under attack, but none of the lead
characters seemed very ethnic to me.  Ed "The Abyss" Harris gives a good
performance as a ruthless SOB, but there's nothing very Irish about him.
The same goes for the lovely Robin Wright, the princess of THE PRINCESS
BRIDE, who shows she is not just a beautiful ex-model but a promising
and interesting actress in her role as the younger sister of gangsters,
trying to live a decent life and distance herself from her shameful
family and past.
     Also, Burgess Meredith hams it up as an old sot--a character a lot
like the one he plays in the Rocky movies.  Is Burgess Meredith alive or
dead?  Seriously, I thought he died.  If so, this must have been one of
his last roles.
     Funny, I recently saw THE FIELD, where the characters were
definitely Irish, but which suffered from an overwrought and silly
script.  The script for STATE OF GRACE by Dennis McIntyre was very
good, I thought, but needed some real Irish people to bring it to life.
And less contrived, special-effects violence to distract us from the
human tragedy.  Where was Mickey Rourke when we needed him?
