Authors
Rich Siege
Number of Reviews
3

Title
Review for Last Seduction, The (1994) (TV)
Starring: Linda Fiorentino,  Peter Berg,  J.T. Walsh,  Bill Pullman
Directed by:  John Dahl
Screenplay:  Steve Barancik
Produced by: Jonathan Shestack
Released by: October Films
     THE LAST SEDUCTION is director John Dahl's follow up to his
sleeper hit RED ROCK WEST, and like his prior film, this one involves
a decent, honest, albeit somewhat naive small town guy who unwittingly
gets between a criminal couple who've developed a rather lethal dislike
for each other.  In this case, small town insurance adjuster Mike
Swale (Peter Berg) falls for Bridget Gregory (Linda Fiorentino), a
mysterious no-nonsense, tough-talking  New Yorker who shows up at his
hometown bar and immediately bowls him over with her sophisticated
style and unselfconscious expression of her sexual needs.  What Mike
doesn't know is: she's hiding out from her crooked-doctor husband Clay
(Bill Pullman) from whom she's just stolen all the proceeds from a big,
once-in-a-lifetime drug deal he's just completed.
     The film centers on Bridget, who's brutally cold and manipulating,
a natural-born grifter.  She unfolds her crafty schemes to safeguard
her stolen fortune with the cool precision of a master spy from the old
"Mission Impossible" TV series.  You can almost see her mind racing ahead
of each scene,  planning just the right moves to keep the hapless
Mike--or anyone else she needs to control--on her string.
     Linda Fiorentino is a joy to watch in this role.  Despite her
character's utter lack of kindness or conscience, her virtually
unshakable confidence, her wit and her sexual brashness  make her
character engaging and enjoyable to watch.
     Bill Pullman, as Bridget's husband Clay, is effective as a sort of
pale reflection of Bridget.  While he has the same basic sensibilities
as his wife, he just doesn't have the smarts or talent to compete with
her.
     Peter Berg's Mike is an appropriately self-conscious yokel; keenly
aware of his lack of sophistication and judgment when it comes to "city
girls." He's not stupid--well, maybe a little;  But basically, he's
just a regular guy.  Against the likes of Bridget, however, he has no
chance.
     Bridget's lawyer (J. T. Walsh) is the only person Bridget seems to
have any respect for.  He provides Bridget with sage advice and moral
support over the telephone.  He's the only one who understands her true
nature: "Anyone check you for a heartbeat lately?", he asks her at one
point.
     THE LAST SEDUCTION is tighter and more suspenseful than RED ROCK
WEST.  The dialog is crisp and to the point.  The cool-but-tense feel
of the film is sustained throughout.   The understated jazz score by
John Vitarelli adds the perfect mood to this very enjoyable film.
Rated: R - (language, nudity, sexual situations)

Title
Review for Legends of the Fall (1994)
Starring:   Brad Pitt, Anthony Hopkins, Aidan Quinn,  Julia Ormond,
            Henry Thomas
Directed by: Edward Zwick
Produced by:  Edward Zwick, Bill Wittliff, Marshal Herskovitz
Screenplay by: Susan Shilliday, Bill Wittliff (based on a novella by Jim
               Harrison)
Director of Photography: John Toll
Music: James Horner
     LEGENDS OF THE FALL would have made a good silent movie.  Its
well-worn story of a family divided by the love of a woman is sustained
primarily by images and music.  The epic sweep of  LEGENDS, which takes
us from a Montana ranch, to the battlefields of World War I, to the
South Seas and even to urban back alleys complete with gangsters, is
perfect camera fodder.  The actors provide the longing looks of
unrequited love, the writhing death scenes and the frail quiverings
of old age.  In the broader strokes of the silents, this would have
been first-rate material.  However, now, it all seems rather
overwrought and anachronistic.
     Brad Pitt, Aidan Quinn and Henry Thomas portray the three sons of
a former Union Army Colonel (Anthony Hopkins), who, after being
outraged by the treatment of  Native Americans during the Indian Wars,
resigns his commission and starts a cattle ranch in Montana.
     Early on, Director Edward Zwick paints an idyllic portrait of the
life of this gentleman-rancher and his sons growing up in the wilds of
Montana (Recollections of BONANZA are unavoidable during the early part
of this film.).  The film patiently, almost reverently, depicts the
love and respect the boys have for each other and their father  (Their
mother, early on, departs for a less rugged environment.).  When we
first see Pitt,  Quinn, Thomas and Hopkins their characters seem to
have some genuine warmth and depth.  When the youngest son, Samuel
(Henry Thomas), arrives home from college with his bride-to-be, the
subtle sense of impending conflict amidst the brotherly camaraderie is
apparent.  Their harmonious life is about to about to come apart.
     When Samuel announces his plan to join the Army to fight the
Kaiser in the Great War and we see Tristan (Brad Pitt) comforting
Samuel's fiancee Susannah (Julia Ormond) when she learns of his plan,
we pretty much know where this story is headed: Samuel is doomed and
Tristan and Susannah will fall in love.
     LEGENDS is fairly routine melodrama.  Not that there's anything
wrong with that.  But in this case, once the stage is set and the main
conflicts defined, the film fails to lives up to its early promise of
rich characterizations and story.  Instead, Pitt and Quinn retreat
into, what for them, are becoming stock characters:  Pitt plays
Tristan--riddled with guilt at the death of Samuel and his love for
Susannah--as the same brooding, haunted soul he portrayed in INTERVIEW
WITH A VAMPIRE.  He unvaryingly expresses a sort of impenetrable
detachment throughout most of the film;  After years of traveling the
world as an adventurer and big-game hunter--which, on screen, is
depicted in a long, awkward section of narration and montage--Pitt's
character returns home with virtually no hint of change or maturation,
as if he'd been gone for a long weekend  (except for a beard that makes
him look remarkably like Val Kilmer's Jim Morrison from THE DOORS.).
     Quinn, also reverts to his predictably long-suffering,
self-righteous character that he has used before in films such as BENNY
AND JOON.  Despite his character's success in business and politics--he
becomes a Congressman--he can't shake that perpetual hurt and betrayed
look.
     Anthony Hopkins provides the appropriate strength and dominance to
the role of the Colonel until his character is reduced, by a stroke, to
a jumble of facial tics and mumblings.
     Despite these flaws however, the film isn't a complete loss.  The
power of John Toll's cinematography and James Horner's lush,
occasionally overbearing, score--which, at times, seems to be
sustaining the film by itself--saves LEGENDS from disaster.  The
beautifully photographed settings of the Montana countryside  (actually
shot in Alberta, Canada) dominates this film.  Even in close ups, the
richness of the backgrounds occasionally upstage the actors which, in
this case, is no great loss.
Rated (R) violence, sexual situations, brief nudity, language.

Title
Review for Ermo (1994)
Keeping Up With the Joneses--Chinese Style.  
     ERMO is a cautionary tale of the pitfalls of the emerging
middle-class in modern Chinese society.  Ermo, the title character, is
a product of Chinese economic free-market reforms.  She's a
self-employed noodle maker who also makes produce baskets on the side
for extra income.  She supports her lazy husband  "Chief," a former
village official, and her son Tiger through long hours of hard work.
For her efforts, her family leads a modest but comfortable life.
     Ermo's problem is that her next door neighbors--"Blindman," his
wife and daughter--are doing even better.  Blindman bought a truck
which he uses as the basis of his successful hauling business.  They're
so successful, in fact, they own the neighborhood's only TV which makes
their home the favorite hangout of the local kids, including Tiger.
Ermo develops an intense jealousy of her neighbors; both for their TV
and for the resourceful, hardworking  "Blindman" who puts her own
layabout husband to shame.
     On a visit to a nearby city to sell her baskets, she sees
something in a department store that, for her, represents the answer to
her feelings of low self-esteem: a 29-inch color TV--bigger than the
richest family in the county could afford.  She determines that owning
this TV will restore her feeling of self-worth and improve her standing
in the community.  She decides to devote all her efforts to acquiring
this technological jewel despite the fact that she has little interest
in watching television herself.  In fact, she finds it quite
bewildering.  As she watches a store display of televisions she's
amazed at how the foreigners on the imported programs can all speak
Chinese.  She even becomes concerned, while watching a foreign language
program, that the TV has forgotten how to speak her native language.
     Despite this, however, the TV becomes Ermo's obsession.  She will
go to any length to acquire it.  She takes a restaurant job in the
city, where she lives, during the week, in squalid barracks.  She even
sells her own blood to the local blood bank for extra cash.  Every
night she lays her money out on her bed and counts and sorts her bills,
waiting for the day her new dream will be fulfilled.
     ERMO shows us the jealousies, petty bickerings, and romantic
intrigues common in middle-class life.  Although these situations are
dealt with in countless films, seeing them in the context of a rapidly
changing culture gives them new life.  Director Zihou Xiawen uses a
decidedly light touch to point out the darker side of capitalism.  Even
with its tragic elements, the film is good-humored and vibrant.
Despite their flaws, most of the characters have an underlying goodness
and honesty about them that makes it easy to sympathize with their
attempt to come to terms with a changing value system.
ERMO features Ailiya, Zhang Haiyan, Liu Peiqui and Ge Zhijun.
Screenplay by Xu Baoqi and  Lang Yun from a novella by Xu Baoqui
Produced by Ocean Film Co.
Distributed by Arrow Entertainment
