Authors
Steve Upstill
Number of Reviews
6

Title
Review for No Way Out (1987)
          Thriller fans and those able to choke back outrage at blatant
     stupidity have the best chance of enjoying this film, which is
     blessed with some fine thriller execution and cursed with some hoary
     thriller cliches.
     NO WAY OUT, the new thriller directed by Roger Donaldson, is a study in
ambivalence.  Rarely have the elements of a movie been so disparate in their
potential to please.  On the one hand, you won't find a better-looking or
-acted movie for grownups offering as many legitimate (or illegitimate)
suspense units.  On the other hand, you have to suffer through some 
astonishingly lame turns of plot (at one point, some of the most powerful
people in the US government decide it would be a keen idea to launch a
room-by-room search of the Pentagon using a pair of witnesses--that's right:
*two* people--to find a Soviet agent) and arguably one of the most arbitrary
surprise endings on record.
     Basically, the film is much, much better than it has a right to be.  The 
script is boilerplate turnabout romantic thriller intrigue at the highest 
levels of power in the US government.  The writing is adequate to the task.
It's the execution that makes it worthwhile.  The movie has as much respect for
the audience's intelligence as I can recall in a major Hollywood picture in
some time.  In particular, the psychological interplay between the characters
and the control of the tone of individual scenes is exceptionally keen.  I 
really LIKE not having every little thing s-p-e-l-l-e-d o-u-t f-o-r m-e in
words of one syllable.  I have to credit the director and the fine cast (Kevin 
Costner, Gene Hackman, Sean Young, and others) for most of what's good here.
     In short, if you can turn off your reality checker, ignore a variety of 
blatant stupidities, put up with several gratuitous chase scenes, and believe 
in the most surprising of surprise endings, NO WAY OUT will definitely give 
you your money's worth.  But the clash of all these qualities keeps my rating 
down to **1/2 out of ****.

Title
Review for Swimming to Cambodia (1987)
    SWIMMING TO CAMBODIA is an hour and a half of a man talking.  Spalding Gray
spent several weeks in Thailand acting a small part in the film THE KILLING
FIELDS, and this film (a record of his performance before a live audience, in a
perfomance gallery in New York) is a monologue about events and observations
surrounding the filming, including the decimation of Cambodia, the nature of
Hollywood reality, the fleshly pleasures of Bangkok, the Gulf of Siam, drugs,
American foreign policy, relationships and himself, Spalding Gray.  You can
imagine, this is a film with scope.
    It was directed by Jonathon Demme, who, after the Talking Heads concert
film STOP MAKING SENSE and the Yuppie comedy SOMETHING WILD, is rapidly
becoming a hero among modern directors.  His presence in the film is firm but
subdued, providing emphasis and enhancing mood with sound effects, camera
angles, cross-cutting, editing and Laurie Anderson's understated music.  The
star, of course, is Gray, and he makes the time go by lickety-split.  He is of
that rare breed of storytellers who command the totality of your attention and
imagination while speaking, and he leaves you with something when you go out.
    This film is valuable for several reasons.  First, as a completely
successful exercise in minimalism: you're never less than interested in what
he's saying, and often deeply moved.  Second, as a political lesson, bringing
home the real horror of the rule of Pol Pot (who now lurks behind the border of
Thailand waiting to take over again with the support of the United States).
Third, as grist for the intellectual mill.  Gray is really talking about movie
reality vs. flesh-and-blood reality, and how they get all mushed up.  Fourth,
he is an inspiration.  Seeing the world through his eyes is a challenge, to
observe and absorb in the same probing, synthetic way.  Finally, this film is a
document of an archetype: Gray is pounded by what he experiences, but he never
loses his very '80s irony and detachment towards it.

Title
Review for Untouchables, The (1987)
      5) Do you appreciate a script which NEVER makes you wince, and which
         consistently concocts novel, interesting approaches to pedestrian
         material and manages to take several surprising turns?
      9) Can you tolerate realistic bloodshed in the service of terrific action?
     10) Do you respond to a little food for thought subservient to action?
     If you answered positively to the majority of these questions, have I got
a movie for you.  Not a film, mind you, a MOVIE.  Where the story is brisk and
important, where the killings are mean, where the scenery is from another
world, where the characters are bigger than life, where the actors are stars.
If you just got lost in thought thinking about the last time you saw something
like that, then have I got a movie for you.  The story: Al Capone is running
Chicago.  Elliot Ness comes in to stop him, forms the Untouchables, and gets
his man.  This is probably Brian DePalma's best movie.  Not his most daring,
perhaps, but the one in which he matures into a director who puts his talent at
the service of the picture instead of his visual ego.  He gets support in all
departments ranging in quality from first-rate to brilliant: Kevin Costner
finally gets the lead role he deserves, and performs to perfection in a
difficult characterization which must humanize a man who in our cynical times
we can only describe as a crusading supercop.  Sean Connery, as a member of
his team, inhabits his role completely as an aging beat cop who signs on with
Ness.  Robert DeNiro is once again perfect as the publicly genteel, privately
brutal Capone.  Ennio Morricone's score does it again, with just the right
touch of bombast.  Whoever was in charge of the production design also
deserves a round of applause for a consistently evocative, detailed 30's.  And
the cinematographer captures it all beautifully.
     Finally, David Mamet's script has to be singled out.  It absolutely puts
the run of Hollywood writing to shame, recalling the days when screenwriters
were writers first and Hollywood deal-chasers second:  His story is solid, his
turns of plot surprising, his dialogue crisp and right, his characters walking
perfectly that thin line between interesting complexity and mythic stature.
Best of all, he manages to insert one of the most compelling subtexts in some
time, underlining with three or four clever juxtapositions the presentation
and willing, even eager, public acceptance of a face of witty gentility on a
reality of horrid brutality.  The public's eagerness to believe in Al Capone
as a kind of public servant provides much of the underlying dramatic tension
in Ness's efforts, but leaves the viewer with much to think about.
     But that's all too serious.  When you come right down to it, THE
UNTOUCHABLES is terrific entertainment.  The tension starts early, and reaches
a feverish peak in a train station shootout that is DePalma's greatest
set-piece, which is saying a lot.  How successful is it?  Put it this way: it
contains a blatant steal from Eisenstein's Odessa Steps sequence in POTEMKIN,
and DePalma GETS AWAY WITH IT!!  In spades!
     All in all, a piece of Hollywood magic that reminds you of what Hollywood
is really capable of when it is of a mind to do it.  A clear +3 on the Leeper
scale.
     Caveat: you should know that DePalma's affection for bloodletting is in
evidence here, though in comparatively restrained measure.  That is, it's
nothing like that in SCARFACE.  But if the sight of blood makes you ill, don't
say I didn't warn you.

Title
Review for Hombre mirando al sudeste (1986)
     One of the most universally-praised films of the last year was MAN FACING
SOUTHEAST.  With only two exceptions, everyone I know who saw it lavished it
with praise.  I finally caught up with it last Friday, and I'm spoiling for a
fight with anyone who would care to defend it.
     One of my two dissenters described it, not kindly, as a misbegotten hybrid
of THE MAN WHO FELL TO EARTH and ONE FLEW OVER THE CUCKOO'S NEST.  I concur;
MAN FACING SOUTHEAST *is* indeed like an ill-starred half-breed, but without
the latter's mystical power or the former's sense of humor.
     But seriously, folks, I have three serious gripes with it.  First, it
didn't have the dramatic fortitude to be consistent.  If Rantes was supposed to
be this unfeeling creature, why are we never informed, or even hinted at, about
the transformation which enabled him to express such joy in the "conducting"
scene.  He seems impassive when an Impassive Objective Analysis of Human
Affairs is required, and passionate/human when that is convenient.
     Second, the film tries very hard (and apparently successfully) to give 
the impression of addressing important issues without ever really coming to
grips with any of them.  Ambiguity and irresolution have their place in a
well-constructed plot, but not in the kind of hit-and-run philosophical
flirtation you find in this film.  Sure the doctor was intrigued, engaged and
depressed by encountering Rantes, but was he any different at the end than at
the beginning?  Did he learn anything?  If so, then his treatment of the woman
does a good job of obscuring it.  And how are we supposed to make of the
prisoners rioting while Rantes conducts?  Is this supposed to matter to us,
except to jerk hope out of us like romantic novels jerk tears out of
adolescents?
     But I guess the thing that bothers me most involves the film's single
clear philosophical statement, that it is "rational" to help another, which
proves that people are irrational.  In fact, compassion is one of the most
noble of human emotions, partly because it is irrational.  The most chillingly
uncompassionate people I have ever met are also the most rational.  Tune in to
libertarian discussions on Poli-Sci sometime if you don't believe me.  The
view that morality is a strictly rational phenomenon goes back to Kant, and is
profoundly dehumanizing, making people into dry bearers of Absolute Good,
devoid of either passion or joy, with no use whatsoever of the idea that 
humanity shares some common bond.
     But of course the filmmakers didn't think it through that far.  They tell
us that compassion is rational because it's an easy, glib way of telling us how
fucked up we are.  The annoying thing about MAN FACING SOUTHEAST is that it is
perfectly content with glibness, allowing and encouraging its audience in the
smugness of frustrated hope, without ever considering the effort involved in
making real change in the world.  As H. L. Mencken said (more or less) "If you
make people think they're thinking, they'll love you.  If you *really* make
them think, they'll hate you."

Title
Review for Someone to Watch Over Me (1987)
     In Brief: Once again Ridley Scott takes a mediocre premise and by
     sheer force of technique *almost* makes you buy it.  Several
     appealing characters trapped in a movie-of-the-week.  But still,
     it's a Ridley Scott picture.
    I've developed a theory about Ridley Scott: that mediocre material has an
irresistible attraction for him.  I'm not quite sure whether it's the challenge
of transforming lead into gold, or just that dross keeps your  attention on his
work.  But you consistently hear, in reference to his  pictures (THE DUELLISTS,
ALIEN, BLADE RUNNER, LEGEND, and now SOMEONE TO WATCH OVER ME), how the movie
itself wasn't much, but IT LOOKED SOOOOO GOOD!
    He does keep getting better, though.  THE DUELLISTS was primarily eye
candy, but ALIEN had such compelling texture that it (for some) triumphed over
its hoary old bug-eyed-monster plot.  BLADE RUNNER was his only  unqualified
success as far as I'm concerned, simply because its future world was so
complete and also because, to a large extent, the creation of a compelling
world *was* the movie.  LEGEND again leaned on world-fabrication, but its other
elements were so vestigial that it didn't quite make it in spite of the
brilliance of the odd moment and the fact that it was the most complete,
satisfying fantasy world I've ever seen in a film.
    And now, SOMEONE TO WATCH OVER ME, his first "real-world" picture,
containing his first romance.  The story: cop from Queens bodyguards 
socialite from Manhattan and gets in over his head, romantically speaking.
Canonical movie-of-the-week material, right?  Indeed.  But then there's the
part that's hard to talk about.  Somehow, Ridley Scott has gone beyond look,
beyond mood, beyond texture, into some other realm entirely.  The images in the
first twenty minutes or so of this movie are so ravishing, so self-assured, so
perfectly assembled, so *right*, that they almost justify the film on their own.
Unlike the perfect compositions of, say, Stanley Kubrick, they draw you in.
They have an electric life of their own, and they say to you, "Come here.  Let
me show you something you've seen a million times in a way you've never thought
possible."
    Not that everything else in the film is wrong.  Tom Berenger is perfectly
cast as, and perfectly plays, a basically simple, hard-working, family-loving,
confused but not stupid, working class cop.  Both his wife and his love
interest (sorry, didn't catch the names) are distinct, full-blooded people.
You just wish, and wish, and wish, they these interesting, sympathetic people
would jump the track of this basic, predictable copshow and go do something 
interesting.
    Ridley Scott is a state-of-the-art filmmaker.  I just wish someone would
force a state-of-the-art script on him.  Let's start a movement to make him
direct the film of PRESUMED INNOCENT.  For this one, he only gets bbb out of
bbbb.

Title
Review for 'Breaker' Morant (1980)
        Speaking of unknown great movies, here is a short list of
unknown/forgotten films that populate my all-time-favorite list.  
Face in the Crowd (1957) -- The writer-director team of the earlier Marlon
    Brando classic "On The Waterfront" collaborated on this melodrama of a
    bum from the South who gets on the radio and becomes what is now known
    as a media celebrity in the early days of television.  Andy Griffith,
    of all people, turns in one of the most galvanizing performances you'll
    ever see.  Turn off the lights, watch it all at once and be stunned.
The Tenant (1976) -- Roman Polanski's existential horror film about a man
    with a shaky lease on his own soul.  Polish immigrant in Paris (Polanski)
    takes the apartment of a woman who hasn't quite committed suicide.  The
    clearest example I know of Polanski's greatness as a filmmaker, this film
    can be seen as three or four independent great films: as straightforward
    mystical horror; as creepy, blackest comedy; as a depiction of existential
    detachment along the lines of Polanski's earlier "Repulsion"; as a brutal
    examination of human vampirism.  Again, you have to pay full attention to
    get the full impact, but under the right conditions this one will have you
    raving for days.
McCabe and Mrs. Miller (1971) -- Robert Altman's first film after the celebrity
   afforded him by M*A*S*H wasn't entirely ignored, but neither does it have
   nearly the regard it deserves.  Possibly the first "revisionist Western,"
   it's an exquisite mood piece exactly like a Leonard Cohen song -- and a
   number of those appear on the soundtrack.  Warren Beatty plays a gunfighter
   attempting to retire to a dingy mining town running a whorehouse.  Or
   rather, getting Julie Christie to run it for him.  This is a classic for
   illustrating the magic of cinema, as all the scenes and small bits add up
   to a deeply moving, melancholy finale.
Breaker Morant (1981) -- again, hardly an unknown (it enjoyed a sweep of the
    Australian Academy Awards), this is a courtroom drama and a moral 
    examination of stunning perfection.  "Breaker" Morant is an Australian 
    officer in the Boer wars in South Africa brought up on war-crimes charges by
    British officials in search of a scapegoat.  It is first a riveting
    courtroom drama as the attorneys for Morant struggle to overcome the 
    system.  But it is also about moral ambiguity, personal responsibility and
    colonial exploitation (of the Australians as well as the South Africans 
    by the British), recalling implicitly such historic tragedies as the 
    Holocaust and the war in Vietnam.  But the show's the thing -- it isn't
    every day that you have to tear your eyes away from a film and forcibly
    remind yourself that what you're seeing is really just a movie.
Sullivan's Travels (1943)
Miracle of Morgan's Creek (1941) -- the seven or eight movies made by Preston
    Sturges between 1939 and 1944 (other highlights are "Hail the Conquering
    Hero," "Palm Beach Story," the original "Unfaithfully Yours" and 
    "The Lady Eve") are as unrecognized a set of national movie treasures as 
    I could name.  No one before or since has combined snappy wordplay, low
    slapstick, loony characterizations, hurtling plots, arch social
    commentary (especially regarding the then-sacred small-town America)
    and sure-handed direction in such tight packages.  "Miracle at Morgan's
    Creek" is both the wildest of his comedies and the most cutting -- the plot
    concerns a small-town girl who marries and gets pregnant by one of the five
    soldiers ("Oh I don't know -- it was something like...Ratskiwatsky") she
    goes out with one night before they ship out to Europe. "Sullivan's
    Travels" is Sturges' masterpiece, at once a self-defense for doing comedy
    in a grim world, a satire of socially-conscious filmmaking, and a moving
    picture of the suffering comedy relieves.  If that sounds like an odd mix,
    then you get an idea of the miracle that Sturges pulls off here.  The 
    ease and sure-footedness with which he switches from broad comedy to
    tragedy, again and again, will make you gasp.
