Authors
David Blatt
Number of Reviews
2

Title
Review for Private Parts (1997)
Released: 1997 United States
Runtime: 109 minutes
Distributed: Paramount Pictures
Director: Betty Thomas
Executive Producer: Jeffrey Chernov
Screenplay: Len Blum, Michael Kalesnio and Howard Stern (book)
Starring: Howard Stern, Mary McCormack, Robin Quivers, Paul Giamatti,
Fred Norris
        Given Hollywood's most recent ode to a sexually-obsessed bad boy,
it's natural to expect `Private Parts' to be `The People vs. Howard
Stern', a ringing affirmation of how our basic constitutional freedoms
must be protected against the crusades of the prudish religious right. 
To the filmmakers' credit, `Private Parts' opts not to wrap itself in the
flag or present Stern as a crusader for any ideal loftier than ratings
and his right to stay on the air. But even without pretensions of
political or historical weight, `Private Parts' is crafted as a movie
about a hero's triumphant struggle in support of a cause.  In the
tradition of such diverse films as `Mister Roberts',  `One Flew Over the
Cuckoo's Nest',  `Dead Poets Society', or most similarly, `Good Morning,
Vietnam', the film adopts the tried-and-trued Hollywood formula of
pitting a rule-breaking, authority-defying rebel against the bureaucratic
stuffed shirts.  Guess who wins and guess whose side we're on?
`Private Parts' follows Howard Stern, playing himself, from his
childhood as the son of a carping radio engineer through his gawky
college years at Boston University to his first jobs with small radio
gigs on Long Island, Hartford and Detroit.  To his own amazement, his
pitiable attempts to attract women bear fruit with the radiant and
warm-hearted Alison, who agrees to be his wife and support his struggling
career.
While Howard's love for radio stems from childhood visits to his
father's station, his success in the business comes only slowly.  He
lacks a natural radio voice, a flaw which he tries to mask by raising his
voice half an octave to a near sing-song, and lacks a comfortable on-air
identity. It is only when Alison convinces him that he is at his best
when he is being himself that Howard starts attracting big ratings while
provoking the frantic anxiety of station managers and account executives.
What exactly is Howard Stern when he's being himself?  The film
begins with a voice-over declaration from Stern bemoaning how he is
always misunderstood.  It is hard to tell from this film, or from
occasional exposure to his radio and TV shows, what there is to
misunderstand.  Quite simply, Stern is the uninhibted, unleashed, voice
of male pre-pubescent masturbatory fantasies, a cross between
Beavis-and-Butthead and Penthouse Forum, with a brain focused on penis
size, large-breasted women, menage-a-trois, lesbian love scenes and the
like.  Where most of us restrict this kind of talk to private spaces and
eventually (pretend to) grow out of it, Stern gets to share his pee-pee
and wee-wee talk daily on the air.  And given that most of this subject
matter remains officially taboo, he gets to attract a mass audience in
the process.  The Howard Stern phenomenon is nicely explained in a scene
where a station executive shares audience research showing that the #1
reason why Stern's fans listen to his show is to find out what he'll dare
to do next--and that Stern's haters listen even longer for the very same
reason.
Stern's material is vulgar, infantile, offensive and in many
cases, extremely funny. The movie plays the laughs brilliantly by
delivering the raunchiest bits as part of Stern's on-going battles
against the tight-assed executives of his stations in Washington and WNBC
in New York. After Stern's been reminded of the seven dirty words not to
say on radio, he and his cronies play an on-air game show that involves
searching for the missing words that go with `willow' and `a-doodle-doo'.
 Another outrageous scene involves Howard leading a female listener to
on-air orgasm. The higher-ups may fume and rant, but they can't stop him
because the more outrageous his material, the better his ratings.
The movie's message seems to be that no matter what Stern says or
does on the air, it's okay because it's honest and because deep down he's
a nice guy who's all talk but no action.  The counterpoint to all Stern's
fantasy talk about sex with Playmates is his marital fidelity to Alison
(Mary Mc.Cormack) and his personal loyalty to his on-air colleagues
Robin Quivers and Fred Norris (both played by themselves).  Like most
fictional Hollywood heroes, Howard nearly loses both Alison and Robin at
different points, but manages to regain their trust and win them back. 
Alison genuinely struggles with embarrassment over her husband's on-air
antics, but ultimately retains her confidence that he's a good man.
The film, directed by Betty Thomas (`The Brady Bunch Movie'), 
mostly follows a straight-forward narrative style, punctuated by
occasional fantasy scenes and `here's-us-filming-a-movie' interludes that
simply seem out of place.  Stern does a marvelous job playing Stern,
especially during the bell-bottomed, big-afro, cheesy mustache 1970's. 
Paul Giamatti, a largely unknown film actor, is especially hilarious as
the New York station manager, nicknamed Pig Vomit by Stern, driven to
apoplectic fury by his foil's unstoppable antics. Giamatti creates one of
the finest buffoons since Herbert Lom's days as boss to Inspector
Clouseau.
`Private Parts' concludes with three scenes: a triumphant concert
in Central Park to celebrate Stern's rise to #1 in the ratings; Howard
turning down an easy score and embracing his wife and children; and a
defeated Pig Vomit grumbling about that goddamned Howard Stern.  With the
support of the people, the rebel has conquered the stuffed shirts and
kept his gal. And thanks to the courage of this true-life Hollywood hero,
most of America can now share a grown man's locker-room sexual fantasies
for hours on end every day.

Title
Review for Voleurs, Les (1996)
        In the opening scenes of Andre Techine's `Thieves' (Les Voleurs), a
young boy, wakened by voices late at night, finds that his father,
Ivan,  has been killed under mysterious circumstances.  The next day,
his father's estranged brother, Alex, arrives for the funeral with his
girlfriend, Juliette. Juliette chooses to stay outside the house,
explaining that she doesn't know the family inside. But when she thinks
no one is watching, the boy, Justin, steals a glimpse of  Juliette
planting a kiss on the forehead of his father's corpse.
The mysteries of Ivan's death and what the boy sees are gradually
revealed in Andre Techine's powerful and enigmatic film. In a narrative
style that shares similarities with Atom Egoyan and Kristof Kieslowski,
Techine weaves together a complex yet easily followed tale that jumps
back and forth between multiple narrators and  time periods
over the course of a year leading up to and following Ivan's death. 
Ultimately, the plot mysteries are resolved, while leaving the much
deeper mysteries about the relationships that unite and divide the
film's central characters.
The film's title refers most literally to Ivan and his circle of
accomplices, who run a petty criminal operation out of Lyons that
involves shipping stolen cars to the Middle East.  One of his young gang
members, Jimmy, has a sister, Juliette (Laurence Cote), a street-tough
girl in her late teens torn pulled three strongly conflicting
influences: her brother and Ivan and their life of crime; her female
lover, Marie (Catherine Deneuve), a professor of philosophy at the
college Jimmy pays for her to attend, and her male lover, Alex (Daniel
Auteuil), a world-weary detective whose beat is the crime-ridden urban
projects of Lyons. Juliette's ambiguous sexuality and gender (she is
repeatedly mistaken for a boy) nicely represent a world where things are
never quite as they appear.
As the story unfolds, we enter into a tightly-weaven web of 
complicated rivalries and alliances.  Alex and Juliette first meet when
she is brought before him on shoplifting charges.  When he discovers her
ties with the brother he has long despised, they begin a sexual
relationship that begins with mutual contempt, but for Alex at least,
slowly and tentatively evolves into something more.  Alex keeps himself
so well proected from intimacy that he insists they remain almost fully
clothed during sex.  She remains so much a part of her upbringing that
she refuses to step foot into a cop's apartment. Yet Alex's attachment
to Juliette grows to the point where he chooses to endanger his career
so at not to risk implicating her in the events surrounding his
brother's death.
Concern for Juliette's well-being creates an equally unlikely bond
between Alex and her other lover, Marie.  Unlike Alex, who comes to
cherish what Juliette offers him yet retains a profoundly cynical and
anti-romantic view of human nature, Marie falls deeply in love with her
young pupil.  Where we are shown Alex and Juliette engaged in rough and
dirty intercourse in a hotel, Marie and Juliette share a sensuous, naked
bath in Marie's apartment. Yet if Juliette and Alex are thwarted by
being on opposite sides of the law, there is an equally great distance
separating Marie's romanticism and Juliette's hard-edged despair. When
Juliette is forced to flee Lyons, a devastated Marie abandons her job
and commits herself to writing Juliette's story.  Eventually, Marie
chooses to leave Alex with the responsibility of preserving Juliette's
legacy.
The Alex-Juliette-Marie triangle is only one of several struggles that
`Thieves' explores. There is also a variation on the classic battle
between two brothers who stand on opposite sides of the thin line of the
law. In this case, it is Alex, the cop, who is
ostracized from a family which sees upholding the law as a crime. When
Alex tries to connect with his young nephew after Ivan's death, the
boy frankly explains that he has no desire to hang out with a policeman.
Despite his father's violent end, it is clear that Justin sides with the
thieves.
`Thieves' is a provocative and rewarding film that steers far away from
simple and contrived messages. Techine demands of the audience that we
decide for ourselves what the film is about and what it has to tell us. 
While depriving us of pat linear storylines and a happy resolution, the
joy of viewing intelligent filmmaking and first-rate performances is
more than enough to make `Thieves' a rare cinematic pleasure.
