Authors
Mike Watson
Number of Reviews
21

Title
Review for Profondo rosso (1975)
*NOTE:  This is a review of the full-length Italian language version
with English subtitles.
Some fans of cult Italian director Dario Argento may be unaware that a
two hour version of his classic thriller PROFONDO ROSSO (aka DEEP RED)
even exists.  Yet with its clearer narrative and better
characterisations, this emerges as THE definitive version of the film.
It is superior to all English language prints including the Japanese
laserdisc (108 minutes) and the various heavily cut video versions
which run as short as 90 minutes.
After 25 years, PROFONDO ROSSO still looks dazzling in its original
widescreen glory and remains both a gripping murder mystery and rather
amusing battle-of-the-sexes tussle between the two leads.  Set in
Rome, the story concerns a lapsed murderer who is stung back into
action after almost being "outed" by a mindreader at parapsychology
seminar.  An English musician Marcus (David Hemmings) later witnesses
the mindreader's violent slaughter.  With his curiosity aroused, he
teams up with perky reporter Gianna (Daria Nicolodi) and they attempt
to solve the mystery on their own.  Stubbornly avoiding involvement
with the police, this risky option nearly costs them their lives.
For Dario Argento, PROFONDO ROSSO was the film in which he really came
of age as a stylist.  His camera technique is seductive and unusual,
cleverly drawing the viewer into the proceedings.  His use of lighting
and colour is at times magical, and the murders are shocking and
deftly staged with razor sharp editing.  It is a beautiful, artful
film despite its dark premise and boasts a bizarre, intriguing
storyline with relatively few holes.
Hemmings and Nicolodi's awkward romance is quite charming.  Their
verbal sparring on issues of sex and gender may seem a little dated
now, but it does give the story much of its heart and sense of humour,
elements sorely missing from shorter versions of the film.  A number
of scenes between the two are also crucial in giving us both plot
points and an understanding of their motivations in pursuing the
killer.  The voices of Hemmings and the other English-speaking actors
have been dubbed into Italian, but it's not a bad dubbing job and
you'll probably be too busy reading the subtitles to notice.
Once again, Argento's use of music is magnificent, easily on par with
the stunning Goblin soundtrack he used later in SUSPIRIA.  After three
scores with Ennio Morricone, PROFONDO ROSSO marks Argento's first
collaboration with Goblin whose peculiar brand of gothic rock is
wonderfully macabre here despite its frequently upbeat tempo.  Even
better is the snippet from a haunting child's song that recurs
throughout the film, a crucial element from the killer's past that
becomes a vital clue in Hemmings' attempts to solve the mystery.
Faults?  None major to speak of.  There's some surprisingly inept
effects of a house burning down, and the killer's presence during one
or two scenes where a character makes an important discovery seems a
little incredulous.  But on the whole, this is pretty solid stuff.
Dario Argento has apparently been quoted as saying that the 108 minute
English version is his preferred cut of the film.  Having seen four or
five different cuts of PROFONDO ROSSO, I must disagree.  This Italian
language version (particularly in the widescreen format) is surely the
way the film was meant to be seen.  If not Argento's crowning
achievement, it certainly ranks among his two or three best works.  So
do yourself a favour and beg, buy, borrow or steal a video copy, or
keep an eye out at your local art house cinema for what would be a
most welcome revival. 
**Be aware that the recent UK video re-release of this version of the
film is a cropped print for TV with the edges cut off, and the film
suffers considerably for it.  But both SBS-TV in Australia and the
World Movies cable channel do have the rare widescreen letterboxed
print.
**The UK video re-release has a shot showing a dying lizard removed by
the British censors.  This cut unfortunately renders the particular
scene meaningless.

Title
Review for Phenomena (1985)
The "Italian Hitchcock" and acknowledged master of the giallo
murder-mystery Dario Argento again offers us a fascinating turn on the
formula in PHENEOMENA.
This time the twist comes in the form of Jennifer Corvino (Jennifer
Connelly), a bright teenager with gift for telepathically
communicating with insects.  Sent to a girls boarding school in
Switzerland, she soon learns of a series of bizarre disappearances and
at least one murder that has the school's population terrified.  A
chance meeting with a brilliant entomologist (Donald Pleasance) leads
the two of them to team up and solve the mystery with the aid of her
remarkable gift.
PHENOMENA is an imaginative, original thriller.  Writer/director
Argento creates several sequences of surreal, haunting beauty here,
including a masterfully shot sleepwalking episode and a striking scene
when a swarm of flying insects descends on the school at Jennifer's
beckoning.  The plot takes some wonderfully bizarre turns and the
killer's identity is genuinely shocking and surprising.
The director took a big gamble with a soundtrack that mixes elements
as diverse as heavy metal band Iron Maiden, ex-Rolling Stone Bill
Wyman, and Argento's favourite Gothic/electronic outfit Goblin.  But
it gels surprisingly well.  The film's opening music reccurs several
times, an eerie and evocative score that perfectly sets the overall
tone.
Argento fans beware: the film was released outside Europe in a
terribly butchered form re-titled as CREEPERS.  This deleted nearly
half an hour of footage, mainly of key dialogue scenes.

Title
Review for Scarface (1983)
At one point during Brian De Palma's crime epic SCARFACE, the radiant
Michelle Pfeiffer turns to a ranting Al Pacino and pops a question
that the audience has no doubt been wanting to ask for themselves:
"Can't you stop saying 'fuck' all the time?"
Fucking good question, that.  It may not be an honour that instills
the filmmakers with pride, but as far as I can tell Oliver Stone's
script contains the said expletitive more times than any other film in
cinema history.
Yet it would be a shame if bad language is all De Palma's SCARFACE is
remembered for, because this is a damn fine gangstar flick.  The
overall structure is similar to Howard Hawks' 1932 original, but this
time the scene has switched to Miami, Florida and our anti-hero's
chosen vice is cocaine traffiking.  Pacino, sporting a thick Cuban
accent, gives one the best performances of his career (Golden Globe
nominated) as Tony Montana, a Cuban refugee with a criminal past who
flees Castro and comes to America to live the American Dream.
And live it out he does, with lashings of violence, abuse, murder and
the funny white powder.  From his earliest jobs as a drug runner for
various middlemen, Tony Montana makes it clear to everyone he meets
that he's not a man to be fucked (sorry).  Soon he's the king of the
cocaine heap, but his hot head and an increasingly out of control drug
addiction prove his undoing.  "Never do your own stash", warns one
character early in the film.  As sure as night follows day, the
Emperor Of Miami eventually falls.
Writer Oliver Stone and director Brian De Palma make an explosive
combination here.  Stone's script offers solid storytelling and some
fine character development.  Montana is fascinating; uneducated but
calculating, a straight shooter who speaks from the heart; an
ambitious, violent man yet one with a conscience.  A man fiercely
protective of his beautiful 20 year old sister, not wanting her to be
sucked into the glitzy, dangerous world which he inhabits.  Pacino is
dynamite, taking to the role with a brooding, bristling energy which
in his more recent films has often degenerated into just simple
overracting.
Pfeiffer also registers strongly as the gangstar mole with no inner
life.  Only once does Tony express real affection for her and his
desire to have children, and even then you sense all he really wants
is a regular screw and a beautiful object to show off to his friends,
and she's happy to oblige.  This isn't as meaty a role for Pfieffer as
Sharon Stone's was in CASINO, but its an effective one nonetheless and
she aquits herself well.
As director, De Palma sets up a number of dramatic scenes with his
typical stylistic brauva.  The escalating tension he creates in
various mob situations - a drug deal gone wrong, an assination attempt
- is often thrilling, and in this respect he is every bit the equal of
Scorese and Coppola.
Where he differs from, say, Coppola's Godfather trilogy is in his
overall treatment.  Coppola gives his crime sagas an operatic sweep,
whereas in SCARFACE De Palma opts for a grittier feel.  And it
perfectly suits the material.  The only major botch is Giorgio
Moroder's mostly crap synthesier score.  It's just not right, and
unfortunately compromises the impact of some otherwise good scenes.
As expected, SCARFACE is very violent at times, but you shouldn't be
watching gangster movies if that upsets you.  At over two and a half
hours in length it's a true epic, and if you're a fan of the genre
you'll love f**k-filled minute of it.

Title
Review for Paura nella cittŕ dei morti viventi (1980)
RETROSPECTIVE: CITY OF THE LIVING DEAD (1980)
I once heard someone describe the films of Italian schlock horror
director Lucio Fulci as "dim-witted".  And by golly, just about all
other words fail me when confronted with a dog like CITY OF THE LIVING
DEAD.
Although the late Fulci managed some rather good thrillers in his
career, this is not one of them.  Two points in the movie's favour -
the impressive camerawork of Sergio Salvati and occasionally evocative
score by Fabio Frizzi - keep things from falling totally into the
abyss, but by and large CITY OF THE LIVING DEAD is a failure.  And
like most cinematic failures, it comes down to bad writing, dumb
performances and lousy direction.
The story starts in New York when, during a seance, a medium
(Katherine McColl) sees a vision of a priest hanging himself in the
town of Dunwich, Massachusetts.  For reasons we won't go into here,
this opens the gates of Hell which must be closed by All Saints Day or
the dead will rise and walk the earth.  The medium apparently dies of
fright during the seance, but awakens in her coffin in the graveyard
the next day and is rescued by a crusty old journalist (Christopher
George).  That scene in itself is a howler: why would you bust open a
coffin with a large pick axe when you know someone is alive inside?
And don't cadavers have various things stuffed in them and drained out
of them before they're buried?  Anyway, off the two of them go to
Dunwich to save the world, where various grisly goings-on are already
happening as All Saints Day approaches.
Fulci's graphic gore is in evidence once again, but here it only
serves to further highlight the film's flimsy script and plodding
direction.  The dialogue, in all manner of speaking, is unspeakable.
Not bad in the quotable sense, like an Ed Wood film, but bad in its
sheer dullness or blatantly obvious "lets explain the plot" type
approach.  McColl doesn't have a clue who her character is: deadly
serious one minute, frivolous the next, she at times is genuinely hard
to watch.  And the geezer (the actor's name escapes me) who plays the
town psychiatrist becomes even harder to stomach than McColl as the
film progresses.  Christopher George's performance is salvageable, but
he gets his brains ripped out in the end by a zombie and we don't
care.  In fact we don't care for anyone in CITY OF THE LIVING DEAD,
though in other Fulci films that hasn't mattered so much when he was
on form as a stylist and an ideas man, as he was in THE BEYOND.
As a director, some of Fulci' idiosyncrasies are incredibly silly and
annoying here.  He constantly uses extreme close-ups of people's eyes,
a ridiculous technique which suggests an attempt to convey the emotion
that his dialogue and actors aren't capable of.  And despite some
gruesome violence, he barely manages a single scare in the entire
film.  Long-time collaborator Fabio Frizzi, talented but always
erratic, offers a patchy soundtrack that veers between eerie, gothic
death marches and woefully inappropriate electro-pop that's quite
frankly embarrassing.
Fulci's other films of this period may be flawed - HOUSE BY THE
CEMETERY, THE BEYOND, THE BLACK CAT - but they are nonetheless films
with more inspiration, atmosphere and better dialogue than this
turkey.  For completists only.

Title
Review for Raiders of the Lost Ark (1981)
You know what most adventure films ultimately lack?  A sense of
wonder, that's what.  But RAIDERS OF THE LOST ARK is an utterly
delightful exception.  Not to say that this is a deeply philosophical
film.  Hell no!  But it does possess something that adventure films
often strive for but rarely achieve: a real sense of the mystical.
Archaeologist Indiana Jones' quest to beat the Nazis in the search for
the fabled Ark Of The Covenant is certainly a pretty intriguing
premise.  Still, in less inspired hands such a story could easily have
fallen prey to limp writing and empty spectacle.  Luckily for us, the
team of writer George Lucas and director Steven Speilberg have created
such cracking good action sequences and invested the film with such a
sense of awe and mystery that RAIDERS is able to stand alongside the
most thrilling Hollywood movies ever made. 
Of course, the other vital components of a great action film are also
in place: solid storytelling, colourful characters, spicy romance, and
exotic mid-Eastern locales, topped off with some very convincing - and
horrifying - special effects.  Oh, and a terrific sense of humour.
One short sequence about mid-way through when Jones is confronted by a
showy sabre-wielding bad guy is a bonafide all-time classic sight gag.
If by chance you haven't yet seen it, you're guaranteed a belly laugh.
Although RAIDERS is based on the old Saturday-afternoon matinees of
the 30's & 40's, it doesn't date the film one iota.  Indeed, Karen
Allen's strong, gutsy female lead is very much an exception in action
films.  Not for her the stupid, passive damsel-in-distress of years
gone by.  Nor of sequels to come, I might add: witness Kate Capshaw's
unbearable hysterics in the follow-up TEMPLE OF DOOM.  As Indiana
Jones, Harrison Ford is more the traditional action hero, but what a
hero he makes. 
A nod must also go to composer John Williamson for his near-perfect
score, particularly that haunting minor-chord theme which appears
right on cue at the most awe-inspiring moments.  And the film is
beautifully photographed by Douglas Slocombe, so if you're seeing it
on video, the widescreen version is a must.
RAIDERS OF THE LOST ARK is absolutely terrific American filmmaking,
worth seeing again and again as an example of Hollywood at its most
inspired.  A massive box office success, and richly deserved. 

Title
Review for Hairspray (1988)
Hysterical racist housewife to funky black lady in downtown record
shop:  "Don't you try your voodoo spells on me you...you...NATIVE
WOMAN!!!!"  For quotable quotes, no one does 'em like John Waters.
After two decades of outrageous, confronting, often hilarious and at
times plain disgusting movies, The King Of Camp and Prince Of Puke
delivered his first mainstream film with HAIRSPRAY.  And though it's
no shockfest, it remains one of his most likable and enduring films,
possibly the finest of his long career.
This affectionate, funny tribute to teenage life in early-60's
Baltimore has such an innocent feel-good vibe that fans of Waters'
earlier trash classics may, ironically, be a little shocked.
HAIRSPRAY tells the story of "pleasantly plump" Tracy Turnblad (Ricki
Lake) and her ambitions to be a star on The Corny Collins Show, the
cool TV dance show that's the be-all and end-all for Baltimore's
glamour-crazed teens.  Her wacky parents (played wonderfully by Divine
and Seinfeld star Jerry Stiller) and shy best friend Penny stand by
her side as she battles bitch teen queen Amber Von Tussle for both the
star spot on the show and the love the teen hunk Link.
The soundtrack is spiced with great songs, and the some of the dance
routines are nothing short of sensational.  For me, the most powerful
sequence is when our white heroes pay their first ever visit to a
black dance club.  Immediately you see - no, feel - the difference
between the black and white styles as Waters charges the scene with an
incredible sensuality and sexual energy.  It really is an exhilarating
moment.
With HAIRSPRAY Waters has clearly toned down his infamous shock
tactics of earlier films - you'll see no eating dog shit, obese
lesbian lovemaking or dicks being cut off here.  Thankfully his way
with dialogue, his love of trash, and his endearing sense of camp
remain.  The outrageous hairdos, the silly teen lingo, the "Hefty
Hideaway" fashion boutique, Penny's hysterical Puritan mother - his
unmistakable touch is everywhere.
This is a comedy, no question.  But what surprises is that it's a
comedy with a strong moral awareness.  Amongst all the laughs and
driving the film at its centre is the issue of black/white
segregation.  It's a fact of life in the lives of these characters,
but not for long if Tracey Turnblad and her friends have their way.
Their growing awareness of the obscene injustice of it all eventually
leads them to full-on revolt, and you can bet your beehive hairdo that
you'll be cheering them all the way.
This is what elevates HAIRSPRAY above just about every other retro
comedy to come out of Hollywood in the last two decades.  It's not
just entertaining, it's actually very touching.  John Waters'
compassion for black people, fat people, outcastes and fringe-dwellers
gives this film tremendous heart.  I've watched it four times and I
still find it one of the most genuinely uplifting films I've seen.  Of
course, it's also riotously funny, and with those two magic
ingredients combined the writer/director has delivered an unmistakable
classic.  

Title
Review for Dune (1984)
The following review encompasses two versions of DUNE:
DUNE: THE THEATRICAL VERSION (1984)
Runtime: 137 minutes
Rating: 2 out of 5
Capsule Review: Cut down to just over two hours by nervous studio
executives, the theatrical version of DUNE is a spectacular mess and
may be incomprehensible to those unfamiliar with the book.  The film's
visual splendour, mystical beauty and impressive action scenes only
partly compensate for gaping holes in the narrative.
DUNE: THE EXTENDED VERSION (1988)
Runtime: 189 minutes
Rating: 3 out of 5
Capsule Review: A bit of a throw-together assembled by MCA TV Special
Projects for cable television.  It was disowned by director David
Lynch but it's  considerably closer to his original vision by virtue
of its improved characterisation and clearer storyline.  Quality dubs
of this version from the out-of-print Japanese laserdisc release are
available from various dealers on the World Wide Web. 
Released in 1984 and made on a then mammoth budget of $40 million, the
film of Frank Herbert's cult novel DUNE was eagerly awaited by sci-fi
fans.  Director David Lynch (BLUE VELVET, ERASERHEAD, TWIN PEAKS) was
working on his biggest production to date, a mammoth undertaking
filmed under trying conditions on location in Mexico.  The screenplay
was Lynch's own, chosen after the script submitted by original author
Herbert was rejected.
DUNE is set in a universe ruled by powerful families overseen by a
successive line of Emperors.  The key to cosmic power is the planet
Arrakis (Dune), a windswept desert planet that's home to giant
sandworms and the precious spice melange.  The spice is the most
valuable commodity in the universe.  It extends the life and expands
the consciousness of those who consume it.  Most importantly, it
allows the navigators of the Spacing Guild (once human but now
hideously mutated) to "fold space" and navigate their spacecraft
across mammoth distances instantaneously, enabling interstellar
commerce and trade to flourish.
Lynch's film by necessity excises parts of the book while retaining
the story's two main strands.  One is the long-standing rivalry
between two families, Houses Atreides and House Harkonnen, and their
battle for lucrative mining rights on Arrakis.  The second strand is
the emergence of young Paul Atreides as the reluctant Messiah
long-awaited by the natives of Arrakis, the Fremen.  The deeply
religious Fremen want control over their homeworld, and young Paul may
be the fulfilment of their prophecy that a man would come from the
outer worlds and lead them to freedom.
Unfortunately, this epic story unfolds in a confusing and haphazard
manner in the theatrical cut of the film, which runs 30 to 60 minutes
shorter than what Lynch originally intended.  The thinking among
Universal's oh-so-wise money men was that films over two hours in
duration were not popular with audiences at the time and would not do
well at the box office.  With Lynch's initial cut running at closer to
three or more hours, the studio demanded that further cuts be made.
What a great idea!  Why not trim down an already complex film so as to
make it almost incomprehensible?
The most glaring consequence of this one-eyed stupidity is a
hopelessly jumpy narrative, leaving us with badly underdeveloped
characters.  Thus their personalities are vague, their motivations
unclear and, in the case of Paul's father Duke Leto, their demise
rather meaningless.  The end result is a distinct chill: we can't warm
to most of the cast and we don't care much for them.  And it hardly
helps that the voice-over narration is sparse and that the Dune-esque
language and terminology sounds like so much gobbledegook to those
unfamiliar with the book. 
DUNE is also a very serous film.  The constant "self-talk" by various
characters makes it SO serious and self-absorbed at times that you may
find it hard not to wince with embarrassment.  The overall impression
is a world full of people so intense that no one is allowed a joke
lest the universe come crashing down around them.  Humour - or at
least a gentle kind of humour as distinct from the Harkonnen's mad,
sadistic kind - is hard to find.  You may balk at the comparison, but
as a writer Lynch could well have done with some lessons from George
Lucus' STAR WARS trilogy.
The theatrical version is still some way from being a complete
disaster, however.  It still possesses enough of Lynch's stylistic
quirks and enough visual invention to sustain the interest of viewers
with a taste for imaginative sci-fi.  Special effects whiz Carlo
Rambaldi's giant sandworms are an awesome sight.  Both the production
design (Anthony Masters) and costume design (Bob Ringwood) are
striking and original.  And the magnificent score by Toto and Brian
Eno is one of the most underrated soundtracks of the last twenty
years.  With these elements in place and the benefit of Freddie
Francis' lush cinematography, the film is at least a feast for the
senses.  See it in the widescreen format if you can.
And despite all the cuts, several cast members still make a strong
impression, most notably Kenneth McMillan as the supremely nasty Baron
Vladimir Harkonnen.  Sian Phillips also registers strongly as the
Reverend Mother Gaius Helen Mohiam, leader of the Bene Gesserit
religious order who's secret aim is to manipulate Paul's destiny for
its own shadowy ends.  As Paul Atreides, the young Kyle MacLachlan
starts off somewhat shakily, but as his character grows in strength so
does his performance and he emerges as a credible leader of the Fremen
crusade.
The conclusion?  Any assessment of this film must take into account
that Frank Herbert's original novel is a complex piece of work and
presents a tough challenge for any filmmaker.  David Lynch took a
brave stab at it and, partly due to forces beyond his control, ended
up with an officially released version that fails in several key
respects.  DUNE certainly confused and frustrated a lot of people on
its release.  Many chose to stay away altogether, as the film's
disastrous box office showing attests.
The extended version, however, is a rather different beast.  In 1984
Lynch stated his intention to release his own special edition
"director's cut" of the film on home video, a clear indication of his
dissatisfaction with the version that ended up in the theatres.  But,
alas, he failed to do so, choosing to move on to other projects.  In a
way, then, it is partly Lynch's own fault that what appeared instead
was an unauthorised extended version, put together in 1988 by MCA TV
Special Projects for airing on cable networks in the USA.
Stung into action, Lynch successfully petitioned the Director's Guild
to take his name off the credits and replace it with "Allen Smithee",
the standard pseudonym for directors who wish to disown their own
work.  He also had the screenwriting credit changed to the anonymous
"Judas Booth".
Certainly, looking at the results of MCA's handiwork there's at least
half a dozen instances that, for sheer technical sloppiness, are good
enough reasons for the director to object.  But these gripes must be
considered in light of the improvements that the extended cut of DUNE
offers in several crucial areas.
Most of the changes involve the restoration or extension of cut scenes
and the addition of extra narration, both of which fill many holes in
the original version's storyline.  Paul's relationship with his father
and associates is more intimate, with moments of humour and warmth
lacking previously.  The political skulduggery involving the Emperor,
the Spacing Guild, the Bene Gesserits and the two warring Houses is
far better explained.  Paul's initiation into the Fremen way of life
on Arrakis is also fleshed out considerably.  And as further
background, a new prologue has been added featuring narration and
painted stills to give us a brief history of the Dune universe.
As a piece of storytelling, then, MCA TV's version of DUNE is clearly
superior. As a piece of editing, however, it is at times surprisingly
inept.  The use of painted stills in the new prologue works well
enough, but their occasional appearance once the action begins is
inappropriate.  There's some sloppy cutting, too, and in a few
instances shots even appear out of order.  And the use of repeated
footage to fabricate certain scenes (eg. ships coming and going,
soldiers coming and going) is at times clearly out-of-context.  This
is the kind of thing to which Lynch objected, and rightly so.
It should also be noted that several questionable scenes and shots
from the theatrical version were deleted to satisfy the censorship
demands of U.S. television.  But the most notable omission is a
gratuitous piece of nonsense from Lynch that wasn't even in Herbert's
book.  The scene features Baron Harkonnen killing a beautiful young
man in front of his slobbering henchmen by pulling out his "heart
plug".  Its a surreal and disturbing episode that's very Lynch-esque
but adds nothing to what we already know: the Baron is a nasty piece
of work.
Despite its own peculiar flaws, then, the extended version of DUNE is
a generally superior film.  All up, it contains 35 minutes of restored
footage and approximately another 15 minutes of either altered,
fabricated or newly created sequences.  Unless the idiosyncratic Lynch
has a sudden change of heart, the "Alan Smithee" version remains the
closest we'll get to what the movie should have been.  On repeated
viewings, one suspects it is closer than what Lynch would be prepared
to admit.
Still, as one of this century's great science-fiction novels, some
fans and perhaps the late Herbert himself would argue that DUNE
deserved a better fate in its transfer to the screen.  With rumours
circulating of a new six hour mini-series planned by production
company New Amsterdam Entertainment in 1998, it is unlikely that we
have heard the last of the Dune saga.
*For background information a special thankyou to hiphats@aol.com. who
maintains the website DUNE: THE ARRAKIS FILE at:
http://members.aol.com/Hiphats/arrakis.html

Title
Review for Suspiria (1977)
"Psycho meets the Exorcist with no holds barred".  A blurb like that
sounds like desperate publicity for some low budget, third rate
rip-off.  But no, this tacky plug comes from the poster for SUSPIRIA,
perhaps Italian horror director Dario Argento's most consistently
successful film.
What impresses most in re-watching this surrealistic, supernatural
thriller is that Argento's directorial flair and stylish visuals are
matched by a near-fully coherent narrative.  Screenplays have always
been his Achilles heel; confusing subplots, gaping holes, totally
illogical incidents and reactions.  No question: Argento has always
been a better director than a writer.  Fortunately, he gets the
plotting pretty well right with SUSPIRIA, taking his cue from a book
by Thomas De Quincey called "Suspiria de Profundis".  The film's
storyline suffers from no major lapses in logic, provided one can
accept the premise of a ballet school being a front for a coven of
witches.
Jessica Harper plays an American who travels to Germany to further her
studies in dance.  Arriving at the school late at night in driving
rain, she sees a girl leave and run into the storm in a clearly
distressed state.  What happens next - and I don't make the comparison
lightly - is a murder sequence that for intensity, shock value and
sheer directorial flair ranks alongside Alfred Hitchcock's infamous
shower scene in PSYCHO.  It's quite possibly a homage to Hitchcock,
but with its baroque sets, graphic gore and brilliantly chaotic
musical accompaniment by the Gothic rock group Goblin, this stunning
sequence remains very much Argento's own.
Though nothing else quite equals the intensity of SUSPIRIA'S opening
15 minutes, the film continues to be never anything less than
engrossing as Harper begins her own investigations and slowly comes to
realise this is no ordinary ballet school.  We meet an assortment of
slightly sinister characters, most notably the head ballet teacher
played by Alida Valli in another one of those delicious
sour-old-matriarch-from-hell roles she does so well.  Several more
violent murders ensue, including a startling scene in a deserted
square where a blind man is...well, I wouldn't want to spoil things
now, would I?  And the film's climax, staged amid secret corridors and
hidden rooms, has a Gothic ghoulishness that's most impressive.
The English language versions of most Argento movies usually suffer
trimming, and not just for the violence - DEEP RED and PHENOMENA, for
example, have been appallingly hacked about.  Fortunately, the cuts to
SUSPIRIA (about 7 minutes in this version) have not adversely affected
the film.  The dubbing of the Italian actors into English is quite
competently done, too, excepting one appalling and unintentionally
hilarious effort with a conversation between Harper and a professor
about the history of witchcraft in the region.
And the soundtrack?  It is interesting to imagine what power the film
would have lost if it had been scored by someone else.  As it stands,
the use of Goblin's music in SUSPIRIA is outstanding.  Apparently,
Argento played the soundtrack on location while filming so the actors
could hear the music as they acted out their parts.  A stereo video
player adds greatly to the viewer's overall experience.  Even better,
see SUSPIRIA in a cinema, where you'll get the added bonus of
widescreen.
And the colours!  Deep reds, eerie blues, a superb use of shadow and
contrast.  The cinematography of  Luciano Tovoli, whose more recent
credits include REVERSAL OF FORTUNE and SINGLE WHITE FEMALE, is
uniformly superb.  A nod also must go to production designer Giuseppe
Bassan for his wonderful baroque interiors.  These kinds of settings
are crucial to the atmosphere of Argento's more surreal excursions,
the other most notable example being INFERNO (1980) on which Bassan
also worked.
SUSPIRIA is the film that broke Dario Argento into the major league of
European directors, and it is fully deserving of its cult status.  The
gore is at times a little excessive and overstated - that's always
been one of Argento's shortcomings - but overall this is a
fascinating, compelling example of Italian horror.

Title
Review for Amityville 1992: It's About Time (1992)
This surprisingly good entry in the much maligned Amityville series of
haunted house films is finely acted, cleverly written, and directed
with some flair by Tony Randel whose other credits include HELLRAISER
II
It's actually in the film's favour that the original Amityville house
is only obliquely related to the premise of AMITYVILLE: IT'S ABOUT
TIME.  The writers have taken the more challenging option of crafting
a fresher story, rather than simply recycling the horrors of the
original film where the Kurtz family was driven from their home by
maloevant spirits.
Jacob is an architect of housing developments who, after a visit to
New York state (home of the infamous house), returns home to his
family with a beautiful old clock salvaged from the said house when it
was demolished.  Needless to say, the clock is no ordinary timepiece,
and before long the clock is attempting to possess its new home by
causing hallucinations and weird shifts in time.
Not entirely original stuff, for sure, but there are two factors which
elevate this film above your standard haunted house fare.
One is the characters.  Writers Christopher Defaria and Antonio Toro
create an interesting family situation here.  Jacob's ex-lover Andrea
plays a kind of surrogate mother to his two teenage kids, even though
she doesn't live with them anymore.  Shawn Weatherly gives a finely
nuanced performance as Andrea, who struggles to keep everyone's sanity
intact as reality begins to unravel.  She is also wrestling with
ambivalent feelings towards Jacob, who becomes increasingly unstable
after being bed-ridden by a bizarre and savage dog attack.  Further
colour is added by Damon Martin as the teenage son Rusty. He loves is
heavy metal but he's more sensitive than his peers give him credit
for, as his friendship with the eccentric medium Iris demonstrates.
The film's other strong point is the inventive set pieces.  In a
highly erotic scene, the daughter Megan wakes during the night and
plays with her reflection in the mirror, only to see her reflection
take on the persona of a lover and reach out from the mirror to untie
her blouse.  Later on, when Andrea attempts to destroy the clock, the
axe she's wielding lands in the wall instead, part of which crumbles
away to reveal the insides of a gigantic timepiece, as if the clock
had rooted itself in the house like a tree.
Perhaps the films most masterful scene features Andrea's new boyfriend
Leonard, a pain-in-the-arse pychiatrist type who comes to stay with
Andrea at the house while she is caring for the bed-ridden Jacob.
Sitting in the kitchen as the microwave oven counts down a late night
meal, the digital clock slurs to a standstill and he suddenly finds
himself face to face Jacob on the other side of the kitchen table.
Jacob questions the trembling Leonard about his interest in Andrea,
and then produces a revolver.  It's a wonderfully tense, edgy scene.
AMITYVILLE: IT'S ABOUT TIME isn't going to set the world on fire, but
its a solid, imaginative thriller and deserves some attention.  If,
like me, you've always been suspicious of those direct-to-video
releases that turn up on the shelves at your local video store, here's
a movie that proves the old adage: don't throw the baby out with the
bath water.

Title
Review for Nosferatu: Phantom der Nacht (1979)
NOSFERATU THE VAMPYRE (Germany 1979)
This extraordinary re-telling of Bram Stoker's "Dracula" by German
filmmaker Werner Herzog deserves the most prominent of places in
cinematic vampire lore.  Inspired by F.W. Murnau's 1922 silent film of
the same name, Herzog's film is a work of exquisite bleakness, an
oddly touching tragedy with a beautiful and uniquely haunting quality
that lingers long afterwards.
The original full-length English and German language versions of
NOSFERATU have at last received a video release by U.S. distributor
Anchor Bay Entertainment, and in gorgeous widescreen prints.  Until
now only a shortened English language version of the film was
available on video, and only in Europe.  Both of these re-releases
restore the film to its full length, but viewers should still be wary
of the English version due to its often stilted dialogue.  Apparently
the English dialogue coach Herzog had on the set during filming was
incompetent, and some of the voices also seem to be dubbed.  The
German version with English subtitles remains the definitive one.
Everyone knows the story of Dracula.  Or do they?  His story has been
so bastardised on film over the years that a brief reminder of the
basic plot certainly won't hurt.  
Jonathan Harker is a young lawyer sent to the gloomy castle Dracula in
Transylvania to do business with a creepy count (played by Klaus
Kinski) who wants to buy a house in Harker's hometown.  Upon seeing a
photo of Harker's wife (the radiant Isabelle Adjani) he instantly
falls in love with her.  Locking Harker up in his castle, he sets off
on a long journey to meet this woman whose beauty so bewitches him.
Upon divining his identity as a vampire, Adjani seduces the count and
lures him to his death one morning as the sun rises.
That is a story familiar to millions, but Herzog has elevated Stoker's
tale into the realm of - and I use this term a tad reluctantly -
cinematic art.  NOSFERATU is as much a meditation as it is a film,
shot through blue-ish and white filters and peopled with characters
who perform as if they were half hypnotised.  The film's surreal,
dream-like quality is utterly mesmerising.  There is much to enjoy,
but I'll limit my praise to a few key points.
Holding the film together is Kinski's remarkable performance as Count
Dracula.  Past screen portrayals, including Bela Lugosi's famous turn,
have largely been one dimensional and tended towards camp.  But
Kinski...oh boy, this is something far more compelling.  Aided by a
startling make-up job, he portrays Dracula's vampirism not simply as
pure evil but as some sort of loathsome disease.  This man is
dreadfully lonely.  He lives in utter solitude, shunned by the locals
for his hideous appearance and reputation for bloodlust.  Kinski's
portrayal of the Count is both creepy and deeply affecting.  When he
dies, you almost feel as if this man's tortured soul has been freed at
last.
Then there's the unforgettable soundtrack, largely composed by German
group Popul Vuh.  It is so eerily beautiful and evocative that it's
quite impossible to imagine the film without it.  Popul Vuh are
longtime Herzog collaborators and play an ancient-sounding kind of
spacemusic using piano, chants, and exotic instruments.  When I first
saw this film some years ago I was so impressed I tracked down and
bought a number of their albums.  The one I still listen to the most
is "Tantric Songs", from which most of the music in NOSFERATU is
taken.  It's a testament to the music's depth that it is as powerful
without the pictures as it is with them.  The album is still available
on the highly respected ambient and world music label Celestial
Harmonies.
This is a timely re-release by Anchor Bay.  After Francis Ford
Coppola's unscary and woefully overblown version of Bram Stoker's tale
in 1992, it is a joy to go back to Herzog's film and see the amazing
things he has done with what is now a century-old story.  To some
aficionados, NOSFERATU is quite simply the greatest vampire film ever
made.  Without a doubt, it is an unmistakable classic of the genre.
Don't miss it.

Title
Review for Not of This Earth (1995)
Well I'll be damned, what a most excellent surprise.
Not to be confused with the campy and far inferior 1988 remake
starring ex-porn Star Traci Lords, this more recent attempt at
remaking the 1950's drive-in schlockfest NOT OF THIS EARTH is a real
gem and was quite possibly the best sci-fi flick of 1995.  
Once again, B-movie king Roger Corman is behind this effort (he
directed the original) but this time he appears only in the role of
executive producer.  The rest of the crew and cast are relative
unknowns.  It seems criminal that the film was released direct to
video in most countries, because it's an absolute must-see for sci-fi
fans and a treat for anyone who enjoys decently acted and written
thrillers with a kooky bent.
The plot in brief.  Paul Johnson (Michael York) is an alien posing as
an eccentric millionaire who, though needing to kill people to live,
is visiting Earth for far from selfish reasons.  His race is dying of
a mysterious blood disease and he desperately is trying to find a
cure, the key of which lies in the blood of humans.  He visits and
soon puts under his spell the respected blood physician Dr. Rochelle,
whom he hypnotises into doing secret research on his behalf.  He also
has the doctor convince smart and sexy nurse Amanda (Elizabeth
Barondes) to move in with Johnson as his private nurse so as to give
him the blood transfusions which he constantly requires.  But before
long, Amanda and Johnson's sleazy chauffeur release that Johnson is a
lot more than just eccentric.
I must admit, my first glimpse of the video cover for NOT OF THIS
EARTH was not encouraging.  British actor Michael York has appeared in
some real stinkers in past few decades, a far cry from the quality
fare of his younger days such as CABERAT (1972).  But his performance
here as an alien in human disguise is nothing short of outstanding.
The weird twitches and bizarre modes of speech, the dapper clothes and
cool spectacles, the unexpected pathos which he invests in his
character.  York is by turns hilarious, menacing and tragic.  This is
a tour-de-force and quite simply the best performance I've seen from
him.
And while obviously made on a modest budget, the film boasts enormous
strengths.  The casting is spot on, the acting is terrific and the
script is intelligent, witty and consistently engaging, cleverly
updating the original.  The balance of horror and humour is just about
perfect, a marked contrast to the earlier remake from 1988.  The film
doesn't drag for a second of its 90 minute running time thanks to
tight editing and the sure hand of little-known director Terrance H.
Winkless.  And it doesn't matter one bit that the special effects are
cheesy - this is schlock after all, even if it is high class schlock.
In fact my only criticism of the film is that things get a tad weak
towards the end.  Tighter direction could have given the climax more
urgency and a few of the characters act rather illogically given their
life-threatening situation.
But these are minor complaints.  Just see it.  NOT OF THIS EARTH is
one of the biggest sci-fi surprises in years.  And Michael York: in
one cool swoop you've made yourself a B-movie legend, dude.

Title
Review for Kiss the Girls (1997)
Come on Hollywood, surprise me.  Stop giving us these poorly written
thrillers with banal dialogue, sketchy characters and plots as
predictable as the sunset.
The always watchable Morgan Freeman plays a detective who becomes
personally involved in a case involving missing girls.  Personal,
because his niece is one of the victims.  It's a slobbering
psychopath, of course, but this time there's a twist.  Freeman notes
that each of the young women who've disappeared are all strong willed,
assertive, and more successful in their careers than the average girl.
We soon learn that the guy calls himself Casanova, whose aim is to
"dominate" these modern gals by imprisoning them in some dungeon and
keeping them as his personal harem.  Anyway, one of the women manages
to escape (Ashly Judd) and teams up with Freeman to...well, you know
the rest.
A brief glance at the plot to SILENCE OF THE LAMBS, with which this
film is constantly being compared to by the hype merchants, may
suggest LAMBS also has a fairly predictable story.  Perhaps, but that
film also has superbly drawn characters and smart dialogue.  So lets
not insult a great movie by taking the comparisons any further, okay?
And as for comparisons to SEVEN...oh please!
KISS THE GIRLS is based on the novel by James Patterson and written
for the screen by one David Klass.  Maybe the novel was a stinker to
start with, but whatever the case, it's the writing that's clearly at
fault here.  One, these characters have very little to say that's
engaging or interesting.  Two, the script has no sense of humour.
Three, while the notion of a psycho's victims being smart, successful
women is an interesting twist, the execution isn't even half as good
as the idea.  Thus, Ashly Judd comes across all out of focus, instead
of being the heart of the story.  We can't feel her rage.  Some
atrociously written casual exchanges between her and several male
characters are supposed to remind us that she's the no-bullshit 90's
type, but these conversations barely register.  
And as for Freeman, KISS THE GIRLS is his second dog in a year: first
CHAIN REACTION, now this.  For an actor of his calibre, this is most
worrying.
Young director Gary Fleder scored a hit a few years back with his
quirky Pulp Fiction-esque THINGS TO DO IN DENVER WHEN YOUR DEAD.  But
what can he do with material as resolutely mediocre as this?  Not
much, and you can hardly blame him.  There's a few well-staged chase
scenes through the forest where the camera whirls, dives and jumps,
and the effect is startling.  But the script is beyond rescue.  What
hurts most is that Hollywood continues to get away with serving up
this tripe, safe in the knowledge that jaded audiences will lap it up.
Complacency rules: it's been so long since we saw a mainstream
American thriller that delivered juicy characters, real surprises and
consistently sharp dialogue.
The only consolation for this viewer is that my ticket to the movie
was a freebie, positive proof that the best things in life AREN'T
free.... .

Title
Review for Hannah and Her Sisters (1986)
One of the very best films in Woody Allen's considerable career,
HANNAH AND HER SISTERS is an utter delight from start to finish.
Allen's observations of family life and relationships have rarely been
sharper, funnier or more honest.
Like so many of Allen's films, the setting is once again in New York.
But it's a testimony to the universality of his writing that the
location, while certainly inspiring, doesn't really matter in the end.
One doesn't have to have even set foot inside the USA, let alone the
Big Apple, to find these characters so real, so familiar, so achingly
lifelike.
The film focuses on the lives of three sisters: Hannah (Mia Farrow),
Lee (Barbara Hershey) and Holly (Dianne West).  Though a quite a few
different plots run simultaneously though the film, Allen's screenplay
tells two principal stories.  Firstly, the secret extra marital affair
between Hannah's husband Elliot (a wonderful Michael Caine) and his
sister-in-law Lee.  Secondly, we follow the trials of Hannah's
ex-husband Mickey (Woody Allen), a hypochondriac who undergoes a major
personal and spiritual crisis about the meaning of life after
seemingly staring death in the face.
Caine's multi-faceted character is one of the film's standout
performances.  He's both refreshingly honest and oddly calculating in
his agonising over his long-held feelings for his wife's sister and
the passionate affair that follows.  Also outstanding is Allen
himself, playing a variation on the same neurotic character he's done
a million times before but investing the character with real pathos
and humanity.  He's also very, very funny.  Sample: in a flashback
discussing his just diagnosed infertility with his then wife.  Farrow:
What have you done that could have caused this, was it excessive
masturbation?  Allen: Hey, now you're knocking my hobbies!
The smaller details and the secondary plots in this film are equally
as satisfying is the principal storylines.  The sisters' parents are
two showbiz types with big egos; dad trying to grow old gracefully,
mum trying to keep her youth and flirting with men at every
opportunity, much to her husband's disgust.  There's the brain-dead
rock and roller who wants to buy "big art" for his mansion and who
finds himself in an explosive encounter with Lee's first lover
Frederick, an ageing artist and snobbish intellectual played superbly
by the Max Von Sydow.
This is a remarkable, richly textured film, full of warmth, humour,
sadness, and a touching humanity.  The cast of stars is sensational,
taking to their well-defined roles with focus and, it seems, some
humility.  There's no scenery chewing performances here.  And Woody
Allen's script as near to flawless as one could possibly hope for.
HANNAH AND HER SISTERS.  In a word: brilliant.  See it at all costs.

Title
Review for Abyss, The (1989)
This reviewer is ignorant of what hands were responsible for
delivering the original version of THE ABYSS in 1989.  Whether it was
the meddling of studio executives, or the work of writer/director
James Cameron himself, the original cut of this underwater sci-fi
thriller was entertaining enough but also quite seriously flawed.  The
main problem was fairly simple: the film's climax was unworthy of its
build-up.
Someone at 20th Century Fox - and no doubt Cameron himself - must have
agreed, because in 1993 came the theatrical release of THE ABYSS: 
SPECIAL EDITION.  Now available on video, it seems timely to
re-evaluate what, in its newly revamped state, is now a
near-masterpiece despite its borrowings from films like 2010: ODYSSEY
TWO, ALIEN and CLOSE ENCOUNTERS OF THIRD KIND.
The plot is thus.  We meet the crew of an experimental underwater
mobile oil rig designed by the hard-nosed Lindsay (Mastrantonio) and
captained by her soon-to-be-divorced husband Bud (Ed Harris).  The rig
and its crew are diverted from their normal duties when the Navy seeks
their help in investigating the mysterious sinking of a U.S. nuclear
submarine.  Requiring a dive part-way down a three mile deep trench,
three Navy divers arrive to command the operation, led by the edgy
Lieutenant Coffey (Biehn).  But a series of strange sightings soon
convinces at least one member of the civilian crew that whoever or
whatever they're dealing with, as she memorably puts it, "aren't
speaking Russian".
Meanwhile on the surface a hurricane is brewing and, even worse, a
series of incidents around Cuba involving Russians ships and an
increasingly nervous U.S. Navy sets off an international crisis of
possible catastrophic proportions.  This crisis is mirrored in the
confines of the now isolated underwater rig, with the trigger-happy
and increasingly paranoid Lieutenant Coffey at odds with the crew
about how do deal with the mysterious goings-on around them.  The
human drama is often riveting, with the principal players performing
with an intensity that recalls the fine ensemble acting in Cameron's
ALIENS.
The stunts, hardware, special effects and underwater cinematography
are all outstanding.   And so they should be: Cameron's technical
credentials are well established.  But what ultimately makes the film
so gripping is three intersecting plot strands: 1) the tension between
old sparring partners Lindsay and ex-hubby Bud;  2) the war of wills
between the civilian crew and the Navy divers as a series of
escalating crisis' befall them; and 3) the slowly unfolding revelation
of what lies at the bottom of the three mile deep abyss.
THE ABYSS: SPECIAL EDITION is an improvement on the original film in
two major respects.  One is that it further fleshes out the
relationship between Bud and Lindsay, a relationship at times
touching, at others incredibly intense and volatile.  The second
improvement is the restoration of some absolutely crucial scenes
towards the film's end, when the aliens demonstrate their control over
water with a terrifying and extraordinary display of power to a world
on the brink of nuclear war.  With the inclusion of these startling
scenes, the story's climax is now given real weight.  Why on earth
were they left out of the original?  This reviewer finds it utterly
incomprehensible.
So then, we have 25 minutes of additional footage that's turned a
decent underwater thriller into something quite magnificent.  I say
"quite" because some flaws do remain.   The most grating is several
moments of corny Hollywood schmaltz - some new, some old - that may
well have you reaching for the barf bag.
Nonetheless, THE ABYSS: SPECIAL EDITION now stands this somewhat
maligned film among James Cameron's greatest achievements, alongside
ALIENS and TERMINATOR 2.  See it and be moved, gripped and spellbound.

Title
Review for Mouse Hunt (1997)
How do films like MOUSE HUNT get into theatres?  Isn't there a law or
something?
This diabolical load of claptrap from Steven Speilberg's Dreamworks
studio is Hollywood family fare at its deadly worst.  MOUSE HUNT takes
the bare threads of a plot and tries to prop it up with overacting and
flat-out stupid slapstick that makes comedies like JINGLE ALL THE WAY
look decent by comparison.
Writer Adam Rifkin and director Gore Verbinski are the names chiefly
responsible for this swill.  The plot, for what its worth, concerns
two brothers (Nathan Lane and an appalling Lee Evens) who inherit a
poorly run string factory and a seemingly worthless house from their
eccentric father.  Deciding to check out the long-abandoned house,
they soon learn that it's worth a fortune and set about selling it in
auction to the highest bidder.  But battling them at every turn is a
very smart mouse, happy with his run-down little abode and wanting it
to stay that way.
The story alternates between unfunny scenes of the brothers bickering
over what to do with their inheritance and endless action sequences as
the two take on their increasingly determined furry foe.  Whatever
promise the film starts with soon deteriorates into boring dialogue,
terrible overacting, and increasingly uninspired slapstick that
becomes all sound and fury, signifying nothing.  The script becomes so
unspeakably bad that the best line poor Lee Evens can utter after
another run in with the rodent is: "I hate that mouse".  Oh cringe!
This is HOME ALONE all over again, and ten times worse.
One touching scene early on is worth mentioning.  We follow the mouse
through a maze of walls and pipes until he arrives at his makeshift
abode somewhere in a wall.  He jumps into a tiny bed, pulls up a
makeshift sheet and snuggles up to sleep, seemingly happy and just
wanting to be left alone.  It's a magical little moment in an
otherwise soulless film.
A message to Speilberg: if you want Dreamworks to be associated with
some kind of artistic credibility, then either give all concerned in
MOUSE HUNT a swift kick up the arse or hire yourself some decent
writers and directors.  This kind of rubbish will just not do at all. 

Title
Review for Sindrome di Stendhal, La (1996)
Stendhal's Syndrome: a condition where, in the presence of art, a
person becomes engulfed in a painting and hallucinates and may
afterwards suffer symptoms such as depression, suicidal behaviour and
personality disorder.  
Grim stuff, to be sure, but the subject of a remarkable film from
Italy's master of the horror thriller Dario Argento.
Boasting an unforgettable soundtrack from the grandfather of film
music Ennio Morricone, THE STENDHAL SYNDROME is a quite magnificent
return to form for Argento.  It follows his disappointing American
debut TRAUMA (1992), the patchy OPERA (1987) and several mediocre
films he produced for young Italian director Michele Soavi in the late
1980's.  
Based on the novel by Graziella Magherini, the film stars Argento's
daughter Asia as young Roman police inspector Anna Manni in pursuit of
a brutal rapist-killer.  Visiting Florence to follow up several leads,
she is lured by the killer Alfredo (Thomas Kretschmann) to an art
gallery, a favourite haunt where he hopes to identify exactly who is
on his tail.  At the gallery Anna is overwhelmed by a painting and
faints.  Posing as a bystander, Alfredo briefly comes to her aid and
having now identified his pursuer, a strange game of cat and mouse
begins.
A gripping story evolves, and a coherent one, too, which may surprise
those familiar with Argento's often lumpy narratives.  THE STENDHAL
SYNDROME is not a simple cop-hunting-killer scenario.  It is a
disturbing and often compelling study of the central character's
psychological disintegration.  The script explores its psycho-sexual
themes with intelligence and candour, perhaps too much so for more
sensitive viewers.  But as dark as its themes are, THE STENDHAL
SYNDROME emerges as one of the most artful and effective European
thrillers of the last ten years.
Argento is once again working in his native Italy, and he fully
exploits the opportunities to use art and architecture for both
symbolic statements and as departure points for several brilliant
hallucinogenic sequences.  Effects whiz Sergio Stivaletti serves his
director well here, and the cinematography by Giuseppe Rotunno is
consistently excellent.  The film's opening 20 minutes segues between
hallucination, flashback and real-time with tremendous style.  Proof
that, at his most inspired, Argento remains one of the world's most
exhilarating filmmakers.
The cast is generally good, though marred at times by dubbing into
English that renders speech all but emotionless.  Asia Argento's
performance is by turns risky, awkward and fascinating.  It's a
difficult role, and given her relative inexperience on screen she
deserves applause for her efforts.  Thomas Kretschmann is chillingly
effective as Alfredo, and Marco Leonardi (of CINEMA PARADISO, and
possibly the most gorgeous looking man in Italy) does okay as Anna's
work colleague and increasingly confused love interest.
But perhaps THE STENDHAL SYNDROME'S single most striking element is
Ennio Morricone's soundtrack.  Active since the 1960's, Morricone has
scored over 100 films in his career and this must rate as one of his
finest efforts.  It's mostly a variation on the one theme: a slow
circular melody for strings and wordless female vocal possessed with
an extraordinary, haunting beauty that lingers long afterwards.  It's
been three decades since Argento and Morricone worked together.  This
is a long welcome reunion.
If the film has a fault, it is that the last half hour drags a little
and the film doesn't quite reach a completely satisfying climax.  But
by the closing scenes, THE STENDHAL SYNDROME has already offered us
enough to qualify as one of the very best films of Dario Argento's
career.
*NOTE: See the uncut print from Japanese laserdisc if you can.  Dubs
of this version are available from various video dealers on the World
Wide Web.

Title
Review for Much Ado About Nothing (1993)
Much ado about nothing.  Ah, how sweet the irony!
It's accepted wisdom in some circles - among English literature nuts,
mainly - that whenever a critic knocks Shakespeare they are only doing
so through ignorance.  He just doesn't "understand" Shakespeare, you
will hear them say.  The Bard's work is apparently beyond criticism.
What a load of old cobblers.  If these arbiters of public taste think
Kenneth Branaugh's film of Shakespeare's "comedy" MUCH ADO ABOUT
NOTHING is comedy in any modern sense of the word, it's time to get a
life.  Get Monty Python.  Get Woody Allen.  Get John Waters.
Whatever.  Just get a real taste of some clever, witty, risky comedy.
And banish this nonsense to where it belongs.  Drama and tragedy was
Shakespeare's strength.  To my sensibilities - and I'm no stick in the
mud - MUCH ADO ABOUT NOTHING resonates with no spark whatsoever.
No kidding: this film ranks among the most embarrassing two hours I
have ever spent in a cinema in my 20 years of movie going.  The only
thing that stopped me walking out was loyalty to my lady friend, as
this was our day out and I hadn't seen her in ages.  But boy, does she
owe me one!
I won't spend too much time on the plot.  Basically, we follow the
trials and tribulations of two would-be couples - one young, the other
older.  There's some dark treachery amongst all this, but everyone is
so awfully jolly that you'd hardly know it.  Mind you, there's nothing
wrong with the basic story.  Good romantic comedies based on similar
premises abound.  Nothing wrong with most of the cast, either.
Branaugh, Emma Thompson and Denzel Washington are all talented
performers.  
The problem is the script, or more accurately, Shakespeare's original
text.  Light comedy shouldn't be complex.  Yet wrapped in Elizabethan
English, the dialogue becomes difficult to comprehend.  For this alone
it will be a problem for modern audiences unschooled in Shakespeare
and in search of nothing more than a good, undemanding laugh.  The
only laughs to escape my belly were brought on by the gloriously inept
performance of Keanu Reeves, the actor once again miscast as a jealous
half-brother or something.
But when dissected and understood, what it all boils down to is that
this stuff is just so goddamn lame.  This is comedy so clean and nice
and corny and so devoid of danger that it leaves this viewer totally
cold.  Ho, ho, ho, boy likes girl!  Ho, ho, ho, men are such klutzes!
Ho, ho, ho, she's so awfully clumsy!  Oh please!  There's wit in here
somewhere, I'm told.  I call it pretentious.  Something lightweight
striving to be something sophisticated through clever wordplay.
In the end, it's cringeworthy.  Watching some of the cinema patrons
around me collapse with laughter made MUCH ADO ABOUT NOTHING a very
weird movie going experience.  Comedy?  Bah, humbug!

Title
Review for Tenebre (1982)
On re-watching Italian writer/director Dario Argento's much lauded
murder mystery TENEBRAE, I was struck more than anything else by how
many sins he commits as a storyteller and manages to get away with.
In emphasising style over matters of plot Argento is somewhat
notorious in cult film circles, but some aficionados still praise
TENEBRAE as the greatest of his "giallo" murder mysteries.  While it's
certainly not perfect, repeated viewings reveal it to be nonetheless a
densely plotted and terrifically stylish thriller.
The story follows a promotional visit to Rome by famous American
mystery novelist Peter Neal (Anthony Franciosa) where he discovers
that a serial killer is on the loose inspired by his latest book
"Tenebrae".  With the police on his back for leads, he decides to take
a personal interest in the case and he soon becomes drawn into a
mystery where all is not as it seems.  The film benefits enormously
from a fine central performance by Franciosa.  He brings grace, charm
and a deceptive benigness to his character which provides an
interesting foil to both the violence of the books he writes and the
unfolding real-life horror around him.  
The film is awash with a fascinating psychosexual tension.  Argento
peels back the facade of showbiz and jetset lifestyles to reveal an
amoral, ambivalent, shadowy world where desire in all its forms has
become a dangerous business.  TENEBRAE is perhaps the most
multi-layered of Argento's scripts to date and there is much bubbling
underneath the surface here.  It may take at least two or three
viewings to appreciate all the psychological themes at play.  In that
respect it strongly recalls his previous giallo DEEP RED/PROFONDO
ROSSO (the full-length Italian language version) and fans will enjoy
spotting the recurring themes.
Needless to say for Argento fans, there is no denying the director's
brilliance as a stylist.  Many of the action and murder sequences are
directed with his characteristic finesse and feature plenty of
intriguing camerawork.  They are all the more impressive for the fact
that in this film Argento creates mood by filling his scenes with
light, rather than the dark shadows and deep rich colours of earlier
works like DEEP RED and SUSPIRIA.  Instead, TENEBRAE'S set design and
lighting paints a sleek, clinical, chilly vision of a vaguely
futuristic urban world.  And the soundtrack's mix of electronic
atmospheres and gothic rock by frequent Argento collaborators Goblin
is the perfect accompaniment.
So TENEBRAE has much to recommend it, no question.  Still, constantly
nagging at the back of this viewers mind is several lumps in the
narrative.  Some critics argue that logic doesn't matter in Argento
films, but damnit, it matters in ALL films to the point where viewers
don't deserve to feel cheated.  By the way, if you don't want to know
the solution to the mystery THEN SKIP THE NEXT THREE PARAGRAPHS.
About an hour into TENEBRAE the story takes an unexpected twist which,
properly handled, could have proved ingenious.  We witness the murder
of the serial killer himself by a man who, we later discover, is none
other than the author Peter Neal.  He is insane, apparently.  The
murders then continue for the remainder of the film as Neal decides
it's time to settle some personal business involving his neurotic
wife.  He is finally revealed to us as this "second killer" in the
film's bloody climax.
But Argento muffs the twist, both technically and narratively.  You
see, we are supposed to be tricked into thinking that during this
scene Peter Neal is actually an innocent witness who was crouching in
the bushes nearby the whole time and spying on the killer's house.
But thanks to poor editing, its had to believe Neal could have
murdered the killer anyway.  Bad cutting puts the timing way out.  In
other words, he's almost in two places at once.  During this crucial
scene we are also thrown a ridiculous red herring.  By the film's end
you realise that for the sake of an alibi Neal must have
self-inflicted a nasty injury in this earlier scene to make it look
like he was attacked by a fleeing assailant.  The injury?  He banged
himself on the head with a bloody great rock!
Thus, the revelation of the "hero" as a killer (and anti-hero) in the
final scenes may still prove shocking, but its all somewhat
implausible by the time the end credits have rolled.  Helpfully, in
the end we do learn that the bizarre flashbacks of personal
humiliation and murder that have permeated the film belonged to Neal
all along.  But there too is a problem, as the explanations offered
for his motivations are psychologically fuzzy to say the least.  The
story owes us a better understanding of Franciosa's mind, his
concealed madness and his sudden murderous rampage.
TENEBRAE is also marred by annoying little inconsistencies.  For
instance, a teenage boy and girl leave a hotel room and minutes later
we see the girl riding off on the back of a motorbike.  We would
assume the rider is the same boy, but it turns out to be some male
character we aren't even introduced too!  That's careless filmmaking,
pure and simple.
Why, you may ask, do I go on about the story's flaws?  Because when it
comes to visuals and set pieces, Argento is one of the most exciting
filmmakers in the world.  Take one of the extended scenes in TENEBRAE.
An upset girl wandering the streets at night needlessly taunts a guard
dog to the point where - almost unbelievably - it jumps a high fence
and chases her across town.  Finally, as she desperately seeks escape
from this crazed canine, she accidentally stumbles on the serial
killer's lair.  It's an absolutely masterful sequence, tense and
exciting, and communicating a wealth of information through visuals
alone.  And that's exactly the kind of thing that makes the flaws so
frustrating.  Too often, it seems, Argento's films as a whole are less
than the sum of their impressive parts.
Mind you, if you love murder mysteries then TENEBRAE is still worth a
look.  And if you're a fan of Argento's unique style of giallo
thriller then it's essential.  See the uncut widescreen version if you
can and drink in some of the wonderful cinematography by Luciano
Tovoli.  It's a stylish, great-looking and quirky film despite the
problem narrative.
A shame, because it doesn't have to be that way.  Take Argento's more
recent STENDHAL SYNDROME (1992), where with the aid of co-writer
Franco Ferrini he fashioned a solid storyline without sacrificing any
of his surreal weirdness or visual panache.  Proof that he CAN do it,
if he tries...

Title
Review for Inferno (1980)
Frustrating yet seductive, incoherent yet intriguing, by turns
beautiful, horrifying and just plain silly.  INFERNO is all this, and
then some.  The second of only two supernaturally-themed thrillers
directed by cult Italian filmmaker Dario Argento in his 30 year
career, INFERNO occupies his most ambitious period spanning from the
classic DEEP RED (1975) through to OPERA (1987).
The film's premise - and what a muddy, obtuse thing it is - concerns
the origins of an old apartment building in New York.  A curious
tenant named Rose (Irene Miracle) buys an old book written by a mad
architect and alchemist who claims that the building is home to one of
the "Three Mothers".  The book offers a number of clues about the
building that will help uncover the resident Mother's secrets.
Argento's script would have us believe that the Three Mothers "rule
the world" from their houses in Germany, Rome and New York with
"tears, sighs and darkness".  And that they are, in fact, one being:
Death.  
This central premise is the film's chief flaw.  Not for a second can
the viewer really believe that these insignificant buildings and the
women who had them built are the actual earthly embodiment of "Death".
The various goings on - Rose's investigations, her violent murder, her
brother Mark's arrival to investigate further - are all so utterly
trivial in comparison.  Argento is talking about the very
personification of Death here, the force which effects every living
being on planet earth.  Yet he offers us events and settings of
absolutely no global significance and peoples his story with nobodies.
But if you accept your own, lesser premise - for example, that these
sisters are evil, bad-ass women who possess a real power from their
dabbling in the black arts - INFERNO becomes much more digestible.
One astonishing, hypnotic scene follows Rose's descent to the basement
in search of one of the clues or "keys".  Now if you discovered a room
in a basement completely submerged in water, would you dive in?  No,
but our heroine does, in a marvellous sequence devised (uncredited,
mind you) by the late great Mario Bava, his last contribution to film
before his death.
After a narrow escape from...well, I won't spoil it for you, Rose
writes a letter to her brother Mark in Rome begging him to come to New
York.  But the resident Mother in Rome - a beautiful, ghostly
apparition - somehow intervenes so that the letter is almost destroyed
before Mark can read it.  After a strange scene with an alchemist in
an old library and two bloody murders, Mark stumbles upon the letter's
remaining fragments and then sets of to New York, only to discover his
sister has disappeared.
Argento's direction - the poetic scene changes, the gliding
camerawork, the brilliant use of Keith Emerson's classical rock score
- is often masterful.  Particularly well executed is a scene later in
the film when a tenant falls victim to a sudden and frenzied attack by
about a dozen cats.  But although Agento's murder scenes throughout
INFERNO are typically stylish and bloody, the generally disjointed
narrative does rob them of some dramatic power.  And we don't get
answers to a perfectly reasonable question: just who or what is that
silhouette doing the killing?
Argento certainly extracts maximum effect from art director Guiseppe
Bassan's beautiful gothic interiors designed for the New York
apartment building.  The intense reds and blues strongly echo the look
of the Agento's previous film SUSPIRIA, which Bassan also designed.
Mark's eventual discovery of the Mother's lair - a gleaming, surreal,
stunningly ornate gothic interior - is genuinely exciting.  And for
all the story's flaws, not to mention some very lame dialogue, the
ending of INFERNO is curiously satisfying.
A much discussed film, this.  Argento's reported excuse for INFERNO'S
incoherence is that when he read a book on alchemy - for which the
film is apparently a metaphor - he simply couldn't understand it.
Perhaps, then, he should have let someone else write the screenplay.
But in Argento's career that hasn't often happened.  His filmmaking
style is a very personal one - with Argento the director, you also get
Argento the writer.  And that, I imagine, is the way it will always
be.

Title
Review for Mommie Dearest (1981)
"Tina!!!  Fetch me the axe!!!"  A favourite book of mine called THE
GOLDEN TURKEY AWARDS relates the story that when MOMMIE DEAREST was
unleashed upon unsuspecting audiences back in 1981, Paramount soon
realised they had a problem on their hands.  It wasn't just the film's
disappointing box office performance.  Indeed, in the coming years
some people would be going back to see it two, three, even six times.
No, the main problem was that what was intended as a serious biopic of
screen queen Joan Crawford was turning into the laugh riot of the
year.
In a desperate attempt to capitalise on this unexpected turn of
events, some publicity hacks dreamed up outrageous print
advertisements screaming: "Mommie Dearest: The Biggest Mommie Of Them
All!".  Executives at Paramount were appalled and soon had the ads
withdrawn, but it was all too late.  MOMMIE DEAREST was already
cementing its place in camp cinema history.
Unfortunately, Faye Dunaway's energetic, at times ridiculously
over-the-top performance is about the film's only redeeming feature.
Based on daughter Christina Crawford's trashy biography, MOMMIE
DEAREST chronicles a series of mainly private events in the life of
her moviestar mother.  If you believe this movie, it was a life was
racked by obsession, lonliness, child abuse and rampant egomania.
The film begins with Crawford adopting two children, and concludes in
the office of her lawyer where her now grown-up daughter and son find
out they have been left out of their mother's will.  Joan always
wanted her kids to be able to fend for themselves, you see.  But
that's about the only thread in the narrative that manages to survive
to the film's end.  The script - laboured over by four writers, a bad
sign in itself  - is a poorly connected series of episodes that builds
little dramatic momentum.  Frank Perry's direction is no more than
competent, and Dunaway's bitchy lines aside, the dialogue is flat and
uninvolving.
In fairness, the film's second half ditches some of the cartoon
hysterics and does develop a degree empathy for its characters.  When
the adult Christina moves out of home into her own modest dwelling,
Joan visits and keeps in touch, not helping her financially but
encouraging Christina's own acting and career ambitions.  Crawford
does seem to care about her daughter, but you can sense the emotional
distance and feel some of their pain.  You also get glimpses of what
the film could have been in the hands of better writers.
Ah, but there IS Dunaway's performance.  And what a delicious piece of
campery it often is.  Having just been sacked by her studio after a
run of box office duds, Crawford storms home late at night and
proceeds to go ballistic in the garden.  She has the maid drag the
kids out of bed to come down and clean up the mess she's making.
Spotting a young tree she doesn't like the look of, she turns to the
trembling Christina and utters the immortal line "Tina!!  Fetch me the
axe!!" with which she proceeds to enthusiastically dismember the poor
sapling.
In the film's most outrageous scene, Joan realises that some of her
daughter's clothes are hanging on wire coat hangers.  Oh dear!  Sounds
like the perfect excuse for another temper tantrum, doesn't it?   This
time she gives her daughter a horrible beating while delivering
another classic outburst: "No...wire...hangers....EVER!!!!".  And
later, when the Board of her late husband's company Pepsi Cola tries
to divest her of her directorship, she displays a superb grasp of
business etiquette by jumping to her feet and roaring: "Don't fuck
with me, fellas!!".  Oh joy!
Something of a camp classic, then, but if that's not you're cup of tea
then MOMMIE DEAREST doesn't have too much to recommend it.  Better you
see the real Crawford in THE WOMEN (1939), MILDRED PIERCE (1945) or
WHATEVER HAPPENED TO BABY JANE (1962).  Great films distinguished by
great performances, and a far more eloquent testament to this great
woman than Frank Perry's shrieking piece of tabloid froth.

Title
Review for Shock (1977)
The Grandfather of Italian Horror the late Mario Bava has credits in
nearly 100 films and TV movies produced in Italy between 1939 and his
death in the early 80's.  More practiced as a cinematographer than a
director, Bava nonetheless sat in the director's chair for BEYOND THE
DOOR II, the project which turned out to be his last full-length
feature film.
Alongside the appalling zombie schlock of hacks like Lucio Fulci,
BEYOND THE DOOR II is simply a revelation.  In his day Bava was
considered by most to be no great filmmaker, yet here he fashioned one
of the finest Italian horror movies of the 1970's.  (Note that the
film has no connection with the 1975 Exorcist-rip off BEHIND THE DOOR,
but for some unexplained reason was given this related title for
release in the USA and Australia.)
This story focuses on Dora, a women set upon by a malevolent spirit
that channels itself through her young son Marco.  The film opens with
Dora, her son and second husband Bruno returning to a house by the sea
that was the scene of her first husband's suicide and her subsequent
trauma 7 years earlier.  They hope to put the past behind them, but as
small accidents start to befall Dora - usually while Bruno is away on
business  - she starts to suspect that Marco (played with uncanny
ability by 8 year old David Colin Jr.) is somehow involved in the
strange goings on.
To reveal any more of the story would be unfair.  Suffice to say that
this artfully paced study of a woman suffering a nervous breakdown
offers an intriguing plot, loads of atmosphere and solid acting,
though the dialogue is somewhat weakened by the dubbing into English.
Bava coaches a surprisingly good performance from the usually wooden
Daria Nicolodi, wife of famed Italian horror director Dario Argento.
Her character is invested with sufficient depth to allow the audience
real empathy with Dora's troubled soul.  The music by Italian ensemble
Libra is also effective, mixing odd-sounding 70's rock with classic
Gothic piano sequences.  And there is at least one moment -
brilliantly engineered by Bava - that is guaranteed to lift you ten
feet out of your chair. 
Yet for Italian horror, the bloodletting here is surprisingly minimal.
Lamberto Bava and Francesco Barbieri's script is more concerned with
deeper, psychological terrors, with themes of guilt and suffering,
with the notion that what we sow will shall - somewhere, somehow -
eventually reap.  Scholars of the genre take note: BEYOND THE DOOR II
is stylish, chilling, and essential.
