Authors
John Roberdeau
Number of Reviews
6

Title
Review for Game, The (1997)
Director: David Fincher
Writers: John Brancato, Michael Ferris,
         Larry Gross, and Andrew Kevin Walker
Producers: Cean Chaffin & Steve Golin
"The Game" is one of those movies that people love to call a 'taut
thriller'.
In reference to this film, though, 'taut' is a joke.  Most movies that
categorize themselves as suspenseful thrillers or somesuch have a few
surprises in them and perhaps a twist at the end that you might or might not
have seen coming.  "The Game" is decidedly atypical.  I can honestly say
that
this is one of the most gripping and probably the most suspenseful movie I
have seen.
David Fincher's fingerprints are all over this movie, and that is a very
very
good thing.  From the customary darkness of the city and Michael Douglas'
suits and Sean Penn's hair to the brief explosion of blinding neon in the
middle of the film to the unspeakably suspenseful ending, it's clear who the
director was.  Actually, it's funny, I first heard a while back that David
Fincher had directed some music videos, among which were "Janie's Got a Gun"
by Aerosmith and "Vogue" by Madonna.  I thought that was kind of odd, but
after seeing each of those videos  again, I really feel I should have known.
Also, I have read in a place or two that he is either "strongly influenced
by" or "blatantly copies" a film by the name of Videodrome, but having never
seen it, I cannot comment.
Okay, enough about the director.  Ever since I saw "Wall Street", I have
been
somewhat of a fan of Douglas, though he has made some movies by which I am
decidedly unimpressed.  Even if you don't like him, though, it's very clear
that he was perfectly cast in this role.  It's a role he's been playing
quite
often of late.  Basically, he's the guy from "A Perfect Murder", except he's
a slightly more sympathetic character this time around.
He is, however, not hugely concerned with those around him, including his
brother        Conrad, played by Sean Penn.  Penn is unquestionably one of my
favorite actors, and if you don't agree, you should check out "State of
Grace" and "She's So Lovely".  Anyway, though Penn's role is fairly small,
he is responsible for the goings-on in the movie. For his birthday, Conrad
gives his brother a gift certificate redeemable for participation in a game
that is tailor-made for each participant by a company called Consumer
Recreation Services.  On somewhat of a whim, Nicholas decides to try it out,
and man, do antics ensue!
I really don't see what there is not to like about this film.  There is
certainly the question of plausibility, but it is addressed relatively well
in the movie.  And besides, it's not all that hard to suspend disbelief
for two hours and eight minutes.  It's really a highly entertaining
experience, and if that doesn't        get you, then you can just pay attention to
how beautiful the whole thing is.  I am a big fan of the work of several
people connected with this movie.  Fincher and Andrew Kevin Walker
(co-writer)
worked together on Se7en (possibly my favorite movie ever), and as I said
before, I am a fan of both Douglas and Penn.  This is a movie that just
can't
go wrong.  Give it a try.

Title
Review for Swimming with Sharks (1994)
I don't know why, but this hasn't been an easy review to write.  Maybe part
of it is that I'm sort of divided about why I like it (and there are lots of
acceptable reasons, believe me).  The original reason it interested me is
that Kevin Spacey is the star.  I first heard of this movie (and first
watched it) the day after I saw the Usual Suspects for the first time, and
for those of you who have seen that, you know Spacey is unbelievable (and so
does the Academy, come to think of it).
After I started watching this, I found another good reason to like it --
Benicio Del Toro (also in Usual Suspects).  He has a really small part
(probably less than 5 minutes of screen time), but he manages to do a lot
with it, as he so often does.  Del Toro's exit is about the time the movie
begins to get extremely funny.
This film is billed as a comedy, and it definitely has some pretty strong
elements of the dark variety.  However, I have always been more of the mind
that the dark and non-comedic elements tend to overshadow the dark and
comedic elements.  Actually, in that way it reminds me of "In the Company of
Men" (an excellent movie, by the way).  It's undeniably funny, though it's a
somewhat guilty sort of humor.  And then, before you really notice, it's
suddenly disturbing and not-at-all funny and you realize that it hasn't
actually been funny for a while.
The plot, basically, is this:  Guy (Whaley) is a small-town kid who comes to
Hollywood to work for Buddy Ackerman (Spacey), a big-shot producer.  The job
turns out to be a total nightmare, as Guy has found his boss to be
demanding,
obnoxious, and utterly devoid of any respect for him or anything else.
Amidst much on-the-job yelling and ridicule, Guy's resentment grows and
grows
until he finds himself taking his boss hostage and torturing him.  This
happens in the first 5 minutes, however -- the whole movie is a flashback.
Not knowing how to say what I want to say about this movie has caused me to
ramble on for quite a while, so I will try to sum this up now.  The first
2/3
of this movie are incredibly funny dark comedy which I imagine Kevin Spacey
enjoyed heartily.  As is customary in such a film, there is some moderately
disturbing stuff going on, but it's all in good fun.  I'm honestly not sure
what it is about this movie that makes me like it so much, but if you like
Kevin Spacey and aren't bothered by black comedy, it's well worth your time.
I recommend it quite highly.

Title
Review for Big Lebowski, The (1998)
For those who consider themselves fans (or perhaps scholars) of the Coen
brothers' work, this movie could perhaps be somewhat of a disappointment --
not because it isn't absolutely incredible, but because        I think it's more
accessible and (though still noticably Coenian) less, shall we say,
"quirky".
Anyway, I think that 85% of the critics' problems with this movie can be
attributed to the success of "Fargo".  I really wasn't much of a fan of
"Fargo", but it seems that I am pretty much the only person who can honestly
say that.  I think my point is that you shouldn't go into this movie
expecting "Fargo" (or "Raising Arizona" or "Millers Crossing" or "Barton
Fink").  Where most of their other movies have humor that sort of peeks out
from under a bunch of violence or weirdness or both, "The Big Lebowski" is a
great deal more straightforward.  Don't get me wrong, the film is actually
quite confusing -- just not that weird.
The movie is about a middle aged, unemployed, pot-smoking, White Russian
drinking fellow who calls himself "The Dude" and was, according        to the
interview included on the DVD, based on a friend of the Coen brothers, which
I found interesting.  It's the laid back attitude of "The Dude" that is the
basis for most of the humor in the movie.  Whether he's saying "Hey,
careful,
man, there's a beverage here!" as someone muscles him into the back seat of
a car or trying to placate Walter (John Goodman), his friend and bowling
partner who pulls a gun on the lanes, it's The Dude's drug-induced calm that
makes you laugh.
The only thing about the movie that I really am not fond of is the presence
of a couple of small musical numbers.  Fortunately, they are easily
overlooked
and don't hurt the movie to a great extent.  In        closing, try the movie if

Title
Review for Bound (1996)
Writers: Andy and Larry Wachowski
Directors: Andy and Larry Wachowski
Producers: Andy and Larry Wachowski, Stuart Boros, Andrew Lazar
Bound is a movie that I think pretty much everyone should see.  For those
who enjoy a well-written, suspenseful crime drama, this movie is a good
choice.  For anybody who is more interestd in astonishing visuals that you
want to watch over and over again, this is _unquestionably_ the movie you
want.  If you have more simple tastes, there are quite a few amusing jokes,
some really good acting (Pantoliano is particularly impressive), and even
a lesbian sex scene...  The list goes on and on.  No matter what your
reason, though, it's a really good movie.
For me, the best part about it is the visuals -- the brothers Wachowski have
accompilished a great deal on what is probably not a huge budget.  The movie
has a great Noir sort of feal, and the directors went to great lengths to
make every shot in the movie interesting and very pleasing to the eye.
Great
use of slow-motion and interesting camera effects abound.
As I said, though, there is more here than a technical marvel.  The writing
(also the work of Larry and Andy Wachowski) is first rate -- the story,
though not the most original ever,  has some variations on the norm, and
there's a good blend of humor and drama.  I don't really want to give away
anything about the plot, so I'm going to keep my mouth shut.  Basically,
though, it's a mob/crime kind of a thing -- sort of.
It's worth saying that though there are good performances all around, the
Wachowskis and the cinematographer, Bill Pope (he has also worked on "Zero
Effect" which I will review sometime as well as "Clueless", "Fire in the
Sky", and "Army of Darkness"), are the clear stars of this production.
There are way too many things I love about this film for me to list them
all, and most of them would just be "this part's awesome" or somesuch, and
that wouldn't be much help to anybody.
Now, even if the movie doesn't sound that good (I didn't think so when other
people told me about it), please do yourself a favor and try it out.  Also,
don't let a dislike for one or all of the stars stop you from watching it
either -- I most definitely was not a fan of Tilly prior to this film, and I
certainly had no positive feelings about anyone else in the film.  This
movie
will change that.
Not seeing this film would have been one of the worst mistakes of my life.
It is a well-conceived and very well-exectued movie.  The directors have a
unique vision that I think make this movie one of the better ones I have
ever seen.

Title
Review for Donnie Brasco (1997)
Director: Mike Newell
Writers: Paul Attanasio, based on the book by Joseph Pistone and Richard
         Woodley
Producers: Mark Johnson, Barry Levinson, Louis DiGiamo, and Gail Mutrux
This is a truly excellent film.  Everyone in the movie has a very good
showing, but for me Al Pacino's is most notable -- I tend to dislike his
characteristic repugnantly overblown performances, though they seem to
please most people.  That's why his role in this movie is so refreshing.
I read once that the director was "able to coax a subdued performance"
from him, and that is exactly what happened -- he is utterly believable
(not to mention touching) in this role as an aging gangster who has been
overlooked and underappreciated by his superiors.
Actually, "subdued" is a good word for the whole movie.  It's more of a
character study than anything else -- Donnie/Joe (Depp)'s relationships
with Lefty (Pacino) and Maggie (Heche), his wife, are the focus of the
film.  Though, as can be expected with a movie of this genre, there are
a few brief explosions of violence, they are perhaps less frequent and
appalling than those of "Casino" or "Goodfellas", two movies that I feel
are bettered by this film.
The basics of the plot are simple: Joe Pistone is an FBI agent posing as
a jeweller named Donnie Brasco.  He meets a mobster named Lefty Ruggiero,
who vouches for him and gains Donnie enterance to his crime family.
Through the course of the film, they form a strong relationship that
eventually threatens Joe's marriage as well as both of their lives.  Also
definitely worth noting: It's a true story, based on the book by Joe
Pistone.  I don't want to give away too much about the story -- I haven't
revealed anything that isn't printed on the back of the DVD.
I really think this movie is best experienced with little or no background.
I didn't know anything at all about it before I saw it, and I went in with
pretty low expectations (mostly        because I was afraid we were going to get
a Heat ("WhaddayaGOT?!") performance out of Pacino).  I had thought Depp's
performance might salvage the film, but really everyone in it is superb.
It's an excellent movie, and it really looks good, too.

Title
Review for Fear and Loathing in Las Vegas (1998)
Director: Terry Gilliam
Writers: Based on the book by Hunter S. Thompson.
         Screenplay by Terry Gilliam & Tony Grisoni, Tod Davies & Alex Cox
Producers: Laila Nabulsi, Patrick Cassavetti, Stephen Nemeth
This movie is not for everyone.  It's important to get that out of the way
at the outset.  It's a strange, disturbing, confusing, and considerably
offensive movie, and it's without question one of my all-time favorites.
When I first heard of this movie back before it was released in theaters,
I was excited about it, though I'd never even heard of the book.  I
originally discovered it when I was trying to check up on whatever Terry
Gilliam's new project might be.  You might know him from any of a number of
excellent movies he has directed including "12 Monkeys",
"Brazil", and "The Fisher King".  Anyway, I was very favorably surprised to
find that this, his next movie, was going to star two of my favorite actors,
Depp (go see "Donnie Brasco", "Ed Wood", and "Edward Scissorhands") and Del
Toro ("The Usual Suspects" and many small but incredible roles).
Anyway, to the movie at hand.  It is, simply put, about drugs.  Slightly
less simply put, it is "A Savage Journey to the Heart of the American
Dream".
The plot revolves around two compatriots, a doctor of journalism and his
attorney, who are sent to Las Vegas to cover a motorcycle race for the
magazine Raoul Duke (Depp) works for.  This business trip (no pun intended)
quickly turns into an extended orgy of drug use, mayhem, and (dare I say)
hilarity.  The movie is clearly a comedy, but there are many moments where
the experience becomes oppressive -- too strange, too demented.
Like the book (which I rapidly bought and read after seeing the film), the
movie is able to rapidly and seamlessly go from ridiculous humor to
disturbing and uncomfortable strangeness to a really poetic and thought
provoking narration.  Actually, almost everything in the movie is word for
word, image for image taken from the book.  It's a very faithful
reproduction.
As I said, it's definitely not something everyone would like, but I strongly
urge everyone who thinks there is any chance they would like it to give it
some serious thought.
