Authors
Jose R. Perez
Number of Reviews
2

Title
Review for Lethal Weapon 3 (1992)
     I went to this movie with very low expectations for a variety of
reasons: first, and unlike the other two, it has gotten mixed reviews in
the media (although mostly good); secondly, the net has also had mixed
opinions; and last and foremost in my apprehension, Shane Black (the
writer of the others) has apparently departed the LW team.  However,
since Richard Donner and the regulars were back, I decide to gamble on
seeing it.
     To my surprise, LW3 surpassed by far my expectations; I am still
amazed that some opinions in the net hint of not enough action.  One big
part of the LW movies is the action, and the incredible stunts; (IMHO)
this movie had more than enough spectacular and new action and
situations to blow me away.  Another part of the LW movies, and what is
almost as important, is the buddy cop relationship between the
characters.  With Mr. Black departed, I was concerned the relationship
(and the chemistry) wouldn't be as strong.  Again, I was pleasantly
surprised, as the Riggs-Murtaugh relationship is stronger than ever, and
even though Mr. Leo (okay, okay, okay!) Getz is on screen for few parts
of the movie, the character is still interesting.  What's more, Rene
Russo worked *perfectly* for me as an addition to the usual duo, even
though she is only a female Riggs.  The last Shane Black movie THE LAST
BOY SCOUT disappointed me, in that the relationship seemed strained and
in that I *hate!* Tony Scott's directing style of almost complete
constant closeups and grisly violence.  Kudos to Mr. Donner and
Mr. Jeffrey Boam (who has written the last two LW screenplays and the
LW3 story) for making LW3 as good as it was.
     As to the plot, it had as much of it as the others.  To me the LW
movies are simply this: Completely fleshed out characters interact with
each other with expertly done humor and action with unbelievable (and
new) stunts.  LW3 delivered in all these counts.  Plot is not irrelevant
in these movies, but does demand a little suspension of disbelief;
thankfully, since the action and humor are so well done, and the movies
are so well filmed by Mr. Donner and his crew, the fun experienced by
the movie-goer more that makes up for the occasional "oh, sure...."
LW3 simply delivers.
On that note, the LW movies get the following ratings:
     These series are evolving into the American Bond movies, (IMHO).
Let's hope the fourth one (if there is one) is as good as LW3.
     Russo's character didn't die!!!  HURRAAAYYYYY!  Maybe it was for
the best that Mr. Black departed; he seems to kill all the females :-)
Who knows?  Maybe Russo will save Riggs on the next one (Big :-))
     To some people, the ending seemed tacked on; to me, ever since
Riggs told Murtaugh that by retiring himself he would be retiring them,
I *knew* he wasn't going to retire.  To me, it was a treat to relive his
birthday scene in the first one with his retirement party; guess they
didn't change the bathroom much after the explosion :-).
     Next weekend: ALIEN^3 - Maybe I'll be pleasantly surprised again.

Title
Review for Under Siege (1992)
     Okay, okay.  Maybe I wasn't in the mood to watch a mindless action
movie; I am the same person that liked LETHAL WEAPON III, even while
admitting that it wasn't as good as the others.  Howewer, the latest
Segal picture didn't look that bad, and since none of my friends would
go see a Woody Allen movie even if I paid them, I went to see it
expecting a mild DIE HARD rehash.  Boy, was I wrong!
     In the first half of the movie, we are already assaulted with
Segal's acting, (he is not simply wooden; he is like a wall), gratuitous
violence, an incredible plot, sexist and even more gratuitous nudity,
and bad lines that obviously were meant as jokes.  By the end, it is
obvious that hundreds of Navy men are no match for thirty armed Special
Forces soldiers.  Not once in the movie did Segal appear worried or
undecided, which did not do much for increasing the unexistent suspense.
     Of course, in movies like these, there must be a sidekick, and a
love interest.  In these one we are given a two for one package in the
form of a Playboy model (in the movie), which only functions as a
supposed comic relief (by the way of extremely stupid unfunny lines),
and to have watering eyes and look away every time something bad happens
in the movie.  Oh, of course, she appears naked from the waist up, and,
of course, Segal kisses her at the end after no development of their
relationship; they did not even seem to be interested in each other.  I
have never seen so little chemistry between two people in a movie.
     Often, the villain saves the movie; unfortunately, the villains
here are cartoonish, stupid and unfunny, unmenacing.  How many movies
have psycho ex-Special Forces bad guys?  Too many.  I was able to
predict the action all throughout the movie, including the moment where
the sidekick saves the hero from certain death, the scene where the bad
guy can kill the hero but proceeds to explain his plan to him, the
scene where we are shown the hero's superiors are stupid, the scene
where the bad guy loses his gun and has to fight the hero hand to hand,
etc...  Simply said, this is movie-making by the numbers, boring, and
potentially offensive in going for the lowest common denominator of the
audience.
     The real sad thing is that there are a lot of movies out that I
would rather have seen; once again, dragged in by my friends, which by
the way, liked the movie halfheartedly.  They probably like wrestling
too :-).
