Authors
evelyn_kingston@bc.sympatico.ca (The Kingstons)
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Crow: City of Angels, The (1996)
This attempt reserect the story of a crow helping the dead to right the
wrong failed to make it out of the coffin. Vincent Perez (Ashe) was a
good choice to succeed the late Brandon Lee but unfotionatly the
material was not of the same calibre.
On it's own merrits this film is passible, barely though. When compared
with the first film, City of angels lack the emotion, action and grit.
The first is more of a love story in which Lee (Draven) is brought back
do to the death of his one true love. Lee must seek out the gang of
thugs that took the life of his love. The second film deals with love
but the love of a father & son. Although tragic this does not carry the
same emotional feeling of the screen. The prevece nature of this film
makes of crave for a shower after leaving the theater.
Story wise was this films weakest point. The focal point of the story,
the climax, was the worst of this movie. When the crow is being killed
Ashe is wounded it the same manner. Not so in the first film. When the
crow is shot Draven simply looses his powers.  After Ashe leaves Curve
(Iggy Pop) floating if the water people on the river bank toss "flower
for the dead" in, which just happen to form a crow around Curve. Not
likely!  This film lacked the action scenes of Lee which made this
movie a bit-of-action thriller. What little action there was, was fist
rate.
The imagery was well done on most of the film execpt for a few shots of
Ashe on a motorcycle which make one wonder, had they ever heard of a
steadycam?
Having the all new soundtract was good but Graeme Revell (composer)
only seemed use the same pieces from the first. A good score but this
was one area from the first film where it would have been nice to have
a change.
This movie was somewhat enjoyalbe but made me want to get home and
watch the first film all the more. Maybe if James O'Barr (the writer of
the comic) had more to do with this movie it could have been better. My
suggestion, wait for video, or if you can't, go to the mat.
