Authors
Christina Nunez
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Tin Cup (1996)
       For all you golf romantics out there, Tin Cup is the movie to see
this summer (presumably the golf Butt-heads out there have already been
satisfied by the release of Happy Gilmore. Brought to you by the same guy
who directed Bull Durham, Tin Cup returns Kevin Costner to his element as
the diamond-in-the-rough women can't resist. Roy McAvoy is a
super-talented golf pro who has a weak follow-through, and of course we're
not talking just about his swing. 
       His run-down driving range out in west Texas gets shaken up by the
arrival of Dr. Molly Griswold (Rene Russo), the first lady McAvoy
considers worthy of more than cheap thrills. But she's not there for the
taking, don't you know. Her boyfriend happens to be an old golf rival,
David Simms, who's in town to promote a tournament. Roy's an endearing
underdog, trying to win Molly and, ultimately, show up Simms in--what're
you, crazy, Roy?--the U.S. Open of all things! Well, you know where the
plot goes from here. That's why you're watching, isn't it? Certainly it's
not for suprises--but the movie delivers in filling this mold with cute,
watchable characters. 
       Kevin Costner, when he's not running around barely dressed with
Native Americans or in some seascape, actually makes an engaging leading
man every once in awhile. His scenery gets stolen more than once by Cheech
Marin as his sidekick, and by Johnson, another likable star with a mostly
regrettable resume. Rene Russo, whose exaggerated but not unattractive
features suggest a younger,
pre-Wayne Flowers Madam, has a pretty straight shot of a role as the uptight
therapist. She may grate occasionally, but she does her best with the role
and with a watery final scene. 
       I would be remiss if I didn't warn non-golf aficionados that, no
matter what you do, no matter how many camera angles you use or plot
twists you wring or strings you swell on the soundtrack, it's still GOLF.
And watching 18 holes, even when Costner's the one swinging, still feels
as suspenseful as watching the Astroturf grow for 9 innings at Wrigley
Stadium. But it remains a "cute" movie, and you can make that your own
endorsement or damnation.
Check t@p online's film section for reviews, clips, and news.
http://www.taponline.com/tap/entertainment/film
