Authors
Manish Malhotra
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Daughters of the Dust (1991)
     There have been a couple of reviews saying two very different
things about this film.  It seems many people don't know the history of
the film, so I decided to post this.  This article contains information
about the film, its history, and a small review.  
     There was a special screening of this film at the University film
theater at Duke.  Before the movie started, there was a brief
introduction about the history of this film and why it was made.  The
film tells the life of people of an African tribe.  Years ago, they were
brought as slaves to America.  Many members of this tribe still live in
islands off the east coast near South Carolina and Georgia.  They have
preserved the original customs despite the fact that few miles across
the ocean lies America, with a culture totally different!
     These people have lived peacefully since the beginning of the
century.  However, their existence is now threatened due to encroachment
on these islands (I don't remember exactly what, perhaps commercial
construction and tourism development.)  The film is supposed to bring
awareness to the American society of what these people stand to lose if
that process continues.  A court case is going on regarding this dispute
of land of those islands.  There is an organization that is fighting for
the rights of these people and survives on charity money.  The director
(I think a woman) had many difficulties obtaining funding for the film.
It took her almost twelve years to complete the film.
     The language spoken in the film is the language that these people
speak.  I think it is English mixed with their original language.   I
would rather call this film a documentary.  Personally, I did not like
the film.  It is a very poorly made film and sustains the interest for a
while only because of its beautiful photography.  Oh!  I hate to think
that natural beauty of these islands would be spoiled because of
commerce.  Another problem I had with the film was its length.  It is
just too long for what it is trying to say.  The plots don't even have
to be there.  My feeling is that the director wanted to make a
documentary but for the reasons of collecting money (for the same
organization), she tried to make it more commercial by adding loose
plots of which she did a very poor job.  After half an hour of the film,
the audience begin to expect some plot to develop.  But all the plots
are left partially developed.
     If you decide to see this film, don't expect a film but think of it
as a documentary.  If you believe in helping this organization, then
think of the ticket money as the charity.  Enjoy the beautiful
photography and gain some insights into the culture of one of the
African tribes.   
