Authors
Ron Rejmaniak
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Frankenstein Unbound (1990)
     I saw this film tonight and liked what I saw.  The return of Roger
Corman to directing and a thinking horror film.  
     Roger Corman's directing doesn't have any cinematic moments and
isn't filled with stylish touches (like Ridley Scott's) but shows the
work of a man who knows his craft returning to work.  It is very able
directing and adding that he hasn't worked on a film other than as a
producer for ~15 years, shouldn't draw too many complaints.  I will add
that it is atmospheric.  One of my friends compares the atmosphere to
that of Corman's Poe films (he's only seen the second half of this film
though...)
     The film casts John Hurt as Buchanan, a weapons scientist who finds
himself sent back in time to Geneva in 1817.  Buchanan's first encounter
in this strange land is with another scientist, Victor Frankenstein,
played by Raul Julia.  Buchanan also encounters Bridget Fonda as Mary
Shelley who was beginning her novel FRANKENSTEIN at this time.  Needless
to say, the acting is top-notch including the actor who plays the
monster.
     The film deals with Buchanan reflecting on his role in science,
drawing parallels to Frankenstein and his semi-thinking creation.  The
film was shot on location in Italy and the costuming is good.  The
soundtrack works well with the film.  There is little blood and gore
despite the R rating and is well served when used.  This is a thinking
horror film with not a lot of action or scares.  We haven't had a horror
film like this since the 1970s.  (I'm *not* saying that this film is
very thought-provoking *after* the film but it does sustain interest
during the film).
     I heartily recommend this film and am sort of glad that it wasn't
hyped up as a Halloween horror film.  I'd list it as one of the best (if
not the best) horror films of the year and among the better films of any
type this year.
     This film may be getting a limited release (if any nationwide) even 
though it is being distributed by 20th Century Fox.  I saw only one small
ad this weekend (out of several newspapers) and no tv ads or theatrical
trailers for this film.  There weren't even any reviews in the papers
for this film.  I find it odd that this film isn't getting noticed in
its release since director Roger Corman was everywhere this summer on
tv and in print discussing his old films (and actors/actresses/directors
he discovered/trained), his new book *on* his old films etc., and
discussing his new film FRANKENSTEIN UNBOUND (sans film clips though).
     In Boston it has an "exclusive engagement" on what I believe to be
the largest screen (not theater capacity) in a Boston movie theater, the
Charles.  At the 9:40 PM Friday showing there were a total of 17 people
there.  I don't think it's going to stay there long with that kind of
attendance.  I wonder how the movie would have done with more
promotion....
     I give a Joe Bob Briggs type 3B count: this film has blood, 2
beasts, and possibly 1 breast (may be prosthetic).  Look for
Frankenstein's improvements of people including 2 thumbs...
