Authors
Greta Christina
Number of Reviews
4

Title
Review for Delta of Venus (1995)
     When I told a friend of mine about DELTA OF VENUS, his response
was to describe a cartoon he once saw in the New Yorker.  The caption
read, "Life is too short for soft-core porn."
     That's DELTA OF VENUS in a nutshell.  The actual review of this
movie is going to be very short.  In a word: Stinkeroo.  We're talking
seriously boring, folks; ill-conceived, poorly-executed, unrelievedly
dull, and a complete and utter failure in the clit-hardening
department.
     Directed by Zalman King (the same genius who wrote 9 1/2 WEEKS and
wrote and directed WILD ORCHID), DELTA OF VENUS is a quasi-mainstream
art-sex movie loosely based on the wonderful collection of short
stories by Anais Nin. There's a vague plot about the erotic and
artistic awakenings of the main character Elena (Audie England), who is
loosely based on Anais Nin, and her torrid and painful relationship
with Lawrence (Costas Mandylor), who seems to be loosely based on Henry
Miller.  But the plot is pretty much a joke, a frayed and tenuous
thread whose sole function in life is to string together the various
erotic stories and fantasies that Elena experiences and/or imagines.
     Hmmm.  A bunch of sex scenes held together by a tissue-thin plot.
Sound familiar?  Sound like almost every porn movie you've seen?  Well,
you got it 100% right, my friend; pick up your prize at the door.  So
why does DELTA OF VENUS fall under my jurisdiction as the Spectator's
mainstream film critic?  In one word: NC-17.
     One might ask what difference there really is between NC-17 and
X.  There does seem to be a distinction of some sort, although, like
many of our culture's distinctions having to do with sex, it gets
rather hazy and inconsistent when you examine it closely.  There's the
obvious legal difference, of course; NC-17 is copyrighted by the Motion
Picture Association of America, whereas the X rating is not.  In
practical terms, this means an NC-17 movie is one that the studio
bothered to submit to the MPAA and get rated.  An X rating, on the
other hand, is given to a film by its manufacturers, who aren't big
Hollywood studios and couldn't give less of a fuck about the MPAA.  (It
also means, in theory, that movie theaters and newspapers that won't
exhibit or advertise porn flicks should be able to handle the NC-17
stuff.  However, in practice, the theaters and newspapers have been
pissants, and an NC-17 rating makes it almost as hard to get access to
the mainstream movie infrastructure as the dreaded X does.)
     There is, of course, another difference, one that has to do with
the somewhat murkier world of marketing and promotion.  To a potential
audience, NC-17 signals some degree of serious artistic quality.  This
seems to translate as no insertion shots, reasonably high
Hollywood-style production values, and a somewhat better pretense at
"redeeming social importance" than most porn flicks have.  (That may be
a bit unfair of me; HENRY AND JUNE, the first film to get the NC-17
rating, has more than just a pretense at redeeming social importance;
and, in fact I would argue that many porn flicks do as well.  That
aside, I think the point still stands.)  X, on the other hand,
signifies ... well, X signifies smut.  And more power to it.
     But if DELTA OF VENUS and SHOWGIRLS are any indication, there's
another, more significant difference between NC-17 and X.  The
difference:  X is better.  X is hotter, X is more interesting, and much
of the time, X is smarter and better made.
     I do realize that there's a big problem inherent in making an
NC-17 movie, and that's getting acting talent.  After all, Michelle
Pfeiffer and Meryl Streep probably aren't going to do arty soft-core
porn flicks, even if you ask them nicely and offer them lots of money.
(Neither are Antonio Banderas or Ralph Fiennes, more's the pity.)  And
if you're trying to make a nice respectable NC-17 art-sex movie instead
of a nasty old X-rated porn flick, you're probably not going to hire
Nina Hartley or Jeff Stryker.  Which puts you in a bit of a bind; you
have to find non-porn actors and actresses who will nevertheless do
almost-explicit sex on screen.
     Unfortunately, non-porn people who'll do sex stuff doesn't seem to
be the deepest talent pool in the business.  If the quality of acting
in DELTA OF VENUS (or SHOWGIRLS, another recent NC-17 loser) is any
indication, it's a very shallow pool indeed.  Audie England's
performance as Elena is just terrible, the worst of both worlds; she
can't do a hot sex scene, and she can't act.  Her idea of deep
emotional expression is to pout.  She pouts when she's angry, she pouts
when she's horny, she pouts when she's lonely, and when she's having an
orgasm she closes her eyes and--you guessed it--pouts.  Costas
Mandylor as Lawrence isn't much better; his performance consists
primarily of a whole lot of smoldering stares.  Very blank smoldering
stares.  He seems to think that smoldering consists of lowering the
chin, staring very hard at the camera, and emptying one's mind of all
conscious thought.
     And the overall quality of the movie is peculiarly dispassionate.
It's infested with scenes of people dancing wildly through the streets
of Paris, supposedly signifying a mad impetuosity and a surrender to
sensual possibilities.  But the execution is so fake, so forced, that
it winds up having the exact opposite effect.  It doesn't have the feel
of people giving themselves over to the moment; it feels like people
making a stilted and self-conscious attempt to give themselves over to
the moment.  Worse, the sex scenes are ... well, boring.  Tepid.  At
best, one or two of them were sort of pretty, interesting to watch,
kind of.  Not one of them made me wet, and not one of them gave me
something to think about the next time I whacked off.
     Which leads me to the most important quality that I feel makes X a
better animal than NC-17:  honesty.  Even the most pretentious X-rated
porn flick, with the dorkiest arty special effects and camera tricks,
is still very clear about its purpose, which is to get your dick/clit
hard and get you off.  That's not to say that porn filmmakers are never
trying to express themselves artistically or politically; I think, at
least sometimes, they are.  But there's a straightforward quality to X-
rated flicks, a direct and unabashed appeal to the audience's desire to
look at people having sex, that is almost completely lacking in the
world of NC-17.  (An odd tangent:  My computer's thesaurus program
gives the synonyms for "explicit" as "definite, distinct, precise,
specific, candid, frank, outspoken, unreserved."  Well, maybe it's not
a tangent.  Maybe it's exactly the point I'm trying to get across.)
     So if I like X-rated films for their honesty, the obvious
implication is that NC-17 movies are, to some extent, dishonest.  (Or,
at any rate, that DELTA OF VENUS and SHOWGIRLS are dishonest.)  I
realize that these are fightin' words, and I'd like to give an example
of what I mean.  That example, the one that annoys me to the point of
infuriation, is the lack of what I call "nudity parity."  By "nudity
parity," I mean that male and female bodies are exposed roughly
equally, with roughly the same degree of vulnerability.  To put it more
bluntly--if a movie shows pussy, it should show cock as well.  And not
just one or two brief teasing shots flitting by, either.  If there are
buttloads of full-frontal female images, there should be buttloads of
men in their full-frontal glory as well.
     Now, nudity parity is tricky to do if you want your film to get an
R rating.  For some inexplicable reason (I'm sure it couldn't possibly
be sexism), a naked dick is much harder to get past the MPAA than a
naked pussy is.  So when I review R-type movies, I do cut them a bit of
slack on this issue.
     But DELTA OF VENUS isn't rated R.  It never stood a chance of
being rated R, and I doubt that anybody expected it to.  Its subject is
sex, it's full of sex scenes both tender and wild, and it parades
female frontal nudity all over the damn place.  But in scenes where
male frontal nudity would be appropriate, it pulls every coy trick in
the book; covering the guy with sheets, having him stand behind sofas,
shooting him from the back or from the side or above the waist.
(SHOWGIRLS, another NC-17 loser, did the same thing.  The movie's only
actual fuck scene took place, rather conveniently, in a swimming pool,
and Kyle MacLachlan's nude scenes were carefully crafted to keep the
camera away from his dick.)
     Now, if nudity is so important for the movie's artistic statement
about sex, then why is all the nudity female?  I can only think of two
reasons, and I don't think much of either one.  Either the director is
thinking purely in terms of images that will please a het male
audience, or he identifies with the male characters and doesn't want to
make them vulnerable by exposing their dicks to the entire adult free
world.  Either way, it's sexist and dishonest.
     If Zalman King and Eszterhas/Verhoeven (the writer/director of
SHOWGIRLS) are any indication, the guys who make NC-17 movies want it
both ways.  They want to make sex movies, but don't want to be treated
like scum.  They want to make smut, but they want some degree of
respectability as well.  And for all my criticism of the NC-17
aesthetic, for all my criticism of these filmmakers' lack of courage
and vision, I can't argue too much with this desire.  In a better
world, they should be able to do that ... and other filmmakers, better
filmmakers, filmmakers with a serious erotic vision, should be able to
do it as well.  The distinction between NC-17 and X is, in essence, the
distinction between erotica and pornography, between art and smut.  And
as such, it is useless, pointless, arbitrary, and ultimately damaging
to the creative process.
(Written for The Spectator; reprinted by permission of The Spectator
and the author.)

Title
Review for Beautiful Girls (1996)
Guy Stuff
Copyright 1996 Greta Christina.  Written for the Spectator;
posted with permission.  Replies to this review may be printed in
the Spectator Express Mail section; please indicate if your
response is not for publication.
Beautiful Girls.  Miramax.  Starring Matt Dillon, Timothy Hutton,
Rosie O'Donnell, Martha Plimpton, Michael Rapaport, and Uma
Thurman.  Produced by Cary Woods.  Written by Scott Rosenberg. 
Directed by Ted Demme.  Rated R.
     When the lights dimmed and the first few minutes of
Beautiful Girls started rolling, my immediate reaction was to
roll my eyes in dismay.  "Oy," I thought to myself.  "A bunch of
dudes talking to each other about their feelings and
relationships and why they can't commit.  It's a chick movie for
guys.  God help us.  Why don't they shut up about their feelings
and go shoot something?  It'd be much more entertaining."
     But then I gave myself a good, hard mental slap in the face
for being such a typical boneheaded American.  I mean, I gripe
all the time about gender stereotyping in movies and how the
media macho myth cripples men emotionally.  Why should I complain
when a movie seems to be undercutting that myth?  So I sat back
and did my best to give Beautiful Girls a chance.
     My final assessment:  Nice try.  Not a particularly
successful one attempt, but an interesting and apparently
heartfelt one.  The writing is well-meaning but often clumsy,
with characters dropping into long overwritten speeches about The
Meaning Of Life And True Love And Stuff at the drop of a hat. 
And while the performances are earnest and sweet, they lack the
sparkle, the elusive sketching-a-character-in-a-few-short-lines
quality, that's needed to make an ensemble film shine.
     But it is a genuinely nice try.  And more to the point, it
has some interesting things to say about men and men's sexuality. 
Unlike the traditional chick movie, a genre that tends to skewer
men's foibles mercilessly (an understandable exercise and one
I've been known to indulge in myself on occasion), Beautiful
Girls deals with men's foibles from the men's point of view.  It
questions, even mocks, traditional male attitudes towards sex and
love and relationships; but it does so gently, with understanding
and sympathy and good humor.
     Essentially, it's--well, it's a chick movie for guys.  (As
such, it will most likely drop at the box office like a sixteen-
ton weight, so if you're at all interested in seeing it, I
suggest you do so as soon as possible.)
     The story focuses on bunch of guys from a small town in
Massachusetts approaching their tenth high school reunion.  One
of them, Willie (Timothy Hutton) has managed to get out of town
and is struggling to make it as a piano player in New York City;
he's now back for the reunion, to connect with his old friends
and try to make some decisions about his life.  Most of the guys
still live in town, though; they plow snow for a living, hang
out, drink, fight with their girlfriends, try to pick up cute
women, and belt out "Sweet Caroline" in the local bar.
     And they talk.  They talk about sex, they talk about love,
they talk about relationships.  They talk about women; about
their wives and girlfriends and exes, about porn stars and
supermodels and girls they had crushes on in high school.  They
talk about what they want from women and what they think women
want from them.  They talk in a way that guys in movies rarely
talk to each other; showing their awkwardness and fear, their
passion for sex and their disappointment in it and their worry
that the disappointment is somehow their fault, their longing for
something better than what they've got and their anxiety that
they don't have what it takes to make that happen.  And when they
talk, they show a balance between toughness and vulnerability,
swagger and doubt, that has an uncommon feeling of truth to it.
     Now obviously, I don't have any idea whether guys really
talk to each other like this when women aren't around.  (Any guys
who see the movie and feel like clueing me in as to its
verisimilitude, feel free to drop me a line.)  But the dialogue
does have a ring of truth to it.  The style isn't always the most
authentic; much of the language is speechy and poetical and not
very much like the way people really talk.  But the feeling
behind the words, the sentiments driving the sometimes dippy and
flowery speeches, do feel quite real.
     Now, just the very sight of men talking to each other about
love, and talking about it as if it matters to them, is enough to
make this movie stand out in a crowd.  But it isn't just the
sight of men talking with each other about their personal lives
that makes this movie unusual.  A number of the specific things
that they say about their lives, and particularly that they say
about sex and love, are things that I've rarely heard before from
guys in Movieland.
     For instance.  When Paul (Michael Rapaport), who is sort of
the movie's scapegoat/whipping boy, complains that his girlfriend
Jan (Martha Plimpton) is pressuring him into making a commitment,
the other guys rag on him mercilessly, pointing out that he's
been with her for seven years and a commitment is not an
unreasonable thing to expect.  When Tommy (Matt Dillon) gripes
about his girlfriend Sharon (Mira Sorvino) and her insecurity and
shitty self-esteem (not to mention her bulimia), his buddies
point out rather bluntly that his ongoing affair with his old
girlfriend Darian (Lauren Holly) might have something to do with
it.  When Paul gasses on about how terrific supermodels are, how
they represent promise and hope and how he wants to date one more
than anything, the guys roll their eyes in mock despair at his
obsessive evasion of real-life women and real-life relationships. 
And when Willie describes his lovely and talented lover Tracy
(Annabeth Gish) to his pals, they read him the riot act for
waffling about his relationship and sniffing around other doors
looking for something better.  I can't remember the last time I
saw a movie in which the male characters encouraged one another
to take some responsibility for their emotional lives.  It's
quite refreshing.
     But I don't want to get too carried away here, either. 
There are a number of traditional notions about sex and love that
the movie doesn't question at all, and they're ones that I find
particularly annoying.
     The first has to do with the whole idea of marriage and
relationships and commitment.  Yes, it's certainly a refreshing
change of pace to see male characters taking love seriously and
talking to each other about their emotional lives.  But it's not
such a refreshing change of pace to see marriage and monogamy and
Long Term Relationships presented as the ultimate answer to all
these knotty problems of sex and love and intimacy and fear.
     And Beautiful Girls does exactly that.  Although each of the
guys in the movie has a different problem with sex and love, they
all wind up with the same solution:  It's time to settle down. 
The big winners in the movie are the guys who decide to put away
childish things, stick with their women and make The Commitment;
the big loser, Paul, is the guy who realizes just how valuable
his girl is after it's too late and he's lost her for good.  I'm
not saying that Committed Relationships are a bad idea, you
understand.  I'm just saying that a slightly less preachy tone
about it might have been nice.
     The other big problem I have with Beautiful Girls has to
with how the movie sees female beauty, what kind of girls it
perceives to be beautiful.  The wives and the girlfriends and the
objects of desire are all very traditionally attractive in a very
standard Hollywood way; slender and willowy and feminine, with
gym-toned bodies and flat stomachs.  And in a stunningly
unoriginal bit of casting, Uma Thurman plays Andera, the
stunningly beautiful stranger who sweeps into town and knocks all
the men off their fee.  Uma, not surprisingly, is held up as the
ultimate pinnacle of female beauty, the one that all the men
naturally and rightly desire.  The movie repeatedly pokes fun at
men for coveting supermodels and other unreal ideals of female
attractiveness; but although it pokes fun at those ideals, it
nevertheless manages to perpetuate them.  And it perpetuates the
notion that these ideals are based on some sort of objective
truth that all men can and do agree on.
     Now, I will admit wholeheartedly that this is a very
personal grudge I carry against movies in general.  I get real
tired of seeing the same damn female body over and over again
when I go to the movies.  It's not that I don't like tall thin
women; it's just that a little variety now and then would be
nice.  And in the clit-hardening department, Uma Thurman does
just about nothing for me.  I'm a bit tired of seeing her held up
as the reigning sex goddess, and I'm real tired of seeing her
bony body put forth as the ne plus ultra of female sexuality. 
Especially when there's a babe like Rosie O'Donnell on the same
screen.
     Again, I will admit to a bias.  I think Rosie is just about
the hottest woman in the movies today.  I'd do her in a New York
minute, no questions asked.  And it baffles and enrages me to see
her, time and time again, playing the buddy or the best friend,
never getting sex or love simply because she's big.  With the
exception of Exit to Eden, I don't think I've *ever* seen Rosie
O'Donnell presented as the object of anyone's desire--and it
pisses me off.  Every other woman in this movie has a boyfriend
or husband or lover; the guys may be jerks, but they're there. 
You think Rosie O'Donnell has a boyfriend?  You think anyone man
in the movie even considers Rosie O'Donnell as girlfriend
material?  Think again.  She gets lots of smart funny lines, and
she gets to make a very groovy speech about the unrealistic
standards of beauty that so many men hold women to.  What she
doesn't get is laid.  And like so many other Hollywood movies,
Beautiful Girls treats the big woman not getting laid as a
completely understandable and indisputable fact of life.  In a
movie that supposedly questions the concepts of traditional
American masculinity, I find the things that it doesn't question
at all to be very revealing.
-- 
For information on the Blowfish Catalog of erotic books, movies,
comix, edible things and arts & crafts write to info@blowfish.com.
Our WWW home page is located at http://www.blowfish.com/

Title
Review for Showgirls (1995)
[Originally published in The Spectator, October 6, 1995]
United Artists.  Written by Joe Eszterhas.  Directed
by Paul Verhoeven.  Produced by Alan Marshall and Charles Evans. 
Starring Elizabeth Berkley, Kyle MacLachlan, and Gina Gershon. 
Rated NC-17.  
     No, I mean really bad.  I can't even begin to tell you
(although, of course, I'm going to try).  The acting is dreadful,
a blend of woodenness and scenery-chewing that's generally
identified with the Movie-of-the-Week.  The writing is just
laughable; some of the most poignant moments had an audience of
hardened critics howling with glee.  I think it was trying to say
something about power and morality and the price of success, but
mostly it had a lot to say about hard nipples and gold lame and
Joe Eszterhas's girl-girl fetish.
     I guess I'd better do a quick summary here.  SHOWGIRLS is
the brainchild of screenwriter Joe Eszterhas and director Paul
Verhoeven, the same creative team that inflicted BASIC INSTINCT
on the world.  (Eszterhas was reportedly paid $3.2 million for
the script.  You have to wonder where it went.  Writing lessons,
I hope.)  SHOWGIRLS tells the gripping tale of Nomi (Elizabeth
Berkley), who comes to Las Vegas carrying a suitcase and a dream
and leaving behind a cloudy past.  She gets a job as a lap dancer
at the Cheetah Club, but soon claws her way into a place in the
chorus at the Stardust.  She ... oh, I can't do this.  Let's let
the press kit take over from here, shall we?  "Possessed of a raw
and riveting talent (yeah, right--GC), Nomi is soon introduced to
the vastly different world of the big Las Vegas shows--and the
powerful men and women who run them.  Zack (Kyle MacLachlan), the
handsome and ambitious entertainment director at the Stardust,
could push Nomi into the spotlight.  Cristal (Gina Gershon), the
glamorous star of the stage show 'Goddess,' is inexorably drawn
to Nomi's beauty and spirit and may make her ... or break her."
     The main character, Nomi, is completely indecipherable. 
She's supposed to be a wild, hot-blooded, untameable tigress, but
to me she just seems petulant and ill-tempered.  In theory, she's
driven by obscure but powerful ambitions and passions, but as
she's the kind of girl that gets shivers and goose-bumps watching
a cheesy Vegas stage show, it's a little hard to swallow. 
Supposedly she finds herself by the end of the movie, but I'll be
damned if I could figure out where she was.  Behind the sofa,
maybe?
     Even as simple, unchallenging entertainment, SHOWGIRLS isn't
very successful.  The dance routines are pretty great in a Vegasy
way, hot and fun and glitzy.  Some of the sex stuff is not bad
(more on that in a bit).  But there's a whole lot of really bad
plot in between--the filler between the dirty bits is just as
ludicrous and boring as it is in most porn flicks--and there's
more and more of it as the movie progresses, bringing the whole
thing to a grinding crawl.  It clocks in at just over two hours. 
It seems longer.
     Essentially, SHOWGIRLS is soft-core porn with very high
production values.  So that's how I'm going to review it.  After
all, I don't think you were expecting CITIZEN KANE.  You wanna
know two things:  You wanna know if it'll get your dick hard, and
you wanna know what it says about sex.
     First things first.  Will it get your dick hard?  Well ... it
might.  There's a pretty good chance that it will.  Depends on
your dick, I suppose.  If your dick likes tall, skinny, long-
legged, hard-muscled women, then it will probably like this movie
pretty well.  If it likes tall, skinny, long-legged, hard-muscled
women who prowl around backstage and do pseudo-lezzie dance
numbers in skimpy gold-lame and black-plastic outfits, then it
will definitely like this movie quite a bit.  And if it likes
deranged, erratic, power-hungry women who slam doors and carry
switchblades and have hissy-fits every twenty seconds, then it'll
probably stand up and sing the "Hallelujah Chorus."
     Your dick had better like being teased, though.  Because for
all its sexy, sleazy, boldly-go-where-no-one-has-gone-before
come-on, SHOWGIRLS is essentially a high-budget cock-tease. 
There is one--I repeat, one--fuck scene in the entire movie.  It
takes place in a swimming pool, where all you can see is some
thrashing around.  (I'm sorry, but all I could think was,
"Chlorinated water.  No lube.  Ouch."  Also, there's no condom,
unless Kyle MacLachlan had one cleverly tucked up his butt for
safekeeping.  But I digress.)
     I don't mean to say that it won't turn you on.  The lap
dancing scene, where Nomi does Zack in the lap-dance booth while
Cristal watches, is pretty spectacular.  The scene where Nomi and
James (Glenn Plummer) practice their dance number and wind up
fooling around is quite wild and nasty--as long as it lasts. 
There's a fairly sleazy bit, in which show director Tony Moss
(Alan Rachins) makes Nomi take off her bra and play with her
nipples on stage during an audition, that wasn't bad.  And a lot
of the dance sequences are pretty steamy.
     But again, it's all a tease.  It winds you up, but it
doesn't take you anywhere.  The lesbian stuff is especially
disappointing; more accurately, the lack of lesbian stuff is
disappointing.  There's lots of flirting and vamping and
attempted seduction, and lots of girl-girl erotic dancing, but
there's not one single scene in which two women actually do it. 
I was crushed.
     Maybe I'm down on this movie for the same reason that I'm
down on a lot of porn--most of the women didn't interest me.  I
like smart and imaginative and funny and fleshy.  Bony is fine if
there's brains and imagination, but bony and brainless--forget
it.  And the main character, Nomi, was a complete washout in the
clit-hardening department.  She has the face of a mall-rat, a
bargain-basement Sharon Stone, and her eyes are mean and empty
and hard.  To put it mildly--not my type.
     What it mostly comes down to, though, is that the movie
hasn't stuck with me.  I only saw it a few hours before writing
this, and already the images are beginning to slip away.  Not a
good sign for pornography; I like porn that I can think about and
jack off to for at least a few days.  With a couple of
exceptions, SHOWGIRLS has provided me with very little in the way
of jack-off material.  Big-screen production vales
notwithstanding, you might be better off with a decent porn
video.
     So enough about getting your dick hard.  What does SHOWGIRLS
say about sex?
     That's a tough one.  The movie is such an unholy mess. 
Deciphering its subtext is going to be tricky.  Hell, for that
matter, deciphering its over-text is going to be tricky.  I'm
pretty sure that Eszterhas and Verhoeven were trying to say
something about sex; I've read interviews and press notes, and
they definitely seem to have had something on their mind.  But
I'll be damned if I can figure it out.
     The movie's attitude towards sex work and prostitution, for
instance, is rather startlingly muddled.  On the one hand, it
wants to be positive about it.  One of the more comprehensible
messages is that Nomi's lap-dancing job at the Cheetah Club is
more honest than shaking her tail at the Stardust.  It's all sex
work, the movie says.  Some of it pretends to be something else,
but if you're going to do sex work, you might as well be up front
about it.
     But at the same time, SHOWGIRLS is very down on whores and
whoredom.  Nomi doesn't want to be a whore, and every time
someone suggests that that's what she's doing, or invites her to
take it a step further, she gets pissed off and flounces out the
door.  She shakes her ass and gets men off for money, but she's
not a whore.  God forbid.  (I think we're supposed to see her as
an artist, who wants to dance more than anything else in the
world--Eszterhas wrote FLASHDANCE, so this may be what he was
trying to get at--but it ain't convincing.)  SHOWGIRLS constantly
uses "whore" as a pejorative; in fact, according to the movie,
it's just about the nastiest thing you can call someone.
     So what's the point here?  Being a whore is honest work, but
it's also an insult?   Selling your talent makes you a whore, and
that's a terrible thing to do?  Sucking up to the boss is one
thing, but sucking off the boss is quite another?  There's a hazy
distinction between being a whore and making a living, but it's a
line that you shouldn't cross?
     But what struck me the most about the SHOWGIRLS world is
that nobody in it seems to actually enjoy sex.  Very few people
in the movie have sex just for fun.  They use sex for power, for
a weapon, for a manipulative tool, and of course for money.  But
they don't use it as a means to achieve pleasure.  They all want
it ... but they don't seem to like it very much.
     I'm very confused.  But in my defense, I think Eszterhas and
Verhoeven are very confused as well.  The ideas and feelings
about sex as expressed in this movie are, to put it kindly,
ambivalent.  I think they want it both ways.  I think they want
to be all groovy and sex-positive and cutting edge, but they also
want to moralize.  I think they want to glamorize sex work and
sleazify it at the same time; or, to put it bluntly, I think they
want to fuck whores and then condemn them for doing it.  The
movie loves sex, adores it, drools over it--but it doesn't seem
to think that it can make anyone very happy.

Title
Review for GoldenEye (1995)
United Artists.
Starring Pierce Brosnan, Izabella Scorupco, Famke Janssen, Judi Dench,
         Sean Bean and Joe Don Baker. 
Produced by Michael G. Wilson and Barbara Broccoli.
Screenplay by Jeffrey Caine and Bruce Feirstein, story by Michael France. 
Directed by Martin Campbell.
Rated PG-13.
     Life is getting a bit too surreal for me, folks.  I just saw a
movie that had some of the best, most interesting, most varied female
characters that I've seen all year.  And it was a James Bond movie.  No
shit.  I kid you not; they made a James Bond movie with really
spectacularly cool women.
     I don't know what this world is coming to.  There's probably not
much point in summarizing the plot of GOLDENEYE; it's a James Bond
movie, and that's all you really need to know.  But I suppose a plot
summary is traditional in a movie review, so here goes.  James Bond
(Pierce Brosnan this time) runs around saving the world from a
brilliant but psychotic arch villain.  He drives fast cars, shoots big
guns, blows a lot of stuff up, sneaks around doing spy stuff, and
horses around with pretty women.  GOLDENEYE is a pretty good example of
the genre; the production values are high, the stunts and explosions
are bitching, and Brosnan does a more-than-adequate job as Bond.
     And the women are fucking amazing.  All of them (well, most of
them, anyway).  The women in GOLDENEYE are tough and strong and
competent.  No matter what field they're in, whether they're running an
intelligence agency or plotting to destroy the world, they know what
the hell they're doing, and they do it with gusto.  They don't wait
around passively for men to do all the fun important stuff; they're
active participants in the action, doing fun important stuff their very
own selves.
     Anyone who is familiar with the Bond ouvre will recognize
immediately that this is a radical departure.  Most 007 movies have
very specific, very standardized types of women.  There's the
fashionably beautiful airhead, generally in a bikini or an evening
gown, whose sole purpose in the movie is to fuck James Bond.  There's
the good-girl, also fashionably beautiful, marginally less airheaded
than the fuckbunny but with a pronounced tendency to cringe and cower
in a crisis, whose sole purpose in the movie is to get saved by James
Bond.  There's the villainess, often competent in some traditionally
male field but ruthless, unprincipled and indifferent to human life,
who acts as a foil to James Bond (although never as his primary
antagonist-- she always works for the arch-villain) and is killed or
destroyed in the end.  And there's the misguided bad-girl, who is both
beautiful and competent but has somehow been misled into working for
the bad guys, who is converted to Truth, Justice and the British Way of
Life by getting fucked by James Bond.  None of them ever instigate any
of the action, and their lives are entirely focused in one way or
another on Bond.  (In the interests of fairness, I should point out
that I haven't seen every single 007 movie every made; this analysis is
based on the six or seven that I have seen.)
     But GOLDENEYE departs from this formula in some very drastic
ways.  I'd like to start with the secondary characters; since one of
the more fabulous things about GOLDENEYE's women is their variety, the
minor characters wind up contributing a great deal to the surprisingly
feminist flavor of the movie.  Take the character of M, head of British
intelligence and Bond's superior officer.  "Now, wait a minute," I hear
you cry.  "M's not a woman.  M changes from movie to movie, but M has
never been a woman.  No woman has ever given James Bond his working
orders." Well, she is and she does in this one, played with a
delightful hardassed professional edge by Judi Dench.  Bond doesn't
much like her; but although he gives her shit, he doesn't question her
authority.  Interestingly, her management style is presented as less
intuitive and impetuous, more analytical and responsible, than the
spy-boys are really happy with; the exact opposite of the criticism
usually levelled at women in power.  And in her confrontation with 007,
she reads him the riot act with the best of them, calling him a
"sexist, misogynist dinosaur, a relic of the Cold War, whose boyish
charms are wasted on me."  Quite a departure from the female fawning
and groveling that characterizes most Bond movies.
     And look at Moneypenny (Samantha Bond), Bond's devoted assistant.
In previous 007 movies, Moneypenny is an aging, unattractive spinster
with a schoolgirl crush on 007 and no life outside her job, who lives
for the approval and bantering flirtation that James occasionally
deigns to bestow upon her.  In GOLDENEYE, however, Moneypenny is none
of the above.  She's attractive--not as a bimbo, but as a striking and
stylish adult woman--and she has a life as well as a career.  She
flirts with Bond, but the flirtation is anything but servile.  In fact,
when he makes some suggestive comment to her, she points out that what
he's doing could be considered sexual harassment--and then challenges
him to come through on all the innuendos he's aimed at her for so
long.  Again, I've never seen anything like it in any 007 movie.
     Moving on to the major characters, we have the villainess, Xenia
Onatopp (Famke Janssen).  That's right:  Onatopp.  Even the name is a
departure form previous Bond temptresses such as, say, Pussy Galore.
Onatopp is a ravenous, sadistic beauty, a former Soviet fighter pilot
who smokes cigars and drives Ferraris and gets sexually aroused by
machine-gun fire and kills men by crushing them to death between her
thighs.  She takes her martinis "straight--with a twist," and she looks
hot as hell in a uniform.  I, for one, have fallen in love.  (Side note
for Star Trek TNG fans:  Janssen, the woman who plays Onatopp, also
played Kamala, the metamorph babe who falls for Picard in "The Perfect
Mate."  Yum.)  In many ways she's quite similar to previous Bond
villainesses; beautiful but ruthless, sexy but dangerous, plays second
fiddle to the real (male) villain, dies a horrible death.  But her
appropriation of traditionally male attributes into a distinctly female
persona, as well as her aggressive, audacious, wildly kinky sexuality,
make for a significant deviation (if you'll pardon the pun) from the
007 standard.
     Finally, we come to the heroine, Natalya Simonova (Izabella
Scorupco), a cute but sort of geeky computer programmer.  Yes, folks,
blasphemy of blasphemies; Bond's girl is a smart, competent
techno-geek, a serious professional in her own right, who can do
something difficult and important that he can't do.
     Like the other women in GOLDENEYE, Natalya is utterly lacking in
the passivity and the cringing subservience that most Bond babes have
had in the past.  When her world comes (literally) crashing down around
her head, she uses her head to keep herself safe and then crawls out of
the wreckage with her bare hands.  She doesn't hesitate to mouth off to
Bond; in fact, she gives him a piece of her mind about his
testosterone-addled lifestyle on more than one occasion.  And when
they're sneaking around in the bad guy's hideout and Bond tells her to
stay put, she totally ignores him and runs to the computer room to jam
the bad guys' program.
     What's more, she dresses like a regular schmoe; during most of the
movie, she's in a cardigan and a plain skirt and thick black tights,
and for much of the rest of it she's in combat trousers and what looks
an awful lot like a long thermal undershirt.  They do get her into a
bikini at one point--it must be in the contract somewhere that Bond's
girlfriend has to wear a bikini for at least one scene--but for the
most part, she dresses like any sane human being would if they lived in
freezing Russia or were running around trying to defeat bad guys.
She's definitely a babe; the outfits suit her, and she does have the
standard Hollywood female body of the 90s.  But she comes across as a
sexy and attractive real-life non-plastic human being.  Once again,
quite unlike any Bond women I've ever seen.
     But what makes Natalya such a radical and delightful departure
from the usual good-girl Bond-meat isn't her skilled professionalism,
or her charming geekdom, or her feisty spirit.  It's not even her
intelligence or courage or physical strength.  What makes her so great
is her participation in the action of the movie.  She doesn't just run
around after 007, squealing and cowering and waiting to be rescued
(well, not much, anyway).  She gets in there and gets her hands dirty;
she can shoot guns and fly helicopters (no, I don't know why a computer
programmer would know how to fly a helicopter); she comes up with ideas
and whacks bad guys in the head.  And her computer skills are central
to the plot, indispensable to solving the puzzle and thwarting the bad
guys' evil scheme.
     Granted, it's still Bond's game; it's his puzzle that she's
solving, it's his arch-enemy that she's battling, and of course it's
his pants that she wants to get into.  But she's still one of the
coolest women I've seen on the screen all year.  She reminds me a lot
of the Sandra Bullock character in Speed; she's basically a regular
schmoe in a bad situation, and she does freak out about it on occasion,
but overall she handles the crisis with grace and courage and style.
     I'm impressed.  It's not just that I've never seen women like this
in any 007 movie; I've seen damn few women like this in amy movie.  The
filmmakers didn't just manage to come up with a decent female
character; they came up with several, all strong and competent and
nervy, and all in their own unique way.  It's almost as if Hollywood
finally figured out that lots of women enjoy action movies, and will
pay to see ones that don't insult us.  I applaud their efforts, and
hope they keep it up.
--
(Written for the Spectator; posted with permission.  Responses to this
review may be printed in the Spectator Express Mail section.  Please
indicate if your response is not for publication.)
Our WWW home page is located at http://www.blowfish.com/
