Authors
Christopher Roberson
Number of Reviews
2

Title
Review for Breaking the Waves (1996)
"Breaking the Waves" was one of the most highly praised films of 1996,
on many different critics' top 10 lists. I had been unable to see the
film in theaters, and was pleased when it became available on video. My
eagerness to see it, however, rapidly turned to a sense of betrayal. It
turned out to be a cheesy melodrama coated with a thick layer of
"artistic" film techniques that rendered it virtually unwatchable. I
have never been so disappointed after seeing a critics' favorite, and I
think the widespread praise it has received needs to be answered with a
dissenting opinion. 
Earlier reviews typically provide the basic plot outline, so I'll skip
that task. I do reveal some plot secrets, though. I appreciate that some
readers may not yet have seen the film, so I have placed the
plot-revealing paragraph at the end of the review, flagged in advance. 
I'll move (roughly) from the film's best features to its worst. Clearly,
its strongest suit is acting. Emily Watson deserved all the praise she
received for her outstanding portrayal of Bess MacNeil, a slow-witted
young Scottish woman who lives in an appallingly backward fishing village.
Whatever else may be problematic about the film, at least this character
stands out as fully-conceived and memorable. Also, a word of praise for
Stellan Skarsgard, who plays Bess's husband Jan: he takes a severely
underwritten role (his character has about ten lines total) and gives a
sense of the character's presence and good humor.
I suspect that some critics were impressed by how well Watson took
advantage of the histrionic opportunities provided by this role (which
called for vomiting, screaming, eye-rolling, and stagey monologues where
Bess talks to God, speaking for both herself and The Lord). But I think
that Watson comes off well _despite_ the way her role is written: she
took a scenery-chewing, meatball role and made the character convincing
when it might have been just silly and overwrought. My only major
reservation about the performance is her ripe, overdone faux-Scottish
accent.
The production techniques also deserve some praise, for inventiveness at
least. After being filmed on standard film stock, the image was
transferred to video and then back to film. This produces a grainy,
washed-out effect, devoid of bright colors or sharp outlines. Although the
effect becomes wearisome, for a while it is striking. One is reminded of
archival footage from some poverty-stricken Eastern European country, or
the murkiness of the images in many of Fassbinder's films.
It seems likely that the director, Lars von Trier, was influenced by
Fassbinder in more respects than his cinematography. His screenplay is
like some of Fassbinder's, but unfortunately not in a good way. Von
Trier seems to have seized on Fassbinder's use of melodrama while
missing everything else that makes Fassbinder worth watching.
Melodramatic elements are only worth retaining in a work of art if they
are handled with sublety, or at least critical distance. Fassbinder was
able to pull this off; von Trier doesn't even come close. Many reviews
praised the film's "exploration of ideas" (such as the meaning and
limits of love and the forms of religious devotion). But the "ideas" in
_Breaking the Waves_ could probably be expressed in about three
sentences. (Three brief sentences, using words of one syllable.) 
Part of the problem is created by the strength and uniqueness of its
central character, Bess. She is such an unusual character that many of
the film's themes seem tied to her particular circumstances, and
difficult to extend to normal people in any convincing way. But the main
problem is that most of the characterization is thin and unconvincing.
The film is dedicated to telling us how deeply Bess loves Jan, and to
what depths she is willing to sink in her devotion to him. It tells us
these things, but it never tells us _why_. Bess loves Jan more deeply
than anything else, and presumably that's because he is special in some
way; but as far as the audience is concerned, Jan is two-dimensional,
hard to distinguish from any of the other young male characters. What
attracted her to him initially? Why did she fall so deeply in love with
him? We never really know. Von Trier doesn't bother to develop Jan's
character or the relationship between Jan and Bess. He seems to have
thought that long, explicit sex scenes were sufficient; but they're not.
The superficiality of the script becomes more evident as the film
proceeds. Astonishingly, some critics seemed to think that von Trier was
making a brave statement about sex and love: but his statements are
hackneyed, and he aims at easy targets. For instance, he boldly suggests
that the church elders of Bess's village, all dour, women-hating
Scottish Calvinists, might be wrong about sexual morality and what love
really means. When (since Hawthorne, anyway) has this been a shocking or
original idea? Who in the audience is likely to side with the church
elders? Who would side with them even if von Trier had tried to portray
them as anything other than dogmatic, cruel, and hateful?  For a film
that makes a point of "savaging the drab conformity of community life,"
there is absolutely no sense of community among these people -- after
the first ten minutes, I never had a sense that the villagers
related to each other in any way that wasn't directly intended to
advance the plot, usually by showing how repressed and judgmental
they were.
Even worse than the writing, though, is the cinematography. The director
chose to use only hand-held cameras. His aim seems to have been a
"cinema-verite feel," but any hint of cinematic realism is constantly
undercut by the framing, which includes numerous close-ups and
unconvincing camera angles which would never occur in actual cinema
verite. Far from being realistic, the camera is constantly calling
attention to itself, diverting attention from the actors.  One
constantly wonders whose perspective the camera work is supposed to
capture. Certainly not any of the film's characters. Not the camera
operator, either, since this isn't _real_ cinema verite, and the actors
never react as if there's a camera present. I'll also rule out the
audience, unless the director was trying to reach an audience of people
who suffer from neck spasms and tremor. Even scenes without any movement
or action never stand still, not for a second. 
And then there is the worst aspect of _Breaking the Waves_: the editing.
Von Trier's confused notions of cinematic "realism" led him to
include gratuitous cuts in the middle of static sequences, for no
apparent reason, while eliminating normal shift-of-perspective cuts in
other scenes. In the latter scenes, the hand-held camera follows the
action with quick, vertiginous pans. The effect, sadly, is not so much
realism as nausea. And even this pales when one considers the editing of
most of the individual scenes: slack, bombastic, intentionally "arty."
In almost every scene, Von Trier seems to have gone out of his way to
include tedious extra footage that no one could possibly care about. It
is this, above all, that makes _Breaking the Waves_ not just an
overwrought melodrama, but a 160-minute-long overwrought melodrama. 
I should probably repeat that this film is _two hours and forty minutes
long_, and it feels longer. Much longer. Much, much longer. It could
easily have been forty to sixty minutes shorter, simply by cutting out
extraneous scenes and editing the remaining ones less slackly. One
particularly grating element is the inclusion of long, unnecessary
"chapter title" sequences (complete with snippets of mediocre early-70s
pop songs), which serve both to break up the narrative flow and to drag
things out even more. 
If you are still interested in seeing the film, you may want to
stop reading at this point. 
One question that doesn't really fit anywhere else: what the hell
does the title mean? 
Although the plot is never particularly convincing, it completely
unravels in the last twenty minutes. It's bad enough that Jan recovers
miraculously from his paralysis after Bess martyrs herself. By golly,
she wasn't schizophrenic, she was Really Talking To God. (Perhaps this
was one of the "original, challenging ideas" critics mentioned?) But the
film tops itself with a jaw-droppingly literal, saccharine conclusion.
Early in the film, we are told that Bess's church has no bells; but Bess
remarks to a friend that she likes church bells. The final scene,
believe it or not, is of bells ringing miraculously in the open sky
above Jan's oil rig. We know that the bells are miraculous because we're
told that they don't show up on the rig's radar. Yes, that's right,
folks: God was on Bess's side the whole time, and now we have proof. 
What's particularly depressing is not so much that the film is bad.
What's depressing is that it was greeted with rave reviews. This leads
me to two pessimistic conclusions. One is that critics are far too
willing to overlook artistic bombast if they're captivated by a good
performance, or if the film has one or two more ideas than is typical.
The other is that von Trier can only have been encouraged by the
critical reaction, and is likely to produce something even worse next
time. At least when his next film comes out, I'll know in advance that I
should avoid it. 

Title
Review for Chasing Amy (1997)
Sorry. But how else could I start a review of a movie by Kevin Smith? 
For those not familiar with Smith -- as you might have guessed, he uses
a lot of profanity. His first widely released film, _Clerks_, almost
received an NC-17 solely on the basis of language. _Chasing Amy_, which
Smith both wrote and directed, doesn't quite meet that standard, but it
comes pretty fucking close. 
Profanity is not ordinarily a matter worth mentioning in a review, but
in this case it seems sympomatic of both the good points and bad points
of the film. Smith apparently wants to send the message that his
characters are young and frank and raw, and also that he's not going to
present a fucking prettified Hollywood version of them. When that
strategy works, it works quite well. Unfortunately, it doesn't work all
the time. 
Recent Oscar-winner Ben Affleck plays Holden McNeil, a young comic book
artist who falls hard for a female comic book artist named Alyssa
(played by Joey Lauren Adams). Alyssa is everything he's looking for in
a woman, except... gasp... she's also a fucking lesbian! Fuck! What a
dilemma! Although Holden and Alyssa manage to overcome this small
obstacle, Holden's close friend and inker Banky (Jason Lee) finds a
whole heap of other obstacles to throw in their path. 
The core of this film is the relationships among its central characters
(as well as a gem of a supporting character, played by Dwight Ewell). Smith
manages to create a situation that is both witty and tragic, and quite
believable. _Chasing Amy_ takes the trouble to explore its characters in
detail. They even have extended conversations that sound like the
conversations real people have. This is quite refreshing after a diet of
typical Hollywood product. Indeed, it is a fucking relief. 
The actors are also quite impressive, particularly Affleck and Lee. It's
a bit late to be making predictions about bright futures for these
actors, as they're already well on their way to Hollywood stardom.
Adams's performance is a bit more uneven, and her whiny helium voice
(reminiscent of Jennifer Tilly's) became grating pretty fucking quickly.
As for the movie's shortcomings: for one, the characters are not always
convincing. For example, we are supposed to believe that Holden and
Banky are hip, with-it young cartoonists and yet also fucking clueless
enough not to realize that a bar they visit is a hardcore lesbian
hangout. I was not persuaded. The camera work is also remarkably
lacking. Smith seems content to "point and shoot" and never re-aim the
camera, to the extent that the actors almost slip out of camera range at
one point. 
And, finally, there's the matter of the cursing. It's difficult to
express reservations about profanity without coming across as a prudish
old fuddy-duddy. ("Shame on you, Kevin Smith. Wash that potty mouth out
with soap! Tsk, tsk, tsk," etc.) But the problem with the profanity in
_Chasing Amy_ wasn't that it was shocking, but that it was boring. It's
simply too restricted a palette to work from. Smith hasn't yet figured
out that saying 'fuck' and 'bitch' and 'cunt' twenty times in a scene
does not constitute character development. 
(I've tried to create the same effect in this review. Reading 'fuck'
over and over again became dull pretty quickly, didn't it?)
What's worse, even some of the character development doesn't really seem
like character development. Some critics have described Smith's dialogue
as "funny and raunchy," but a fair amount of it was depressingly
reminiscent of adolescents trying to be "daring" and "unrepressed."
Having had such conversations when I was sixteen, I don't see the
attraction in sitting through less clever versions of them in a movie. 
On the whole, 'adolescent' is a good description of what's right and
wrong with this movie. It has an adolescent's energy and intensity. It
also has an adolescent's tendency to think that it's really clever and
original to scorn subtlety, and also to say 'fuck' in every sentence.
While on the whole I enjoyed it, I think Smith's work will be better
once he gets over the desire to epater la bourgeoisie (i.e., "give the
squares something to bitch about").
