Authors
Clarissa Brower
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for To Die for (1995)
     Summary: TO DIE FOR is a cross between black comedy and
movie-of-the-week formula, starring Nicole Kidman, Matt Dillon, and
Joaquin Phoenix.
     TO DIE FOR starts out promisingly enough, with Nicole Kidman
saying firmly that her name is *not* Suzanne Maretto (her married
name), but Suzanne STONE.  She pauses at just the right beat at the end
of each sentence, sending the theater into laughter.
     Continuing on, Suzanne's husband's sister says that when she first
saw Suzanne, all she could think of was "A four-letter word that starts
with C."  After another snickering pause, she grins and says, "Cold,
that's it--cold!"
     However, the laughs run out in the first half and by the end of
the movie its hard to laugh any longer.  The plot begins with the vapid
newswoman, Suzanne, stating with phony sincerity how sorry she is that
her husband died, and how close she is to her in-laws.  The cutaway
explanatory scenes show how the plot developed, with each character
having a chance to show what happened from their point of view.
     It resembles nothing more than the Holly Hunter movie, THE
ALLEGEDLY TRUE ADVENTURES OF THE TEXAS CHEERLEADER MURDERING MOM.
However, that movie stays funny and biting throughout.  Van Sant seems
to be confused whether he wants to be funny, shocking, or heart
wrenching.
     Unless you've been staying away from the mass media, you already
know going in that Suzanne engineered the death of her husband,
although why isn't quite clear.  Dillon does a great job of playing
sweet buffoon Larry, who just wants a nice girl to settle down and have
his babies.  Clearly he chose the wrong chick, although any woman as
manipulative as Suzanne could have maneuvered a profitable divorce
settlement easier than her obviously doomed attempt to convince and
then blame some neighborhood teens for the murder.
     We see scene after scene showing how low Suzanne will stoop.
After a short time, it ceases to be funny.  While trying to engineer
her television career from a small local cable channel, she decides to
interview some teenagers at the local school for a documentary.  She
ends up with three, Lydia, Nick, and James, clearly the misfit kids of
a misfit town.
     Lydia is supposed to be chunky and unappealing.  This would be
more believable if they had picked a girl that looked like she would
actually fill out a size 12.  While none of these kids are terribly
bright, James is the most vulnerable and pathetic.  Nobody has ever
paid attention to these kids before, so you're hardly surprised when
they fall for Suzanne's manipulative charm.
     The humor is long gone by the time Suzanne begins seducing James.
She seduces all three kids in some fashion, but watching James fall
hopelessly in love with this monster just isn't funny.  Parents of
teenagers should be required to watch this just to see how bad things
can turn out when someone finally pays attention to a neglected
adolescent.
     When the movie ends, there is some justice, in a strange way, but
you can't help feeling ripped off.  This is the movie getting hyped to
the horizon?  Having just seen THE USUAL SUSPECTS two days earlier,
perhaps I had less patience than usual.  While Kidman, Dillon, and the
teen actors do a marvelous job, good acting can't substitute for a
consistent script and choppy direction.
