Authors
Terri S Buchman
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Batman Forever (1995)
     It's rutting season in Gotham and everybody is feeling the heat.
BATMAN FOREVER seems to be as much about desire as it is about which
criminals are battling which superheroes.  Nicole Kidman plays a
criminal psychologist with a thing for men in "black rubber."  Tommy
Lee Jones plays schizophrenic Harvey Two-Face whose darkest desires is
to consummate his relationship with Batman by killing the Dark Knight.
And Jim Carrey plays Edward Nygma, who really wants to be Bruce Wayne,
but will settle for humiliating and destroying Wayne and his alter ego
Batman.
     This third installment in the Batman series is easily the most
fast moving and colorful of the series so far.  Instead of the dark
painterly settings of the first two Tim Burton directed films, this
movie is all slam, bam action.  Which is a good thing, since the
character building doesn't really seem to be director Joel
Schumacher's strong suit.  He is very good with the action sequences
and has some marvelously inventive dilemmas for the heroes to escape
from.  But a lot of the inner turmoil that the script alludes to just
isn't up there on the screen.  The result is a film that is popcorn
light, but still lots of fun.
     Val Kilmer takes over the reins of Batman and does an adequate job
in a difficult role.  His Batman is gorgeous to look at, fills out the
Batman costume rather well and moves gracefully.  I had no problem
believing in Kilmer as Batman.  I did have some trouble with Kilmer's
portrayal of Bruce Wayne.  His way of showing inner turmoil involves
slowing down his voice and gazing unfocused off into the distance.  I
thought that Michael Keaton handled the moody melancholy of the
character better.  Still, Kilmer does have wonderful lips and that is
definitely a plus in a role in which he has to wear a mask for half the
movie.
     Tommy Lee Jones' Two-Face is the most flat and one-dimensional
character in the movie.  Two-Face starts off completely bonkers and
degenerates from there.  Jones' character is given very little support
from the script.  There is a 30-second scene that reveals how Two-Face
came to be and after that it's all homicidal mania and cocktails.
Still, Tommy Lee Jones is a great actor and it is still fun to watch
him emote his heart out while intoning such great lines as "Let's start
this party with a bang!" while blowing up banks vaults and such.
     Nicole Kidman lacks screen presence.  Her character is written as
another blond bimbo.  About the only thing holding her character up is
her wonderbra.  It's hard to imagine what Batman/Bruce Wayne sees in
her.  It is sort of interesting though to see a character on screen
whose sole motivation is lust.  Edward Nygma riddles, Two-Face fiddles,
and Dr. Meridien wants to be diddled.
     Jim Carrey is very good as Nygma, the nerdy scientist/social
misfit turned criminal genius.  His Riddler is sort of a cover for
insanity's greatest hits and he generates wonderful wacko energy
on-screen.  But there's more to the the nuttiness than just
scene-stealing.  Carrey's Riddler contains more than a hint of lust and
desire directed towards both Bruce Wayne and Batman.  Carrey is quite
good at playing the loser with a heart of ice.  His best scene involves
a stolen moment in the Batcave and revolves around the undeniable joy
to be found in blowing shit up. "Joygasm"  He makes disassociative
personality disorder look like more fun than a trip to Disneyland.
     Chris O'Donnell is absolutely hunky as Robin.  He is sweet and
innocent as the young Dick Grayson and wonderfully forceful and meaty
as Robin, the no-longer-a-boy Wonder.  Drew Barrymore and Debi Mazur
fill out their teddies nicely as Sugar and Spice, Two-Faces' love
interests.  And Michael Gough returns as Alfred, the Wayne family butler,
and does a nice job of holding the ensemble of O'Donnell and Kilmer
together.
     All-in-all, a good summer movie.  See it for the action, the
amazing bat-toys, the hunky, form fitting bat-outfits, the wonderful
special effects, and for the sheer joy that comes from watching shit
blowing up.  Quite a nice ride.
