Authors
Stephen Macy
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Lost World: Jurassic Park, The (1997)
     Steven Spielberg's latest film is an immense failure. The Lost World
disappoints as a thriller, as an action/adventure film, and as a
reworking of the equally dissatisfying Jurassic Park. Spielberg, I
suppose, is the ideal director to helm these special-effects-dependent
films; he's proven himself with both the technically challenging
"monster" picture (Jaws) and the F/X extravaganza (Close Encounters of
the Third Kind). He's an intelligent director, as well. He's aware of
his audience and how they will respond to his films (not unlike
Hitchcock). Even the idea---a scientifically initiated rebirth of
prehistoric creatures---is an intriguing one, but now, with the release
of The Lost World, Spielberg has taken two stabs at it and failed
miserably in both instances.
The film's plot is virtually nonexistent. Within twenty minutes, every
principal character has arrived on the island, and the remaining 2 hours
are devoted to constant carnage, with only the occasional interruption.
Along the way, characters are ripped to shreds on-screen and off,
unctuous and ultra-sophisticated bad boys alike get their comeuppance,
and the prominent heroes (of course) eventually save the day. The script
was concocted by David Koepp, who was also partly responsible for
Jurassic Park. He's not exactly void of talent (he penned the
interesting Brian De Palma film, Carlito's Way), but here his work seems
to function as nothing more than a perfunctory background to paste the
fancy special effects upon. The script is a drab Colorform. The dialogue
is embarrassingly banal, and the action sequences are defiantly
unimaginative--- albeit one marvelous Hitchcockian moment involving a
cliff and a sheet of glass.
The performances are mostly uninspired. Jeff Goldblum can be genuinely
captivating when given the appropriate role, such as the quirky
scientist in David Cronenberg's The Fly. Here his character is
essentially normal and calculated, and Goldblum's unconventional
delivery simply doesn't belong. His love interest is played by Julianne
Moore, who is given nothing even remotely engaging to say; bad news for
a rather bland actress. Goldblum's daughter is played by a young black
actress. Unfortunately, this racial discrepancy is hardly acknowledged;
it only lends a certain awkwardness and an opportunity for a half-assed
joke about family resemblance. Vince Vaughn and Richard Schiff offer
unspectacular supporting performances.
Spielberg, who can usually be depended upon to deliver at the very
least interesting, if not brilliant, direction, fails here, as well. His
methods become conspicuously tedious midway through the film. The
unsubtle portent reduces the suspense and augments the predictability.
This is exemplified by the camera techniques Spielberg utilizes when
danger approaches. He often places the camera low, observing the subject
at hazard from an awkward angle; as the subject realizes she is in
jeopardy, the camera will dolly forward. The threat will then appear in
the frame behind her, or we are treated to a reverse angle. Spielberg
puts to use some of the most hackneyed cinematic conventions known to
man. During the scene where a pack of diminutive compsognathuses chase a
particularly nasty hunter, the camera assumes the position of one the
critters, low and fidgety (I believe this technique was employed
extensively in Puppet Master III: Toulon's Revenge, realized by a
considerably less talented director). Equally as trite is the hunter's
eventual death. His actual demise is obstructed by a large, collapsed
tree trunk, but we are offered the sight of blood flowing from the small
stream beneath the log. This treatment of death may have been considered
masterly suggestive thirty or so years ago; today, it is familiar and an
obvious attempt to be "cinematic." The aforementioned Hitchcockian glass
sequence is the sole display of Spielberg's skill. And even that is
overlong.
The music is yet another disappointment. John Williams's recent scores
have been so derivative of his earlier efforts you may be provoked to
smack some sense into him with a 50-piece orchestra. The Lost World's
arrangement is no exception. Initially it sears beyond feeling,
interfering rather than integrating. Then it broods, and it's torpid and
unaffecting.
I suppose the true attraction to many moviegoers is this film's special
effects. And while they are impressive from a technical standpoint (the
dinosaurs never appear computer generated), we've essentially been
treated to the same magic once before in Jurassic Park. A magic trick is
considerably less spectacular and awe-inspiring the second time around.
One of the strengths of Spielberg's Jaws was his refusal to
anthropomorphize the beast; the shark wasn't much more than a machine
that could detect the scent of blood. Conversely, the "monsters" in The
Lost World are remarkably expressive and motherly. Their moans are laced
with pain, and, of course, they must be provoked before the real
horrorshow begins. Why these creatures are instilled with pathos is
beyond me; what made the shark in Jaws so frightening was its deadly
lack of rhyme and reason.
Spielberg has mentioned he's settled to do "one for the studio, one
for me," in alternation. With the gross sum he's about to collect from
this film, perhaps he can take a hiatus from this plan. His "me" films
aren't always artistically successful, but they have given birth to
Schindler's List, his best work since Jaws. And, as an additional
incentive, you presumably won't be seeing heroic acrobatics or Godzilla
parodies in his more personal endeavors.
-- Visit PREMATURE THOUGHTS ON FILM --
-- Temporarily at:
http://users.southeast.net/~chuckd21/smj/smjindex.html --
