Authors
W. Graves
Number of Reviews
2

Title
Review for Fled (1996)
I did exactly what the title suggests when this film ended, but for a good 
reason.  Is it me, or is the "disk" plot getting extremely tiresome?  I 
literally shook my head when the story turned out to be just like the dreary 
disk-chasing story lines of "Eraser" and "Mission:Impossible."  When disks are 
brought into the picture, it's useless to chase someone that can just copy a 
1.4 meg floppy in seconds or send it out to thousands of internet users' E-mail 
boxes....don't you think?  It's not the 80's anymore, and this plot needs to 
die with the decade.  Period.  The movie actually had potential, and Baldwin 
was entertaining, but the script should have been modified for 1996.  I thought 
at first that it may have been a cheap "Fugitive" rip-off, but Baldwin's 
character made a comment about Harrison Ford's escape tactics in the film, and 
that was humorous enough to end that idea.  The action sequences were awesome, 
especially the motorcycle chase scene during the climax of the film.  These I 
enjoyed, and most of the acting as well.  The theory that the action takes over 
when the plot lacks, ie Twister, couldn't be applied here because it wasn't 
fast enough to be a summer blockbuster, and the plot was a
typical disk-chasing shoot-em-up.  Hollywood: out with the old writers and in 
with the new generation...and I'll be the first to volunteer.  The story 
follows a fugitive, Baldwin, that hacked into and transferred money from a 
company which turns out to be the Cuban mafia.  He transfers vital data onto a 
floppy, which becomes the hot item needed to nail the head of the 
company with all the necessary charges.  After all the testimony hopefuls 
against the head of the mafia are killed, a fake chance for an escape is setup 
in order to get Baldwin to run....while he is cuffed to another person, 
Fishburne, he thinks is a fellow fugitive.  This is all in hopes that Baldwin 
will take them to the last alternative, the disk, which he has left with a 
friend.  The rest is predictable.  For myself, it  was worth seeing this for 
Salma Hayek alone.  Other than that, wait the storm out.  There will be plenty 
of clear skies for the drive to the video store.
AS SEEN AT: http://www.txdirect.net/users/aaron/toad/movie.html
The ALTERNATIVE page.

Title
Review for Frighteners, The (1996)
I don't know how or why, but Michael J. Fox (why does the "J" have to be said 
anyway?) has the lead in this non-leader.  Don't get me wrong, I enjoy Fox's 
acting.  I just haven't seen him in a strong comedy/drama since the "Back to 
the Future" series ended.  I saw a brief reincarnate when I saw "Greedy" and 
"The American President," but this ends the streak.  Frighteners has some 
dazzling effects, and the script wasn't too shabby, however, the humor failed 
to come from Fox.  The cast of ghosts got most of the laughs, and the R rating 
is what kills them all.  It's hard to tell at first what type of movie this is. 
 The comedy/horror/drama mix is extremely lopsided and awkward.  There are 
several parts of this film that are excessively violent, and could have made 
the movie much better if they were deleted.  I'm not against violence in films, 
but it just doesn't fit with this script.  Michael did the best he could as 
this character, but the part should have been focused more on the Fox we know 
and love, and not the corny jokes and effects the ghosts offer.  What you get 
is a half serious horror/ half "Casper" mix that simply doesn't do the job.  It 
would have done better as a kiddy movie, but the big "R" will prevent that.  
Fox plays a con who has befriended several spirits he can see and communicate 
with after a traumatic accident.  They help him scare customers into paying for 
his bogus services as a ghostbuster.  The twist comes when a deceased serial 
killer continues his mayhem as a spirit, and must be sent to the "other side" 
to end the murdering spree and prevent Fox from being framed for the killings. 
 I'd seriously consider waiting on this one...either for the video release, or 
indefinitely.  Either way you won't miss much.
AS SEEN AT: http://www.txdirect.net/users/aaron/toad/movie.html
The ALTERNATIVE page.
