Authors
David Alba, Jr
Number of Reviews
3

Title
Review for Skin Deep (1989)
     Through the years, Blake Edwards has made some outrageously funny films.
Remember all the Pink Panther movies?  More recently he has also made some very
funny films like S.O.B., 10 and VICTOR/VICTORIA.
     His latest directorial effort is entitled SKIN DEEP.  This is a film about
a married, successful writer and musician (John Ritter), who decides to engage
in the art of infidelity.  This new hobby of his succeeds until his wife 
unexpectedly catches him fooling around.  He soon gets ousted from his happy
home.  He is later seen explaining all of his female encounters to his
psychiatrist.
     This motion picture features Vincent Gardenia (MOONSTRUCK) as his friend.
It also features Julianne Phillips (the former Mrs. Bruce Springsteen) and
Denise Crosby as two of his female conquests.  He soon learns the meaning to
the saying "Hell hath no fury like a woman scorned."
     This film simply stated is a light romantic comedy.  It is not really
Blake Edwards' best work, but it does contain a few funny moments.  This
advertisement for this film promotes a scene that they say is too sexy to be
mentioned on television.  Well, it is too sexy for me to mention it here
either.  All I can say is that it is probably the funniest scene in the movie.

Title
Review for Mississippi Burning (1988)
     Imagine if you will; One night three men are driving in a car, and three
cars begin to follow them.  The men are worried, then they see a police light,
and they pull over wondering what they had done.  The   officer gets out, and
walks over to the stopped car.  The driver rolls down the window, then the
officer shoots him, point blank in the head.  The officers then proceed to kill
the other two men in the car.  Pretty gruesome story isn't it??
     Well, what you just read happens to be the opening scene for the film
MISSISSIPPI BURNING.  As horrifying as that story is, it  is only a small
fraction of all the racial fear and hatred that existed in the small town of
Jessup, Mississippi in 1964.  Those three men, it just so happens were civil
rights activists.
     Two FBI agents arrive in Jessup to investigate the disappearance of the
three activists.  After meeting the sheriff they inquire about the three men.
The sheriff tells them a story that they don't believe.  The two agents Ward
and Anderson (played superbly by Willem Dafoe and Gene Hackman respectively)
decide to follow bureau procedure and question some residents of Jessup.  The
agents are surprised to see that the town is so racially  segregated.  All the
residents that they question either choose to remain tight-lipped, or have no
information to give.  They get a break in the investigation when they find some
evidence that might lead to the whereabouts of the men.  Agent Ward orders over
200 agents to the small town to help conduct a search party.  While Ward is
searching, Anderson is trying to get any information out of the deputy's wife.
Agents Ward and Anderson are amazed when they learn that the head leader of the
local charter of the Ku KLux Klan has arrived for a meeting with the police
department and other local residents  of Jessup.  The constant prying that the
FBI agents are doing, infuriates some of the members of the police department
and some other residents.  They  decide to take out their rage on the colored
residents of the town.  We see the angry townspeople burn down other persons
homes, kidnap them and beat some of them up and we also see them hang a man.
Meanwhile, the deputy's  wife just cannot take any more of this cruelty, and
tells some important information to agent Anderson.  It is when they beat up
the deputy's wife that agent Anderson wants to go after them his own way.
After a scuffle between the two agents, Anderson gets Ward's authority to try
to do it his way.  Agent Anderson then proceeds to use iron-fisted methods to
get some of the residents to give them the answers that they are searching for.
These methods work brilliantly and bring the film to a great conclusion.
     This is a very powerful movie, there were some scenes in the movie that
were so terrible that you could not help but feel somewhat sick inside.  I
believe that MISSISSIPPI BURNING has to be the favorite for this year's Academy
Award for Best Picture.  I cannot remember a more stronger or emotional movie
this year.  I guarantee those film fans who make the effort to see this movie
will not regret it.  It is a captivating bit of filmmaking, expertly capturing
a feeling of strong racial prejudice that should not be lost.  This movie shows
not only how far this country has come in the past 25 years, but  how far race
relations have yet to progress.  Rating: +4

Title
Review for Rain Man (1988)
     Over his illustrious career, Dustin Hoffman has turned in stellar
performances: Ratso Rizzo in MIDNIGHT COWBOY, Lenny Bruce in LENNY, a single
parent in KRAMER VS. KRAMER, an actor turned actress in TOOTSIE, a senile man
in DEATH OF A SALESMAN and what may be his finest role, Raymond Babbit in RAIN
MAN.
     Dustin Hoffman portrays Raymond Babbit, an autistic savant, and Tom Cruise
stars as Raymond's brother Charlie Babbit.  Charlie makes his living by dealing
very high-priced cars (Porsche, Lamborghini, etc).  Charlie soon learns about
his father's death, and at the reading of the will he learns that his father
has given the bulk of the estate to a brother that he never new existed.  After
Charlie learns about the whereabouts of his brother, and after he learns that
his brother is autistic, Charlie plans to kidnap Raymond in order to get half
of his inheritance, which he feels is due him.  Raymond and Charlie embark on a
cross-country trip.  It is while they are traveling through the country that
Charlie learns about Raymond's extraordinary skills.
     This is an excellent movie, which has perhaps one flaw.  I think it is the
fact that director Barry Levinson did not focus more on what being an autistic
sevant is really like.  The director shows us a little bit about autistic
people, but he did not go into more depth on the subject.  Look for Dustin
Hoffman's name come Oscar time.  He is one of this generation's finest actors.
     Barry Levinson, has directed some great films in the past: THE NATURAL,
DINER, TIN MEN, and GOOD MORNING VIETNAM.  With RAIN MAN he has continued in
that tradition of great filmmaking.
