Authors
Cuda Brown
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Once Were Warriors (1994)
     ONCE WERE WARRIORS begins with a placid scene of a beautiful
mountain lake, the green foothills not far beyond.  Pure serenity.
Could be any time, any place.  Removed from the hustle and bustle, no
pollution to be found.  The music is serene as well, befitting the
surroundings.  But soon, the camera begins to pan left and as it does,
you begin to hear the din of city life, maybe a highway nearby.  And
heavy-metal guitar begins to wail, jangling the nerves.  The camera
moves to roaring traffic on the highway below, an industrial setting
with noise and smoke.  You realize that the beautiful surroundings you
imagined just moments before were merely an expressway billboard.  That
moment of serenity is the last we will have until the end of the film.
     This film, though also set in New Zealand, will clearly not be
another version of THE PIANO.  The time frame is completely different.
That was then, this is, well, today.  As the film unfolds, you also
notice that the casting is different.  Rather than addressing the
difficulties of white settlers entering a strange and foreign land, the
Maori natives appearing only as part of the scenery, this film is about
the Maori and what has become of them as a result of the earlier
settling.  Of course, there is more to it than that, which is what
makes ONCE WERE WARRIORS such an important film, in my estimation.
     The film is about Jake and Beth Heke (played by Temuera Morrison
and Rena Owen, respectively) who live in a run down part of an urban
area.  Beth struggles to keep her family together in the face of
pernicious violence from Jake that not only threatens her life, but
also makes it impossible to keep the respect of teenage children who
have their own ideas about life.  In fact, abusive is an understatement
in this case.  She risks losing her children if she doesn't stand up
and take control, but she clearly risks her life if she does.  To
complicate matters, she loves her husband and seems as trapped in their
lifestyle as he does, so the choice is not easy or completely up to
her.  She does the best she thinks she can.
     In such a setting, we witness unparalleled pain before reaching
the inevitable conclusion, and that process is a wrenching one in the
film.  After she seems to lose her eldest son to a Maori gang and her
next oldest son to the streets and, ultimately, a youth home, Beth
suffers a excruciating loss that epitomizes the lot of women in this
film.  Her daughter, Grace, a sensitive and caring young woman, chooses
death over a life that will, inevitably, be much like her mother's.
And finally, although it is not soon enough to save Grace, Beth is
compelled to act.
     Morrison, who reminds me of Robert DeNiro, delivers a powerful
portrayal of Jake.  He seems simultaneously capable of great charm and
sensuality, and, as "Jake the Muss," incredible brutality.  He uses
both to control Beth, who is played with eminent sensitivity by Owen.
Lee Tamahori, in his directorial debut, doesn't let Jake off the hook
by being sentimental, and Jake remains both brutal and pathetic.
     ONCE WERE WARRIORS holds a number of important lessons.  The first
is about domestic violence.  According to a note about the film on
National Public Radio, the film has been responsible for focusing
needed attention on domestic violence in New Zealand.  Jake's acts are
so reprehensible that sympathy for him is the last thing you'll want to
have, even though, at film's end, he remains a victim.  Nevertheless,
it is Beth and the children who bear Jake's wrath and it is clear that,
wherever or whenever it arises, domestic violence cannot be explained
or sympathized away.  In this way, the film makes a universal appeal to
ending such violence.  While written about a Maori family in New
Zealand, it could as easily be about any family in any corner of the
world.
     However, an equally compelling story is derived from the movie's
title itself.  A modern day tale set in the city, ONCE WERE WARRIORS is
about Maori who have strayed far from their roots.  With all of the
depravity of the city, the negative influences of drugs and alcohol and
unemployment and violence, we see a people who, once upon a time were
fearless warriors, yet have long since given up the battles of old to
settle for what is available.  We also see lots of victims, from those
who are "on the dole" or would like to be, to those like Jake and Beth
and their circle of friends, who are caught up in incurable sadness.
     Finally, ultimately, the film is a story of redemption.  In some
ways too late, but Beth nevertheless does finally act.  She stands up
and takes control.  She does what is necessary for survival and we are
left with hope.
     In some ways, ONCE WERE WARRIORS is a new conservative anthem,
about returning to one's roots, returning to traditional values.  It is
about standing up, about not merely taking what life dishes out lying
down.  It is about taking responsibility, regardless of the
surroundings or what everyone else is doing.  And that is a powerful
lesson indeed.  While this story is set in New Zealand, it could easily
be set in any black neighborhood in this country.  The fact is, it
could be set anywhere, anywhere people are not taking individual
responsibility and are satisfied with blaming "others" for their
predicament.  Even when those others are, in fact, responsible.
     The lesson of ONCE WERE WARRIORS is that those of us whose
ancestors were warriors, those of us who are descended from people who
had to struggle against forms of oppression, should once again, take up
that struggle and not accept the fate others have decided for us.  We
should not wait for someone, anyone, to come to our assistance.  We
should take control ourselves.  It is clearly a useful lesson for the
Maori.  It is equally compelling for African-Americans, for other
minorities, for women.  The message is not to go back to the good old
days, but to bring the values that allowed us to survive slavery and
oppression, to bring that struggle, forward for use in our current-days
lives.  As when Beth's son, asked if he wants to wear the traditional
Maori tattooing on his face, responds, "I wear mine on the inside."
     ONCE WERE WARRIORS is the most compelling, and perhaps the best
made, film I've seen in years.  In any event, don't take my word for
it.  Go see it for yourself!
[This review appeared in Meanderings 2.03.  You can find the entire
issue at http://www.webcom.com/~sppg/meanderings/me203/me203_00.shtml
]
