Authors
Eugene Miya
Number of Reviews
8

Title
Review for Nuts (1987)
     This is not an adolescent action film.  It is an adult "courtroom drama."
Films about sanity have been popular topics from THE KING OF HEARTS to ONE FLEW
OVER THE CUCKOO'S NEST.  Streisand and Dreyfus star in this one with a cast of
other well-known actors and actresses and one unexpected appearance.
     Karl Malden has an interesting role playing Streisand's step-father.  Look
for caricature drawings (the Nose and American Express).  His character is
pivotal (but almost predictable) in the film.
     The drama centers around Streisand who is accused of manslaughter
("womanslaughter" in her terms a la the ads).  This is not her felony trial but
a hearing to determine sanity and competence to stand on such a trial.  Dreyfus
is her count-appointed lawyer after Streisand breaks the nose of her
parent-appointed lawyer.  Every character fears from this event that she just
may be "Nuts."
     NUTS is about conduct and how individuals are expected to behave in our
confusing society.  It is an appropriate film in an age considering
drug-testing and questions of sanity.
     Two interesting scenes are 1) a scene between Streisand and Dreyfus
regarding privacy and a need-to-know and 2) the cross-examination of Streisand.
     The film's real weaknesses are in the forms of flashbacks used to fill
the audience in.  This is a performance film, not so much a story.  There are
elements of this film which remind the reviewer of Nicholson's ONE FLEW OVER
THE CUCKOO'S NEST performance.  If this film had been made in the early 70s,
it might have had a different conclusion.
     If you think you are the slightest bit crazy, go see this film; otherwise,
skip it.
     B movie (90 minutes before I checked a watch).  I found it personally
enjoyable.
--eugene miya NASA Ames Research Center eugene@ames-aurora.ARPA
  {hplabs,hao,ihnp4,decwrl,allegra,tektronix}!ames!aurora!eugene

Title
Review for Born on the Fourth of July (1989)
     Why would anyone want to see this film?  Sounds like a Springsteen song.
     Some people like Tom Cruise.  I can understand; I paid ASC dues for a
while.  It's not comedy, and it's not one of those macho man films, but I think
there were some people in the audience who thought it might have been.  This
film won't have many repeat attendees.  It was emotionally draining for a few
people.
     It is a long film, nearly 2.5 hours.  A few of the scenes might seem down
and out.  I guess life is kind of like that, and as I get older, I have tended
to get tired of some of the current same-as-always fare.  So you might not like
this (my) view.  I don't know if people want Vietnam films, judging from
popular expression of support in Panama--an irony it happens at the same time.
     I went to see this film because when I was growing up I remember Dad
watching the tube and seeing a fellow named Ron Kovic in a wheelchair and my
Dad exclaiming, "That man is a Communist."  It happened more than once, and
that was my introduction to The Vietnam Veteran Against the War.
     This film is not for weak stomachs.  It does not show some aspects of life
in a very positive manner: values, non-White races, women [to a degree],
Catholicism, the VA [especially], people with handicaps, and others "we" don't
treat well.  Especially the VA: I know that from personal experience because I
remember spending lots of time at VA hospitals [Westwood and Long Beach] with
my Dad who was a Legionnaire (and I was a Son: still recall the preamble,
visiting WWII vets, and I know that those and other earlier Vets tended to look
down up the Nam vets.
     The obvious comparison is Hal Ashby's COMING HOME.  This is a different
story, a real one.  You can go borrow Kovic's book from a library (is it still
in print?).  So you can check the deals as I did for Michael Fox's CASUALTIES
OF WAR.  I do not think it is possible to spoil the film by recounting the
sequence of events: it is a very graphic, very visual film.
     I think this is one of the most powerful films of the year.  It is very
similar in tone to Stone's earlier PLATOON (incidental music is the same).
There are no BIG names in this film.  Tom Berringer and Wilhelm Dafoe from that
earlier film appear in this film: Berringer as a recruiting sergeant (I
remember when that happened in my life) and Dafoe as another vet in a chair.
The details are well taken care of, perhaps too obvious in attention to having
a few long scenes: the anti-war books before Kovic changed his mind (JOHNNY GOT
HIS GUN and ALL QUIET ON THE WESTERN FRONT), Life Magazines, the TV footage;
oh, Stone himself appears as a newscaster interviewing a colonel on the tube.
Ron Kovic himself is in the film as another wheelchair-bound vet.
     This is another one of those "male-bonding" films, to use the cliche.  It
does not speak well of fixed roles, or how we treat our fellow man.  A signal
the film sends out (from the 50s) is that it is an honor to give your life for
your country: the ultimate sacrifice.  But the film shows that to die is
preferable to coming back "less than whole."  These men who returned have made
the ultimate sacrifice.
     I don't know how well it will do in the box-office in the long run.  I
went to see the film at a nearly full Saturday matinee when I was waiting for a
long computer run.  Do I used Leeper's scale?  Dare I gave it a +3?  Sure.  May
even be a +4.  But people like Kovic's mother would question that (remember, I
said that some women do not appear in a favorable light).  That's Leeper's
scale.  Only time will tell.  
     Okay, you had your chance (that concludes commentary).  Synopsis follows--
nothing else.  Again, it's visceral, so I don't think I will give any earth-
shattering thing away.
     The film begins with two boys paying Army (Ron) on Long Island in 1956.
(I remember the surplus helmet I had.)  Well done, down to throwing the dirt.
It's the 4th of July, Ron's birthday.  They attend a parade, see the soldiers,
the disabled vets.  One first notices one of the vets wincing at the sound of
firecrackers (I never saw anything like that growing up, but the parade was
well done; I've walked in three or four myself).  Ron's future "sweetheart" is
shown.  Not into girls yet.  It moves to a time when Kennedy is stepping into
office (the "ask not what you country can do for you..."  speech; this evoked
the only cheer in my audience).  But Ron's mother is worried about Communism.
Said many times through the film.  
     The next scenes show Ron getting older.  He's into wrestling, and he loses.
He's working very hard, the American dream.  His mother catches him with a
Playboy (I am surprised she did not do the equivalent to washing his mouth with
soap).  The group pressure is shown.  A recruiting team visits.  He decides to
become a Marine.  His Dad, a WWII Vet, isn't so sure he should do this, not
saying why, not a strong-willed father figure.  The concept of duty to country
was well shown.  His brother playing Dylan.
     It's too bad the film is as long as it is.  It would be a great film if it
had the training scenes from FULL METAL JACKET at this point, but the film now
cuts to a beach near the DMZ.  It's a village they are preparing to check out.
They open fire early, the confusion starts, and the pressure of authority
(command) is there.  Ron, on his second tour (that part seemed a bit less
probable), and his men (one new) check out for friendly casualties.  They
wasted a few.  The wounds are very graphic--there is a way the skin parts on a
grazing wound and they show this.  But then they are under attack.  The
confusion of battle and retreat is well portrayed.  NVA, bullets.  Looking
toward the sun, movement, Ron shoots.  It's the new man.  From Georgia.  Not a
pretty sight.
     The Major denies Ron killed his own man, but Ron is feeling it.  They
don't tell you that 10-12% of the casualties of a war are caused by "friendly
fire" (explored by a Carol Burnett film of that title).  Remember that when
you see Panama casualty figures.
     Ron is getting a bit frosty; his mind is off somewhere else.  Some months
later, Ron's squad is advancing on another village.  The NVA open up.  Someone
gets it thru the head.  Ron gets his heel blown off, but still the fighter, he
keeps shooting.  He gets hit.  Point of view includes getting hauled out.  This
is the only film I know which shows the exit wound as well as an entry wound.
Ron has a gaping hole in his back.  The aid station is a nightmare.  Soldiers
dying.  Just when you thought it was bad....
     The VA hospital is shown as a real nightmare.  COMING HOME was clean
compared to this.  Ron tries real hard; he still has his fighting spirit.  He's
trying to regain the use of his legs when the doctors are telling him no hope.
When he falls, it's a compound fracture on a paraplegic.  He tragically loses
his leg.  The chair forever now.  This whole sequence is not for weak
stomaches.  And it forebode more: "America Love it or Leave."
     He finally goes home.  Things are different.  One "sleeze" peer has gone
into business (was in college).  He gets a chance to feel better; he's in
parade dress and to speak on the 4th from a platform.  When he gets a memory
from a baby crying.  He can't finish, but he runs into an old buddy who has
also been there.  Lost friends are discussed in a way only a Vet can joke
about.
     He sees his sweetheart.  A demonstration [Readjustment Blues by John
Denver would have been right here].  Ron is slowly becoming a problem.  His
hair starting to get longer.  He has a confrontation with a WWII Vet.  He blows
up in front of his Mom, Catholicism, and his Dad suggests Mexico.
     Down in Mexico, he sees other wheelchair-bound vets.  He is killing time.
Gets into a fight with Dafoe, tragic humor at its best.  What are you going to
do, Ron?  He visits the parents of the man he killed.  Many tokens of past
soldiers in the house.  You can guess for yourself if he tells a story of
bravery or the truth.  A powerful moment.
     The film concludes which Ron (a Republican) getting into the 1972
Republican convention and "disrupting it."  One of the vets is really an
undercover cop, trying to get him specifically (this really happened).  The
media coverage.  Then the 1976 Democratic convention.  His book is out.  He is
"home."
     This film would appear a real downer except at the very beginning and end.
The problem is that many of these people, policies, attitudes still exist.  It
would be really hard to create an uplifting ending.  It is a film about
principles.
     It is somewhat ironic the film was shot in the Philippines where so much
recent blood has been shed.  One hears a a couple dozen killed in Panama, but
few remember that over 300 Americans were wounded, some by friendly fire, some
to probably go thru what Kovic did.  Then what of the 1000 Panamanians?  What
of the millions of Vietnamese?  Okay, so this is commentary.  Finis.
--eugene miya, NASA Ames Research Center, eugene@aurora.arc.nasa.gov
  {ncar,decwrl,hplabs,uunet}!ames!eugene

Title
Review for Fat Man and Little Boy (1989)
     This is yet another telling of the story of the development of the atomic
bomb.  I have been informed by a knowledgeable person (L. Badash) that the
total count of such films is between 4-6.  This story is well documented by
many historians: Hersey, Jungk, most recently, Rhoades, and dozens of other
authors.
     The story is important to the history of science because it happens about
the time when science in America became "big" even before Sputnik.  This makes
the story complex: few single people who stand out.  The perspective is largely
from Leslie Groves (whom many people don't realize built the Pentagon) played
by Paul Newman for star value.
     The second is from a new young physicist fresh from Chicago.  He is
involved in many aspects of the development (ignoring compartmentalization).
The other notable members of the physics and science communities are simply
blurs.  Time is compressed and distorted.  A post-war event with Plutonium is
added for dramatic effect.  In fact lots of stuff is sacrificed for dramatic
effect.
     The "affair" that Oppenheimer has in the movie did take place, but it was
overblown.  J. R. had more problems with his brother Frank (who founded the SF
Exploratorium and DID work at Los Alamos) and his Berkeley friends.  These are
the basic characters.
     Laura Dern plays a nurse involved the the young physicist.  The other real
people from Szilard to Stimson make appearances, but you have to know the
players in advance to know who they are.
     The scenery is spectacular.  It rivals (nearly) the real Los Alamos.  Oh,
to answer one quick question: NO, Richard Feynman does not appear as a
character.
     The film does not convey the fear that the physicists and other felt at
the beginning of the war.  If this film has been made closer to WWII, it would
have probably told a different story.  Such advantage different perspectives
allow.  Note that one scene involving radiation sickness probably had Dr.
Robert Gale (UCLA and Chernobyl) as a consultant.
     Place names, code names had to be removed (who ever heard of Oak Ridge
before the War?).
     The American Playhouse PBS series Oppenheimer with Sam Waterston is a
better accounting.  But it tends to make the physicists looks innocent.
     Quick additional rating since, I was at odds with the IN COUNTRY review: -0 (contrasting to the +2).
--eugene miya, NASA Ames Research Center, eugene@aurora.arc.nasa.gov
  resident cynic at the Rock of Ages Home for Retired Hackers:
  {ncar,decwrl,hplabs,uunet}!ames!eugene

Title
Review for Casualties of War (1989)
     The structure of this film is largely in the form of a flash back which
takes place in 1974 at the time of Nixon's resignation.  The flashback itself
is based on an incident which took place in 1966 and was subsequently written
up in New Yorker in 1969.
     The film is a somewhat different film compared to many of the plastic
coated comedies, light hearted dramas, and big budget shoot them movies of most
summer far.  This film tries to be an accounting of one event during the war.
     I went to see this film because I, as many curious, wondered how Michael
Fox would do in dramatic role.  I think he does well.  I did have the
reservations that this was another Vietnam era film where by Vets would come
out looking crazy or half deranged.  This being a problem with many of the
films including PLATOON and COMING HOME.  Direction was provided by Brian
DePalma.
     I think the film does a reasonably good job.  It is not highly insane like
the allegory of the DEER HUNTER or APOCALYPSE NOW.  On the other hand this
wasn't quite Platoon or Full Metal Jacket.  The film does end on kind of an
upbeat note, definitely positive, I would hope that vets haven't walked out of
the theater by this time.  The investigation did take place, and people brought
to "justice."
     The film starts with Erickson (Fox) on a subway.  Nixon's resigning
(paper) when a Vietnamese girl steps on the Muni (SF).  He flashback (sweaty).
The film goes to confusion of a night patrol and ambush.  Fox falls into a
tunnel entrance and gets stuck (I know some one who fell into a North Korean
tunnel and survived).  This whole section is good.  We see Fox has a good
Sargent.
     The next day on a search during lunch.  The Sarge (played by Penn) is
standing with one of his buddies when a sniper hits the buddy.  A short
firefight ensues.  There is one scene when a VC jumps into a tunnel in sight (a
little improbable, but it conveys the impression).  These guys don't trust the
villagers.
     The next assignment has them going on long range recon.  It is during this
that Penn decides to abduct the girl.  A new grunt (Diaz) has no idea what's
going on ("Is this usual?").  They bring her along on the patrol where they
rape her.  Diaz tells Erickson he won't go along, but in the end does.  The
argument with the Sarge is a moderately powerful statement of "Going along"
[much better than DEAD POET'S SOCIETY].
     The next day, the patrol located a VC cache, they call in an fire mission
which also happens to waste a River Boat (friendly fire).  It is during this
that Erickson has a chance to free the girl (unsuccessfully).  The Sarge
decides to waste the girl, at which time Erickson draws VC attention (this is
actually just prior to the fire mission).  This all takes place at once.  They
end up shooting the girl.
     After they return to their base.  Erickson just misses a fragging.  His
officers won't listen to him, only one buddy will.  His Lt breaks the squad up.
During another patrol, Erickson and one buddy are talking when a new man who
has been bugging them steps on a mine.  This is the moral climax of the film
where he decides to tell.  He goes to the Capt.  Also no show.  I won't spoil
the solution.
     In the end, an investigation locates the body of the girl, the four are
court martialed and the flashback ends with the Sarge whispering something into
Erickson's ear.
     Flash back ends.  Short interesting conclusion.
     The film does have its holes and bad points: one of Erickson's comrades is
just a bit too homicidal, and the officers perhaps a bit too "don't rock the
boat."  One does wonder what is whispered.  One does wonder if the Sarge is out
in the world (sentence is over by now).  Does he want pay back?
     The film does portray combat well (confusion, waste, the there
one-minute, gone the next).  It is just one incident.  Fox does portray a
character who is somewhat naive and "goody-two shoes."  I won't numerically
rate it.  It is also hard to say you "enjoy" this type of film.  It's not clear
how a viewer might place themselves (if they would be an Erickson, or a Sarge,
or even better a Diaz).  But it is a change from the lighter films of the
summer.  There's no purely evil character.  They are all victims.  I do think
the film is worth seeing.
--eugene miya, NASA Ames Research Center, eugene@aurora.arc.nasa.gov
  {ncar,decwrl,hplabs,uunet}!ames!eugene

Title
Review for Hearts of Darkness: A Filmmaker's Apocalypse (1991)
     HEARTS OF DARKNESS is a two-hour documentary on the making of the
film APOCALYPSE NOW (by Francis Ford Coppola) by Francis' wife.
     Background: At the time it was released, APOCALYPSE NOW was the
most expensive film ever made.  Cost was not an issue as much until then
for this $30M film.  At the time, prior to release, I was helping a
friend with a struggling movie company (they made three films before
folding) as an unpaid consultant on the side.  Movies were pollyanna
artsy things.  Then a daily was released from APOCALYPSE NOW showing a
real Huey helicopter (hovering 10 feet off the ground) all of a sudden
blowing up.  What was that film?????!!!!  Of course now this is all old
hat.  APOCALYPSE NOW attracted a lot of attention (as some of this is
covered in the film).  APOCALYPSE NOW got my vote for picture of the
year in 1979 as well as my vote to cinematographer (the only two
categories I could vote).
     HEARTS OF DARKNESS was Francis Coppola's vision of adapting Joseph
Conrad's HEART OF DARKNESS (which I have to admit I only recently read).
It came about because Coppola, George Lucas, and John Milius had all
read Conrad and thought it was the best book they had ever read.  The
film features interviews with all three.  Lucas eventually bowed out;
Milius unhappily went off and produced an even more controversial war
film.
     The idea was born in the late 1960s, shelved as American Zoetrope
made a name for itself, then taken a look at again.  The film presents a
little insight into Coppola's (not necessarily the rest of the film
industry's) process.  Of course no one wanted to touch Vietnam war films
at the time.
     The documentary is not a great film, but it shows some of the
behind the scenes for the construction of the temples, the extensive
napalm and pyrotechnics, the orchestration of the helichoppers
(Philippine Air Force which were called away at a moment's notice when
they needed to be used against real guerillas [the expression on
Coppola's face is great]).  This is not like one of those shorty
documentaries used to describe the making of TERMINATOR 2, or ROBOCOP.
     We see the change of script when Martin Sheen is brought in to
replace an earlier leading man.  His heart attack is covered.  The toll
this film took upon the film crew over years, tropical storms, money
problems was amazing.  The film includes interviews with the actors
(Larry Fishburne, Sam Bottoms, etc.) that make you wonder where the
black actors are today.  The only person not interviewed is Marlon
Brando.
     The spoofs on APOCALYPSE NOW are noted (like one on SATURDAY NIGHT
LIVE with Martin Sheen).
     The R rating is due to several scenes on which the final water
buffalo sacrifice scene is based.  This is not for the squeamish.  It
happens more than once.  (first when Coppola's wife first finds the
ritual, then during filming.)
     Coppola is clearly one of these most important forces in American
movie making.  Other interviews include members of his family (noting
changes in hair length and fashion).  The film goes on and on, like 
APOCALYPSE NOW, and we get "sucked up the river."  It gets kind of
decadent and boring toward the end.
     The film closes noting that APOCALYPSE NOW has made some $135M.
Won numerous awards, and so forth.  This film is not SLEEPING BEAUTY,
but if you have worked for the business, you might find it intense and
dull.  Remember it is a documentary.
--eugene miya, NASA Ames Research Center, eugene@orville.nas.nasa.gov
  {uunet,mailrus,other gateways}!ames!eugene

Title
Review for K2 (1991)
[This review must remain in the public domain.]
     I had not planned on reviewing this film until a storm of more or
less uninformed material appeared.
     What is K2?  K2 is the well-known American ski company.  It is also
the second highest mountain in the world.  K2 holds a special place in
the history of American climbing: the Americans tried to climb K2 while
the British attempted Everest (still higher than K2 despite recent
surveys documented by Brad Washburn [Boston Science Museum] and Nova).
Although K2 is second in height, K2 is considerably more technically
challenging than most Everest routes.  K2 has taken its share of lives
prior and following its ascent by the Italians.
     The film K2 based on a one-act play by a Stanford grad about a
soul-searching bivouac on an open ledge.  Two climbers, buddies with 
opposite personalities: one a competitive, emotional, hard-bitten 
lawyer; the other an injured, more meticulous scientist.  The set 
usually consisted of a rappel down to a "ledge" where the evening was
spent including an avalanche which buried or destroyed what remaining
gear they had.  It wasn't an action play.  In the morning, the
climber(s) continue on.
     Remember this was a play in development, variations occur.  The 
performance I saw had the author (noted in the credits and the 
screenplay) as one of the climbers.  We had an audience discussion 
session following our performance.  The author is a boulderer who lost
a friend in the Tetons (the play was a Teton Group Production and I
wish I had kept a poster).  I was not highly impressed with the play: I
felt it was a bit contrived and the personalities were thin.  This is
not a reason to deter me from seeing the film.
     The plot of the film is similar: two buddies in a city, nothing 
strange about that until one builders (climbs up the outside of a 
building) up to an apartment.  We next see them on a climb where they
encounter another party.  They briefly interact when an avalanche kills
two members of the second party.  The other party was planning an ascent
of K2 (one older climber is the sugar-daddy).  The rest of the film is
about the buddies muscling their way onto the expedition and getting up
the mountain.
     It's kind of a macho film.  Climbers have rather strong 
personalities and one-dimensional personalities (ambitions).  You kind
of need this to get up peaks of this size.  It makes for great
arguments at high altitude.  The ambitions of each character reflect on
the different lives of the two climbers.
     The main problem with the film is the sense of time and continuity.
The story is straight-line.  Consider viewing climbers who are one 
moment in shadow and one moment in bright sun.  Not a cloud in the sky
[note this did not stop director Philip Kaufman and THE RIGHT STUFF.]
Sure.  There are numerous other "errors:" e.g., the expedition is
supposed to start in Seattle (it's Vancouver, BC; if you have been
there, you can recognize the skyline and the lack of a Space-Needle).
So you have to suspend your disbelief a little more than most films.
     These are minor, really trivial nit-picking.  The mountain actually
filmed is Mt. Waddington, a serious peak by any standard.  It makes a
respectable, difficult peak.  There is *one* picture of the *real* K2 if
you know when to look, not fair to the non-climber.  Some of the 
filming did occur in Pakistan, a very dry nation set back from the 
Indian Ocean.  This was very well captured.  But if you look carefully
down canyon you can see a frozen lake and trees.  You  don't find
forests like this in Pakistan.  You don't typically need ladders to
bridge crevices into K2: this is borrowed from Everest expeditions after
the 1970 Japanese Climbing and Skiing expedition with one particularly
memorable film shot across a ladder bridge.  We see numerous camps
throughout the film.  The tents never rattled enough in high winds, but
if they did, the audience would never be able to hear what the climbers
were saying.
     The film has moments borrowed from the American literature on K2
and other climbing accounts.  A scene involving the solution of a
porter dispute came straight from the 1975 American attempt.  A
late-night evacuation was similar to a 1953 American story which went
into history.  This adds a bit to the realism.  Unfortunately the time 
compression creeps in (you don't walk nearly as fast at that elevation
as they show in the film).  Yeah, some dumb looking soloing (contrary to
most expedition technique), numerous dramatic falls and arrests--far too
many.  It is nearly impossible to capture the internal intensity which
drives climbers on peaks like K2.
     Time is the climber's single most important resource.  Big peak 
climbers usually start before dawn, not conducive to filming or
storyline or views.  A motion picture can't capture this time scale and
the film suffers a little for it.  Sure, the plot is predictable,
because the storyline is very linear.  The usual expedition personality
conflicts take place.  The bivouac on which the play is based barely
lasts a minute.  I timed it.  Don't blink.
     But there are bright moments for the viewing climber: an early
scene takes a step back from a perfect hand crack on a beautiful
granite buttress (completely in the shade, by the way).  Only a climber
can appreciate this.  In comparison to the play which occurs on a
ledge, the soul-searching takes place over three or four camps on
different climbs.  I believe this actually makes the film a little
better structured and more realistic.
     The film's use of oxygen and adrenaline is a joke.  The film is a
bit on the melodramatic side, probably necessary because real climbing
as a filming activity is *really dull*.  I mean slow, meticious, *dull*.
Believe me, I know--I've done it 22 years now and it only really 
interests its own collection of "odd-balls."  So I really doubt this 
film will last long in the theaters.  Americans are not climbers and 
outdoors people to the level of the Alpine nations.  Americans are 
arm-chair Monday night football fans (and baseball, and basketball) 
fans.  A few are arm-chair climbers.  Clearly, K2 is better known as a
ski company than a peak in the US.
     The talents of Patricia Charbonney (sp?), a fine, very attractive, 
up-and-coming actress are wasted.  She plays a "climber" with some 
limited basis in fact who in reality caused some friction on a couple
of real K2 expeditions.  She is not nearly as obnoxious in this film
and a dynamic is missed.  The film could have also explored the
personality of Michael Biehn's character from the training in his
office.
     The film is dedicated to Jim Wickwire who did reach the summit of
K2 in 1978 (with Lou Reichart (sp?)) and survived a solo bivouac and
participated in a 1975 attempt.  Jim Wickwire was a consultant to the
film along with numerous Canadian climbs including Pat Morrow (second
ascender of all continental high points).  Another useful technique
missing in this film is showing where K2 is.  George Lucas' films make 
excellent geographic use of maps.
     The SJ Mercury gave it 3 stars.  Far too high.  Their review pointed 
out that there were no close up face shots, a good point.  The 
perspective is always with some distance.  The NY Times panned it (that's
up to the people at nyt.com).  The film is not among the worse films to
portray climbing: bad films (with a few decent climbing scenes) like
THE EIGER SANCTION [the "Plan 9" of climbing films] or FIVE DAYS ONE
SUMMER.  I can't recommend a film like K2 at today's ticket prices.  It
will probably show better on a big screen than a little screen, so if
you are interested, this is a weak thumbs-up, so see it at a matinee.
$6.75?  Well, hard to justify.  It is not the ultimate high.  Me?  I'd
rather go climbing, but every climber I've talked to stood around
thinking about what they saw.  It is mildly interesting and better than
the play.
--eugene miya, NASA Ames Research Center, eugene@orville.nas.nasa.gov
  Resident Cynic, Rock of Ages Home for Retired Hackers
  {uunet,mailrus,other gateways}!ames!eugene
.


Title
Review for Search for Signs of Inteligent Life in the Universe, The (1991)
     As a warning, I saw the play twice (the second time in the first
row; much better!).  I also have Jane Wagner's book of the same title.
A documentary on Lily Tomlin (PBS) describes the development of this
play.  The film is an adaptation to Tomlin's successful play of the same
name.  The title is intriguing, especially since the real "Search" work
is done here at Ames.  The "Search" in the film is the alien search for
intelligent life.
     The interest in the film is to see how she takes the one-woman play
and adapt it for the big screen with costumes and makeup.  The majority
of the film does not have Tomlin in character garb, but rather, in the
suit she had designed for the stage with the limited set of props she
had.  A few of the characters make brief appearances in costume.
     The film concerns one of Tomlin's long time characters, Trudy the
bag lady.  Trudy is in contact with extra-terrestrials and she has the
ability to pop into other people's lives (although randomly): a la
Vonnegut.  Her other characters include Agnes Angst, Ludd (male, Agnes'
grandfather), Agnes' grandmother, Brandy (a prostitute), Paul, etc.
(names you can get from Wagner's book(.  The films consist of various
monologues and dialogues between the Tomlin characters (all
inter-related).
     Some of the events of the film are clearly dated.  So the humor is
a bit topically and behind.  Tomlin has a nice delivery, but for those
unfamiliar with her work, you may/may not like it.  The print I saw at
Camera Three was surprising poor for a new movie.  I think I like the
stage performance better (especially when she came down and sat on the
edge and just answered questions from the audience).
     Should you go see it?  At $6, it might be better to wait until it
reaches video.  Die-hard fans might go to relive the theater, but
sketches and diagloue have changed from the book and what I remember to
make a shorter film (mostly Act 1 material removed).  
--eugene miya, NASA Ames Research Center, eugene@orville.nas.nasa.gov
  {uunet,mailrus,other gateways}!ames!eugene

Title
Review for Good Morning, Vietnam (1987)
     Adrian Cronauer is a USAF DJ transferred from Crete to an early Vietnam
police action (1965).  This film is about his adjustment to Nam, and Nam's
adjustment to Cronauer.  The other characters include the General who brought
him there, his CO and NCO, and his fellow DJs.  Cronauer also takes an off-duty
stint teaching English to get close to a Vietnamese girl (Crete apparently
lacking women).  There are run-ins with terrorist bombs, mines in the jungle,
new foods, smiles from 'helping' people in a different culture: all the things
which people join the Armed forces for....  Note: since realism is being
discussed there really is an Adrian Cronauer (see the TIME review on this).
     In some ways, the film is kind of a "downer" (mimic Robin Williams surfer
voice).  There many amusing moments with Williams, but these are short-lived.
The problem is there are no good complementary (antagonistic) characters for
Robin to bounce his lines off.  M.A.S.H. had the Frank Burns and Hot Lips
characters to a minor degree.  Unlike M.A.S.H., Cronauer does not completely
spoof the bureaucracy.  He's constantly put down by it.  
     My favorite scene in the film (you have to see it, no real spoiler) is
when Adrian (being driven to the radio station) gets caught in a traffic jam as
troops are heading to the front.  This is Robin as his best.
     GOOD MORNING, VIETNAM appears like Bill Murray's attempt to cover some
serious material as in THE RAZOR'S EDGE.  This film will do well, initially,
because of Robin William's following.  Too much is made of his comedy.
Perhaps, he should have had a better hand with his writing.
     I really like Robin Williams and have seen him live many times.  What's
great about him isn't so much his comedy but his observations of the "human
condition."  I don't own any of his comedy albums because his visual
coordination is important to his delivery.  This is also a problem in this
film.  Williams has noted the problem himself between trained actor versus
comic.  By far and away, his best material is what's shown on HBO.
>From the Rock of Ages Home for Retired Hackers:
--eugene miya NASA Ames Research Center eugene@ames-aurora.ARPA
  {uunet,hplabs,hao,ihnp4,decwrl,allegra,tektronix}!ames!aurora!eugene
