Authors
Joe Barlow
Number of Reviews
3

Title
Review for Wrongfully Accused (1998)
        You may find it hard to believe, but Leslie Nielsen was once a
highly-respected dramatic actor.  From 1949 to 1980, he appeared in
over 50 movies and countless television shows, including "M*A*S*H,"
"Forbidden Planet" and "The Big Valley."  The talented actor had a
well-deserved reputation for delivering solid, dramatic performances in
any role he played.
        But in 1980, Nielsen took a small part in the Zucker Brothers
comedy "Airplane," and his life and career changed virtually overnight.
In that film, Nielsen played a deadpan doctor whose services are
desperately needed when an entire airline crew comes down with food
poisoning in mid-flight.  Nielsen's performance was so clever and droll
that Hollywood immediately began offering him other comedic parts,
including the lead role in the short-lived TV series "Police Squad" and
its subsequent big-screen offspring, the "Naked Gun" films.  So
successful were these movies that Nielsen's "serious" work, which spans
five decades, has been all but forgotten.  It's a shame, too.  Although
I like "The Naked Gun" as much as anybody else, it would be wonderful to
see him do another film in which he plays something more substantial than
a loveable goofball.
        Nielsen's latest offering, "Wrongfully Accused," is a parody of
"The Fugitive," the popular Harrison Ford extravaganza.  Ryan Harrison
(Nielsen) is a famous concert violinist who is falsely accused of
murder.  After being arrested, he makes a daring escape while his...
        Oh, it doesn't matter.  You don't go see a film like this because
it contains a riveting plot; you go because you want to see how Nielsen's
character will screw up every situation he finds himself in THIS time.
Along the way, we know we'll see some of Nielsen's famous slapstick, and
catch a bunch of pop-culture injokes (I spotted parodies of "Casablanca,"
"Fatal Attraction," "Charlie's Angels," "Baywatch," "Fargo," "Braveheart,"
"Mission: Impossible," a none-too-subtle lampoon of "Titanic," and
perhaps a dozen others).  Oh, and we'll also get dialogue like:
        Since we can agree that the plot is pretty much irrelevant,
let's focus instead on the humor factor.  The good news: this is
probably Nielsen's funniest movie since "The Naked Gun" trilogy.  The
bad news: that doesn't say much.  His most recent outings, which
include "Spy Hard" and "Dracula: Dead and Loving It," have been nothing
more than painfully unfunny attempts to cash in on the Leslie Nielsen
name-brand.  Unfortunately, even an actor of Nielsen's considerable
ability cannot rescue a movie that's only pretending to go through the
motions; as such, these flicks fared dismally at the box office, and
were soundly shredded by fans and critics alike.
        Writer/director Pat Proft helms this latest offering, and he's
obviously done his homework: this movie feels a lot like "Police Squad,"
with gags flying fast and furious.  Unfortunately, it has the same problem
that most Nielsen comedies have: a lack of restraint.  Every gag that
Proft can think of is included, regardless of whether it's actually
funny or not; as such, the comedic effect is seriously compromised.
The rare witty line or clever joke is a sure sign that the next gag will
involve a man getting hit in the genitals or banged in the head with a
frying pan.  News flash: that's not funny, and never was.  Can someone
please explain to me why these kind of scenes are considered so
brilliantly hysterical that they deserve to appear in EVERY comedy film
that comes out?
        The good news is, the jokes that DO work actually work pretty
well.  Particularly noteworthy is the entire opening sequence (which
depicts Nielsen's character performing a violin concerto before an
appreciative audience), as well as a later gag involving a runaway
locomotive.  An additional scene demonstrates the wrong way to use
suntan lotion, a moment which for me was the movie's biggest laugh.
        All in all, though, the film is nothing new, and Nielsen stays
comfortably within the territory he's staked out since "Airplane."
Apparently he's happy there; I just heard that he's signed on to do two
more comedies: "Titanic Too: It Missed the Iceberg," and "2001: A Space
Travesty."  Zounds.  Here's hoping that they're edited a little more
liberally than their predecesers were.  As it is, even though it runs a
mere 90 minutes, "Wrongfully Accused" seems to drag on a bit too
long.
        Oh, by the way, don't believe the theater lobby poster, which
lists Sandra Bernhardt as one of the film's stars: she appears for only
a single fifteen-second scene.

E-Mail: jbarlow@earthling.net
Joe Barlow on Film:  http://www.ipass.net/~jbarlow/film.htm

Title
Review for Dance with Me (1998)
        Sometimes it's wonderful to be wrong.  When I saw the first
trailer for "Dance With Me," the new film from director Randa "Children
of a Lesser God" Haines, I wasn't impressed.  The world hardly needs
another movie in which boring characters wade through a minimalistic plot,
whose only purpose is to link one spectacularly-choreographed dance number
to the next.  After learning who the stars of the film were, I was even
less interested: we have pop singer Vanessa Williams as the female lead,
starring opposite Chayanne, a man who seems to have misplaced his last
name.  Oh, and Kris Kristofferson is along for the ride, too.  Yes,
*the* Kris Kristofferson.  In a dance movie.  Ooo, it's gonna hurt.
        That's the attitude I carried into the opening-day screening of
the movie; two hours and twenty minutes later I walked out, wearing
what I'm sure is one of the dopiest grins that has ever graced my face.
I knew the smile was there, but I simply couldn't get rid of it.  Every
time I tried, a wonderful moment from the film would flash across my mind
and the grin would reattach itself.  I was self-concious about this until
I took a good look at the other people filing out alongside me.  Friends,
I say this with absolutely no exaggeration whatsoever: I saw a similar
smile on *every* face emerging from the theater.  That's the kind of
movie we're dealing with.
        Our story opens in present-day Cuba, where a handsome young man
named Rafael (Chayanne) is coming to terms with the recent death of his
mother.  He receives a sympathy letter from a Texan named John (Kris
Kristofferson), an old friend of the family.  In addition to condolences,
John's note contains an invitation for Rafael to come to America for an
extended visit.  John owns a struggling dance studio and is willing to
offer the mechanically-inclined Rafael a "handyman" position, allowing
him to earn some spending money while he's in the country.  Having no
reason to stay in Cuba, and curious about the mysterious land known as
"The United States," he accepts John's offer.
        After arriving at the studio, the charismatic Rafael befriends
nearly all the students.  Only the beautiful Ruby (Vanessa Williams)
is cold and aloof, after Rafael has the nerve to offer an unsolicited
criticism of one of her routines.  Ruby is an extremely-talented dancer;
her main problem is that she KNOWS it, and is reluctant to take advice
from anyone she regards as beneath her.  This includes Rafael, who she
sees as a mere handyman with no dance experience whatsoever.  The
evidence seems to support her view: Rafael stumbles and trods on his
partner's feet when he attempts to learn even a simple waltz.
        But Rafael, though untrained, reveals himself to be a fine dancer
in his own right.  His secret: simply go with the beat of the music,
let it seep into your soul, then do whatever comes naturally.  He has no
use for "real" dance steps, since everything he needs to know is
contained in the music itself.  Ruby is astonished the first time she
sees Rafael dance this way:
        Even as a cautious friendship begins to form between Rafael and
Ruby, we learn of bigger problems.  John, whose passion for dance has
dwindled as he's aged (and is now all but extinguished), wants nothing
more to do with the trade.  Planning to retire to the coast and become
a full-time fisherman, he agrees to keep the studio open only through the
end of the following month, to allow his students time to practice for an
upcoming competition.  During this limited time frame, the friendship
between himself and Rafael grows extremely complex, which raises other
issues John does not wish to deal with.
        As our characters' relationships grow and change, we can see the
thought and depth that has gone into this film.  At no point are any of
our characters (with the exception of the one-note Julian, Ruby's ex)
less than utterly convincing; this is true even of those students with
little screen time.  My favorite is Bea (Joan Plowright), a dance student
in her late sixties, who is the spitting image of her namesake from "The
Andy Griffith Show."  All of her scenes contain a great deal of heart,
and the wonderful routine she performs with Rafael near the film's finale
generated a round of delighted applause at the screening I attended.
        The direction is subtle but more than effective; never once does
director Haines feel the need to grandstand or make any Great Statements.
The camerawork is straightforward and solid, and the wonderful Latin music
is nothing short of infectous.  The cinematographer has chosen to use very
soft lighting for most of the scenes, giving a cozy, intimate feel
that suits the movie well.  All of these traits come together in the
magnificent dance number in which Rafael and Ruby cut loose in a Cuban
club.  Watch how the camera lightly weaves in and out of the crowd as Ruby
is handed off from one partner to the next, like a human hot potato.  She
and the other dancers, male and female alike, are but a blur of smiles and
bright colors, enveloped by this amazing music.  It's at this point that
Ruby finally realises what Rafael has been telling her all along: follow
the melody, and your feet will move by themselves.  It's unquestionably
my favorite moment in the entire film.
        The movie owes much of its success to Chayanne's portrayl of
Rafael.  The guy is just so darn likeable, with a disarming smile that
makes you want to dash up and throw a brotherly arm around his shoulder,
that the story is practically guaranteed to work.  Vanessa Williams also
shows remarkable range as Ruby, covering a wide spectrum of emotions and
never once faltering.  This is vital.  Witness the following dialogue, as
Ruby explains to Rafael why she wishes to leave the studio and return to
her former dance partner:
        These lines are so perfectly delivered that we never doubt them.
If they'd been spoken by less-skilled actors, however, they could've come
across as laughably trite.
        But the biggest surprise for me was Kris Kristofferson's masterful
portrayl of John.  Arguably the most complex performance in the movie,
Kristofferson has full control of his character at all times, knowing
precisely when to reign himself in.  There are no moments of self-
indulgence, which could've been fatal to the story's believability.  I
sincerely hope that he's remembered when Oscar nominations for "Best
Supporting Actor" are announced; he's THAT good.  (What is it about
country singers that makes them great actors, anyway?  First there was
Dwight Yokam in "Sling Blade," then Lyle Lovett in "The Opposite of
Sex," and now Mr. Kristofferson.  Granted, KK has acted in other movies
before, but he's never been better than he is here.)
        "Dance With Me" is not the best film I've seen this year, but its
warm afterglow has stayed with me.  The movie is joyful and innocent; in
every shot we can feel the filmmakers' love of dance and their great wish
to share it with the audience.  We need more films like this.  Thinking
about the movie as I write these words, I can feel that dopey grin back
on my face.  But if a film can make me feel this good, I don't mind a
bit.

E-Mail: jbarlow@earthling.net
Joe Barlow on Film:  http://www.ipass.net/~jbarlow/film.htm

Title
Review for Smoke Signals (1998)
        On the Coeur d'Alene indian reservation in Idaho, life floats by
like a slow breeze.  K-REZ, the low-watt radio station which serves the
indian community, broadcasts the same basic traffic report every morning:
"A big truck is passing by."  A pause.  "Now it's gone."  Another pause.
"Ain't no traffic, really."  The meteorological report is just as laconic:
"One of those clouds looks kinda like a horse."  It's the sort of place
where people still prefer to barter for their goods, and if you can't
afford to have the "forward" gear of your car fixed, then hey, you simply
drive around in reverse.  But life here only looks slow and dreamy if you
happen to live somewhere else.  The residents of this community have
their own fair share of joy, desire, catastrophe and discontent, all
carefully buried behind the idyllic facade they put up for the benefit of
the tourists.
        It's a rare film indeed which is able to bring together
sentimentality, wistfulness, and absolution in such a way that it feels
fresh and new, rather than old and reheated.  "Smoke Signals" is such a
film.  Not only does it allow us a peek into the highly personal lives of
its characters, but it paints them with such a deft touch that we are
completely drawn into their world, experiencing all the pain and triumph
of these fascinating people.  This is a film where, when the end credits
begin to roll, you simply stay in your seat and think about what you've
just seen while simultaneously wishing the experience wasn't over.
        The story opens on July 4, 1976, the American bi-centennial.  On
the reservation, indians celebrate "the white man's day of freedom" by
shooting off fireworks and drinking beer.  The festivities are quickly
disrupted, however, when a fire breaks out in a nearby house.  The young
couple inside finds themselves trapped in the burning building, and fling
their newborn baby from a third-story window in a desperate attempt to
save it from the inferno.  A quick-thinking neighbor, Arnold Joseph (Gary
Farmer), manages to catch the child, but all he and the other onlookers
can do is watch and listen as the parents burn.
        The infant that Arnold saves is Thomas Builds-the-Fire (Evan
Adams).  Raised by his grandmother after being saved from the flames,
Thomas grows into an intelligent, amiable young man, full of stories and
laughter.  Sadly, Thomas is also a bit of a nerd, and is therefore shunned
by the other indians.  Cruelest of all is Arnold's son Victor (Adam Evans),
who later accuses Thomas of having learned everything he knows about their
heritage by watching "Dances with Wolves" over and over.
        Victor has demons of his own, however.  His father, despite the
brief moment of heroism in which he saved Thomas, is an alcoholic who's
just as likely to communicate with his fists as with words.  In his
young life, Victor has seen his mother physically abused by Arnold many
times.  Under the tutelage of his father, Victor is also taught to hate all
white people.  When Arnold storms out after a fight with his wife and
moves to Arizona, never to return, Victor learns an important lesson:
one must never love, for love leads to pain.  The lesson is heeded, though
Victor never forgives his father for deserting him.
        Flash forward to present day, as word of Arnold's death filters
back to the reservation.  As his only son, Victor knows what he must do:
travel to Arizona, pick up his father's ashes, and bring them back to the
reservation as indian tradition demands.  There's a problem, however:
Victor has no money, no car, and precious little experience dealing with
the great big world outside the reservation's boundaries.  Thomas, hearing
of Victor's plight, offers to buy Victor a bus ticket on one condition:
he, Thomas, must be allowed to come along and pay his respects to the man
who saved his life so long ago.  Victor grudgingly agrees, and the two men
head off on a journey which will change both of them forever.
        The film borders on heavy at times, but the witty script from
Sherman Alexie knows when to lighten the mood with humor.  The interplay
between Thomas and Victor, an indian "Odd Couple," is priceless.  Thomas,
who has even less experience being off the reservation than Victor, is
constantly fascinated by the smallest details.  "I went to Denny's once,"
he tells Victor wonderingly.  "Even though it was after twelve, they still
let me order the Grand Slam Breakfast!"  In another scene, Victor tries to
get Thomas to act more like an indian.  "You smile too much.  Indians don't
smile, Thomas.  Get stoic!"  This is a wonderful moment, as is another
in which Thomas and Victor sing a lengthy song about John Wayne's false
teeth... to the great annoyance of the other passengers.
        Along the way, we watch Victor come to terms with the death of
his father, who he has always considered a loser and a deserter.  Thomas,
who knows Arnold only as the man who saved his life, disagrees with this
assessment.  As more of Arnold's personality is revealed to us via
flashbacks, we learn that neither Victor or Thomas have the complete
picture.  Mercifully, the film does not try to make Arnold into a "good"
man, only a real one.  Victor will learn that his father was not quite
the monster he'd always believed, just as Thomas will discover that no
man, including the late Arnold Joseph, is a saint.  It's a revelation
that makes both men rethink their philosophies.
        As one would expect of any mismatched pair, there is an incredible
amount of friction between our two main characters.  When the friendly
Thomas befriends a white woman on the bus, Victor insults her and drives
her away.  Thomas's chatterbox dialogue grates on Victor's ears, and they
have differing opinions on just about everything.  But through it all, a
special bond forms between them.  Due to the skillful way in which the
film depicts their growing fondness, we never doubt either man's sincerity.
        By the end of the movie, Victor and Thomas have each inherited
a smattering of the other's personality, and both are better people for it.
Their final parting scene, in which Thomas receives a special gift from
his new friend, is so unselfish and "real" that I was honestly touched by
it.  The fact that such a powerful response could be generated by such a
short scene says a great deal about the skill of the actors, director,
and screenwriter.  These characters stay with us long after the film is
over, as does the haunting climatic voice-over, solemnly delivered by
Thomas.
        "Smoke Signals" isn't perfect, but it comes awfully close.  Only
once does it stumble, and even this is not neccessarily a flaw, depending
on your point-of-view:
        I understand that the film is interested in conveying the Native
American viewpoint.  That's fine-- it does so extremely well, and it's
a big part of the movie's charm.  However, the film does seem to go out
of its way to make a GREAT STATEMENT about racism, which quite honestly
feels forced.  Case in point: there are four white men with speaking parts
in this movie, and ALL OF THEM are racist scumbags.  Indeed, one scene
with a redneck sheriff could be dispensed with altogether, since it seems
to be included for no other reason than to introduce yet another white
antagonist.
        But this relatively minor criticism in no way detracts from the
story's power.  This is an incredible debut from first-time director
Chris Eyre, full of warmth, humor, and most of all, life.  Be sure to
catch it.  Without a doubt, it's one of the year's best.

E-Mail: jbarlow@earthling.net
Joe Barlow on Film:  http://www.ipass.net/~jbarlow/film.htm
