Authors
Anton J. Panagos
Number of Reviews
4

Title
Review for Naked Gun: From the Files of Police Squad!, The (1988)
Movie Review 1 - "A Fish Called Wanda" (R) - (Comedy)
**************   ------------------------------------
     This movie has to be the funniest comedy I have seen in 4 or 5 years.  The
movie stars John Cleese, of Monty Python fame, Jaime Lee Curtis, and Kevin
Kline.  A FISH CALLED WANDA has sick jokes, dirty jokes, dead animal jokes,
and a very good plot.  The plot concerns a gang of thieves who decide to rob a
bank of 10 million dollars worth of diamonds and jewels.  All of the hoodlums
get away from the police from the robbery except one of them.  Deciding he will
probably go to jail never to see his reward, the caught hoodlum hides the loot
in a train station pay locker and hides the key to the locker in the treasure
chest located in the bottom of a goldfish aquarium!!!  Never mind that all of
the above occurs in the first ten minutes of the film!!!  John Cleese is
hilarious as the stiff-necked attorney who ends up getting involved in this
mess.  Jaime Lee Curtis and Kevin Kline, as two of the thieves, portray a
strange "sister-brother" relationship.  This wicked comedy is funny, funny,
funny.  The movie will soon be available on video.  It has played for a long
run in many movie theatres.  I rate it ***1/2 out of a possible four.
Mini Reviews  - "The Naked Gun" (PG) - Comedy
                 ---------------------------- 
     The movie stars Leslie Nielsen in an "Airplane"-type comedy filled with
slapstick, sight sags, and generally silly humor.  Priscilla Presley plays the
femme fatale to Nielsen's attempted straight-face approach to his role as a
bumbling police detective about to solve his biggest case.  The movie has
cameos from actors and sports heros including O.J. Simpson, Reggie Jackson,
and a look-alike to Queen Elizabeth.  This movie, though, is not *half* as
funny as A FISH CALLED WANDA.  THE NAKED GUN is still worth a see.  I rate
THE NAKED GUN ** out of four.

Title
Review for Silence of the Lambs, The (1991)
     Jonathan Demme creates a horrifying and gruesome story of two
serial killers.  One is an imprisoned and demented psychiatrist,
Hannibal "the cannibal" Lecter and the other is a serial killer on the
loose, Buffalo Bill.  
     Lecter is visited in his maximum-security cell by a young FBI
agent-in-training, Clarisse (played by Jodie Foster).  Clarisse had been
sent by her boss and trainer (played by Scott Glenn).  Lecter was jailed
for committing heinous crimes including cannibalism, hence the
nickname.  Clarisse's objective is to retrieve information from a
psychopath like Lecter in order catch Buffalo Bill.  Lecter is helpful,
at first.  But Clarisse is dealing with a highly intelligent and clever
criminal.
     On the other hand, Buffalo Bill is a serial killer who skins his
victims.  He kidnaps the daughter of a senator in West Virginia.  The
minute the news hits the FBI agency in Washington,DC, Clarisse offers a
"vacation" plan to Lecter as a supposed bribe.  The chase for Buffalo
Bill goes on from here.  Meanwhile problems occur with  Lecter after he
is transferred to a temporary cell ordered by his  officer-in-charge.  
     There are some explicit scenes of victims and of extreme violence
in this film.  The film lets us look into the mind of a serial killer.
There are many surprises and a heart-pounding ending in this
well-executed and mind-numbing movie.  The cinematography and music help
set the dark mood.  Anthony Hopkins performs  Hannibal Lecter to the
hilt.  It is the best acting performance of 1991, so far.  Hopkins
should be a shoo-in for a nomination for next year's Oscar awards.
Jodie Foster does a competent job as a FBI agent who learns very quickly
how dangerous her job can be.  Overall, "Silence of the Lambs" is
definately one of the best thrillers in a few years.  

Title
Review for Other People's Money (1991)
- Starring Danny DeVito, Penelope Ann Miller, Gregory Peck,
           Piper Laurie, and Dean Jones
     OTHER PEOPLE'S MONEY is a slightly humorous version of Oliver
Stone's WALL STREET.  OTHER PEOPLE'S MONEY is the story of a corporate
raider, played by DeVito, who wants to buy out a company.  He's so
ruthless that he is nickname "Larry the Liquidator."  The company DeVito
wants to buy goes by the name of New England Wire and Cable (as in
TELEPHONE wire and cable).  (There are even some obvious plugs for AT&T
phones!!)  The company is situated in a sleepy little town of Rhode
Island.  Trying to stop him are the chairman of the board of NEW&C,
great actor Gregory Peck, his wife, Piper Laurie, and their lawyer,
Penelope Ann Miller.  Miller and DeVito fight it out for who should keep
the company: DeVito, who will do anything to "help his stockholders," or
Miller, a clever business lawyer who will do almost anything to save the
old company and its employees.  The difference between this movie and
WALL STREET is that DeVito and Miller have a love interest.  Or is it a
lust interest?  
     Good performances are had by all, especially by DeVito.  DeVito has
a knack for nasty roles.  From RUTHLESS PEOPLE to THROW MOMMA FROM THE
TRAIN, he has delivered well.  Peck makes a short role interesting.  His
impressive speech at the annual shareholder's meeting is a notch in the
case against "liquidators."  Penelope Ann Miller gives a sultry but
otherwise okay role.  She's been cast in better roles, such as in THE
FRESHMAN.  Unfortunately, the movie was slowly paced with occasional
humor thrown in by DeVito.  The payoff at the end of the movie was not
really worth it either.   I'd give this movie this movie a "B" for
effort (on acting) but a "C" for execution.  The director, Norman
Jewison,  has directed better in other movies.  Jewison thought the
romance between DeVito and Miller was enough to carry the movie.  It
doesn't.  It isn't complex and neither is the plot revolving DeVito's
intended buy-out.  
     I'd rate this movie on a scale on 1 to 4 stars, a generous 2 stars
for the good, but not great acting.  OTHER PEOPLE'S MONEY is rated R for
language, and adult situations, but no violence.

Title
Review for Scent of a Woman (1992)
     SCENT OF A WOMAN is one of the best movies of the year.  The main
reason for the above statement: Al Pacino.  This is Pacino's best film
role since DOG DAY AFTERNOON.  The role is a fully rich one for Pacino,
and he plays it to the hilt.  SCENT OF A WOMAN is the story of a college
kid, aloofingly played by Chris O'Donnell, who spends the Thanksgiving
weekend as a paid housesitter for a blind, and totally obnoxious,
Vietnam vet, Al Pacino.
     Without spoiling the movie's many wonderful surprises, the movie 
contains a nice mix of drama and comedy.  There is also beautifully
filmed tango danced by one of the principal characters and newcomer
actress Gabrielle Anwar.  (This is not a spoiler, just look at any movie
ad for SCENT OF A WOMAN in any newspaper!)
     What makes the story fascinating?  The explanation of Al Pacino's
character by others and Pacino himself.  His relationship with the young
and innocent O'Donnell, who becomes his protege in life.  Pacino
"teaches" O'Donnell about basic instincts of life and surprisingly
Pacino learns a few things as well.  The movie's ending was fittingly
great.  SCENT OF A WOMAN may  be nominated for an Oscar in April, but Al
Pacino definitely deserves an Oscar for this winning role of a lifetime.
I'd rate SCENT OF A WOMAN **** stars out of possible ****
The film is rated (R) for profanity.
