Authors
Jean Krevor
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Remains of the Day, The (1993)
     Once again, your non-critical previewer has seen something so
worthwhile that she felt compelled to tell y'all about it.  This time
the film is THE REMAINS OF THE DAY.  I'm not sure when it opens, but
when it does, *see it*!!!
     It stars Anthony Hopkins as Stevens, the "perfect English Butler";
Emma Thompson as Miss Kenton, the housekeeper; Christopher Reeve as
Senator Lewis, the new owner of the estate where Stevens "buttles"; Peter
Vaughan as Stevens Sr.; and James Fox as Lord Darlington, the original
(during Stevens' time there) Lord of the Estate.
     The film opens in 1958, and Stevens is embarking in a journey
across England.  He is the "perfect English Butler," now employed by
Mr. Lewis, the new American owner of Darlington Hall, where Stevens
has spent the best part of his working life.  In the course of his trip,
through many breathtaking flashback sequences, Stevens reviews his life
in service to Lord Darlington, the former owner of Darlington Hall, and
what it was like to be in the middle of political intrigue,
relationships, and day to day life in the 1930s, while being completely
in blinders.
     That's all I can really say about the plot without spoiling the
film for you.  I assure you that it is quite worthwhile, and should be
in the running for Best Picture this year.  It was written by Kazuo
Ishiguro (! surprised me too!), and the novel THE REMAINS OF THE DAY
won the 1989 Booker Prize.
     Most of the other crew on this film are also known for their
work on such films as A ROOM WITH A VIEW, MR. AND MRS. BRIDGE, and
HOWARDS END.
     The costumes are lovely.  Being circa 1930s, they are not too far
off from what we'd see today in formal wear, and are absolutely
exquisite.
     Oh, the director is James Ivory, known for the above mentioned
films, as well as THE BOSTONIANS (also with Christopher Reeve),
MAURICE, and SLAVES OF NEW YORK.  He is currently working on a film
about Thomas Jefferson's Paris years as American Ambassador, starring
Nick Nolte and Greta Scacchi.  Filming begins in March 1994.
     In writing about this film I would be remiss if I didn't mention
the absolutely spectacular location work.  While the film was about one
location, many different British estates were used in the filming.
     The exteriors were shot at Dyrham Park; built around the turn of
the 18th century for a minister of William III, the mansion stands in a
valley, with fields and gardens and winding roads as far as the eye can
see.
     Many of the interior shots were filmed at Powderham Castle, near
Exeter.  This castle has been the seat of the Courtenays, Earls of
Devon, for over 600 years.  Here, they used the staircase hall (I wish
my *apartment* was as large and luxurious as this "hall"!), the Music
room, the Library (pant, pant, pant, ...) the "Ante room," and the State
bedroom, a place where I'm sure I could spend many a dreamy night....
     Other locations included Corsham Court in Wiltshire, today the
home of Lord Methuen.  Here they filmed the picture gallery, another
lust-worthy library, and the dining room--oh wow ... but I digress!
     The scenes in the servants' quarters were shot at Badminton House
in Gloucestershire, the seat of the Dukes of Beaufort.  As much of the
film takes place "below stairs," this location was quite important.  It
was difficult to find, as the lifestyle required in these manor houses
has become quite impossible to maintain for all but the most affluent
nobility.  Many of the "Backstairs" sections of English country houses
have been converted to restaurants, museum shops, flats for the
custodians.  Badminton is still a "living" house, however, the present
Duke and his family do live far more simply than their predecessors.
The servants' quarters remain as they were, although are largely
unoccupied.  It is interesting to note that it was much more difficult
to find these locations--kitchen, servants hall, Butler's pantry,
scullery, etc.---than to find the magnificent state rooms.
     Anthony Hopkins delivers a sterling performance, and if he doesn't
at least get nominated for the Oscar, I'll be quite surprised.  Emma
Thompson is lovely as usual, and considering that her role spans 30
years, is quite believable both as a 20 year old and a 50 year old.
Kudos to the makeup people, the aging is done both believably and
tastefully.
     Regards to all---this is your non-critical critic signing off..
     Oh, yes, I nearly forgot--disclaimer time: I'm not a
professional critic (could you tell? :-) and I do not receive any
remuneration for my commentary.  These opinions are mine and mine
alone, although you are quite welcome to share them!
