Authors
kota@poboxes.nospam.com (kota)
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Titanic (1997)
Disaster movies are viewed these days in the same light that horror
movies were viewed in the 80's: tastes great, less filling.
Dismissing James Cameron's Titanic as a disaster movie would be a
grave mistake however. With a budget exceeding $200 million, this is a
love story of shakespearean proportions in disguise. While the movie
does take place on the infamous ship, the story revolves around a
young couple, Jack (DiCaprio) and Rose (Winslet).
Jack Dawson and Rose DeWitt brings a level of poignancy to a sad
moment in history. Out of the 2200 plus passengers on the Titanic,
only about a third survived. This inevitable fact hangs in the air
like the dark clouds of an impending monsoon. Early in the film, we
are made aware that there are only enough boats to carry about half
the people on the ship. The arrogant director ignores the
recommendations of a more knowledgeable captain. The pompous
well-to-do passengers boast that the ship is unsinkable. Furthermore,
we have two powerful adversaries, Rose's mother and her fiance are out
to crush Jack. The deck is stacked against Jack, and he must make do
with what he was dealt.
Throughout the film we are made aware of the strict social structure
that divides the classes. The Titanic upper level is for the rich, and
the lower level is for the poor. The upper deck is lit by sunlight,
while the lower engine room is burning a hellish red from the fire
stacks. This dichotomy is ironic, since the poor are portrayed as
simple, fun loving do-gooders, and the rich are portrayed as
pretentious people in love with their own technology.
This movie is the epitome of the big-budget Hollywood movie. It has it
all; a love story, a social critique, and technical pyrotechnics that
must be seen to be believed. Ideally, you want the pieces to fit into
the mosaic, so that the seams are undetectable. Cameron's expert hand
has crafted a movie in which the audience is mesmerized until the very
end.
--
Please remove "nospam" to reply
http://www.poboxes.com/kota
