Authors
Davis Monroe
Number of Reviews
2

Title
Review for American Pie (1999)
With "Ten Things I Hate About You", "She's All That", "Idle Hands", "Cruel
Intentions", "Carrie 2", and "Never Been Kissed", I'm very tired of teenage
movies with bad teenage actors trying to make disastrous teenage
performances with lame teenage dialog and bad thirty year old directors. I'm
up to my ears in this crap and it keeps making money. "American Pie" isn't
ground breaking material. In fact, out of all the examples above, this film
is the best reason to fully examine why exactly this material is so beloved
by the 17-21 year old film audience.
Screenwriter Adam Herz and director Paul Weitz fashion "American Pie" as
this year's "Porky's". A movie about four high school seniors who vow to
lose their virginity before prom. Each one will woo a fellow student to
varying results, each will engage in completely unfunny comedic shenanigans
that left my screening audience with tears in their eyes. I had a lump of
coal in my stomach.
It's rare to come across a comedy that on the outside has really nothing
wrong with it. It tries to be funny. It's gross-out gags are appropriately
gross (but damn them for outright stealing the laxative gag, so soon at
least, from "Dumb And Dumber"). It also features the grotesquely gratuitous
nudity that I adore from a sex comedy. After "Pie" was served, I was left
with the feeling that the audience was had too easily. If this move would
have been half as clever as it could have been, we would be witness to the
biggest teenage comic gem since Ferris took the day off.
The script is a loose concoction of distressingly elementary teenage drama
intermixed with bawdy gags involving bodily secretions in beer, foreign
exchange students (actress Shannon Elizabeth will be forgiven when she
badmouths this performance in the future), self "love", and the typical
set-pieces that come around whenever a "movie" keg is tapped. The entire
film reeks of disrespect to females, but I will surely be creamed by
everybody for bringing that up. I'll just leave my criticisms to the simple
"It's just isn't funny". None of it. When Austin Powers drinks a cup of
liquefied stool or the South Park kids swear without remorse, both films
have plenty of ingenuity up their sleeves (in South Park's case, brilliant
musical numbers). We can count on hysterical visual gags or rip-roaring
lines to back up the questionable material. "American Pie" can't do this. It
isn't written with care or respect to the audience. Director Paul Weitz
doesn't help the proceedings by making "Pie" the most aesthetically bland
film of the year. That's surprising considering "Blair Witch Project" is
shot with a camcorder and "South Park" is a creation of construction paper
and glue. It's a long shot, but some style might have made the bad medicine
go down easier.
The cast if "American Pie" isn't anything to write home about. Chris Kline
was memorable in April's "Election" as the dimwitted jock with the heart of
gold. Here he plays... the dimwitted jock with the heart of gold. Those
scoring at home, scratch him off the list of ones to watch. Personal faves
Natasha Lyonne and Tara Reid are asked to do nothing more that be the
"girls" of the film. If they needed the money badly, that would explain
their presence. Both actresses have done better previously. Here's to the
hope that they make rent this month and get back to films that exploit their
respective talents more precision. Again I blame Paul Weitz's blasted
direction. All that is expected of this cast is reaction and shock, not
acting. Even comedy needs talented actors. That's why Eugene Levy ("SCTV")
makes the only favorable impression here. He's a comedy legend and he doesn'
t have to break a sweat to make a joke click. The rest of the cast could
learn a thing or two.
"American Pie" is like catnip for teens. It's outrageous, it's naughty, and
the boys are cute. There's always that feeling when I don't like a certain
comedy that I didn't quite get it. I don't feel that here. "Pie" is a bad
film. A comedy that forgot the jokes and remembered the
nonsense.---------------- 2

Title
Review for Arlington Road (1999)
The idea of a slick Hollywood thriller is a tricky thing. The film wants to
give the audience the thrills they were promised, but yet the artists
involved also want to give the audience something of substance. A carefully
realized thought or topical plotline that can give the otherwise lightweight
film so much dramatic weight. "Arlington Road" is the perfect example of
this type of movie. A movie that tries to balance both thrills and thought
on the same platter.
Michael Faraday (Jeff Bridges) is a professor who teaches a course in
terrorism at a local college. When he rescues a neighbor's child from death
one afternoon, Michael begins to get to know the mysterious nearby
residents(Tim Robbins, Joan Cusack), letting them into his life and into the
life of his child and girlfriend (Hope Davis). When Michael begins to
suspect the couple of possible militia involvement, he unknowingly sets off
a chain reaction of events that will change his life forever.
Director Mark Pellington is a veteran of music videos (Pearl Jam's "Jeremy")
and one other feature, 1997's ultra thin "Going All The Way". His style is
very specific: throw the camera around a bit, light the whole thing with a
$1.99 flashlight - who cares if this artistic choice hinders the scene - and
most importantly, get great actors to spew out incredibly bad lines of
dialog but still are able to retain a certain amount of credibility. This is
a very junky thriller with lots of potential but Pellington is not a very
good director and "Arlington Road" is about half of a great film. While
tension-filled, the film doesn't ever really take off the way most of us
would love to see. The film remains too grounded in it's own pretentious
delivery to ever breathe freely.
Jeff Bridges is coming off playing the most career-defining role he has ever
played, that of Jeff Lebowski in the Coen Brother's "The Big Lebowski"(but
you can call him "The Dude"). It was a brilliant performance, cementing
Bridges's reputation as the best of his breed. A real middle American actor
with range to spare and talent to burn. "Arlington" asks Bridges to turn his
trademark wild-eyed paranoia bit into a full scale performance. Nobody can
play skepticism like Bridges. Nobody. It comes as no wonder to tell you that
Jeff Bridges is the one thing that keeps you glued to the screen in
"Arlington". All the twists and turns in the world cannot save a inherently
bad film. Bridges makes you want to see what the outcome of this highly
implausible thriller is going to be. At turns heartbreaking (in scenes
involving Michael's recollection of his dead wife) and deeply disturbing
(the discovery of the dying boy that opens the film), Bridges's performance
is spot-on the entire film.
The rest of the cast is less successful. I admire Tim Robbins more for his
directing lately than his acting. The film doesn't give Robbins much more to
do except look menacing. It's not one of his superior performances. Joan
Cusack is also wasted in a role that is way beneath what she is capable of.
What she does do with her small character leaves a mark, but so much more
should have been accomplished with her. I blame Ehren Kruger's ungraceful
script. The screenplay is full of twists, each one a little more theatrical
than the last. I know that this is a movie with a movie plot, but Kruger
occasionally drops tidbits of real interesting dialog and story with Michael
's lectures to his terrorism class. These scenes are the best in the film.
They give the character the depth needed for the climax of the film, and
they truly give off the uneasy vibe of militias and terrorism that the rest
of the film works overtime to achieve.
The ending of "Arlington Road" is one that will be the one thing most talked
about when this movie is discussed. It is very disturbing, very vivid, and
entirely appropriate. It's also one I wish I could explain in great detail
here, but I won't. This conclusion is something that Pellington and Kruger
do perfectly. The rest of the film is never really inadequate, just missing
something that obviously Pellington couldn't provide: a strict narrative and
appropriate visual choices. I wish him luck in the future, but if he never
makes another film, that will be good luck for us all.----- 6
