Authors
Brian Finkelstein
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Cop Land (1997)
[My understanding is that this film is still unfinished, so keep that in
mind.  -Moderator]
OK, here's the deal guys.  I normally would not review a movie for the
masses, but in this case I felt that I needed too because I saw the
movie several months before any of the normal NET critics will so I
must share my insights but I'll keep it short.
Copland is a movie starring DeNiro and Stallone along with several other
big names.   Basically it's about a bunch of city cops who spend their
free time in Garrison New Jersey and are all thoroughly corrupt.  They
keep the town safe, but their bring their warped sense of fairness and
justice with them across the symbolic bridge.
This flick has many, many problems.  First is the acting of Sheriff
Freddie, played by Stallone, who allows the big city cops to do
whatever they want.  He spends the entire movie with a decidedly
retarded expression on his face.  The character was supposed to be deaf
in one ear, and it is possible to image Stallone reading the script and
thinking to himself, "He's so stupid that he can't hear!  I'll play
this role as if he were retarded."  Stallone stands with his jaw agar
for at least 1 hour of this 1-1/2 hour movie.
Aside from Stallone's acting, the rest of the problems are entirely
script related.  There are seemingly dozens of sideplots relating to the
Mafia and love interests that are never explained or resolved.  They are
brought up, explained quickly, thought about for a second, and then
forgotten never to be brought up again.  Also, the fact that there are
dozens of characters that are constantly in motion and are never truly
memorable was less then helpful.  Several times during the movie I found
myself turning to my friends and asking-- who's that?  who's that?
All in all, this movie had little merit except for a slightly
entertaining sequence in the beginning showing the parallels between
city and suburban police life.  I have intentionally given away very
little of the plot as the movie has yet to be released so changes can
easily be made, but this movie was too far gone... I urge each and every
one of you reading this, don't see the movie-- it's not worth the seven
dollars.
This is the first review i've done, i'd love to hear how i'm doing...
