Authors
Carolyn Ford
Number of Reviews
2

Title
Review for Mr. & Mrs. Bridge (1990)
     The following musings are not really a review of the movie Mr. AND
MRS. BRIDGE, but are, well, musings.  I have not included any
spoiler warnings, because the movie does not really have any surprises.
     MR. AND MRS. BRIDGE is one of the most depressing movies I've seen
in a long time.  Why, you ask?  Because it's about my family.  And I'll
bet it's about a lot of your families, too.  Granted, my family was
not nearly as wealthy as the Bridges (I'd classify us as comfortably
middle-class), but my mom suffered from the same slow nullification
of her personhood as Mrs. Bridge.  How many of us had mom's who were
raised to believe that the most noble aspiration a woman could have
was to dedicate her life to her husband and kids?  How many of our
moms ended up lost and completely insecure when we became teenagers
and didn't want her around all the time anymore, and dad was too busy
with his career to give her a sense of importance?  
     MR. AND MRS. BRIDGE is a most damning view of the "traditional"
family unit and the devastation it has on the women who have given up
all their dreams and talents to serve a family that, after a while,
doesn't even seem to need them anymore.  Are they supposed to get
fulfillment from silly painting classes and endless games of bridge
(hmmm ...  hadn't noticed that connection to the movie before)?  By
keeping their wives completely buffered and protected from everything
outside the home, the husbands functionally and emotionally disable
their wives to the point where they don't even have their own opinions.
     As depressing at it was, I liked MR. AND MRS. BRIDGE precisely
because I hated PEGGY SUE GOT MARRIED.  Were we really supposed to
believe that Peggy Sue could give up all her hopes and dreams and get
fulfillment solely from her kids and husband?  I think not!  I think MR.
AND MRS. BRIDGE is a sequel to PEGGY SUE GOT MARRIED showing us what
really happened to Peggy Sue several years later.
     I applaud MR. AND MRS. BRIDGE for challenging our comfortable
image of how "right" the traditional family unit is, and for pointing
out how many people (women) have given up their entire lives for a myth.

Title
Review for White Sands (1992)
     WHITE SANDS is about an Estancia, New Mexico sheriff (Willem Dafoe)
who is trying to discover who killed a man found near the town.  Also
found with the dead man is a briefcase containing half a million
dollars.  Along the way, he gets entangled with the FBI, goes
undercover, and gets involved with Mickey Rourke and Mary Elizabeth
Mastrantonio.  I went to see  this because I grew up in northern New
Mexico, and heard it had a lot of good New Mexico scenery.  It does have
good scenery, but that's about it.  From the commercials, it looks like
it's going to be an action-packed adventure, which I think it was
supposed to be.  I'm having a hard time putting my finger on what didn't
work with this movie.  It seemed more like an outline or idea for a
movie.  There was plenty of blood and guts, killings, and  nasty people,
but somehow it just didn't involve me.  Thinking back through the plot,
it seems like it should have been exciting, but when it was over, I was
surprised, because I was still expecting the climax.
     The scenery, as I said, was beautiful, if you like New Mexico,
which I do.  However, they did play fast and loose with the size of the
state.  New Mexico is a huge state (even though many people don't even
realize it *is* a state), and you just don't bop down to White Sands
from Santa Fe for the afternoon.   Albuquerque is a long way from Taos,
etc., etc., and they seemed to make these trips back and forth with no
time delay at all.
     Another one of my big complaints is that Hollywood seems to think
that New Mexico is beautiful desert and mountain scenery populated by a
bunch of Texans.  Dafoe's character didn't suffer from this, but
incidental characters (Santa Fe locals and such) always seemed to talk
with Texas accents.  And they had country music playing in the lobby of
La Fonda hotel!  Give me a break!  They play more jazz and new-age type
music there, and Santa Fe is not real big on country music.  Hollywood
seems to think of "Southwest" as "Texas Cowboys."  Not that I'm slamming
Texas (after all, I live here now) but New Mexico is *completely
different*!
     Anyway, I can't recommend this movie based on plot, but it's a
pretty picture, and Mastrantonio's character has an absolutely gorgeous
house.
