Authors
Chad Polenz
Number of Reviews
295

Title
Review for Nothing to Lose (1997)
Nothing To Lose
Chad'z rating: *** (out of 4 = good)
1997, R, 97 minutes [1 hour, 37 minutes]
[comedy/crime]
starring: Tim Robbins (Nick), Martin Lawrence (T. Paul), John C. McGinley
(Davis "Rig" Lanlow), Giancarlo Esposito (Charlie Runt), produced by Martin
and Michael Scott Bregman, Dan Jinks, written and directed by Steve Oedekerk.
Hmmm.... something's not right here. The elements that make up "Nothing To
Lose" are pretty much the same old stuff: completely opposite characters who
become best friends; a long road trip; many chase scenes; an intricate
robbery; a few cliffhangers here and there; and some supposedly sentimental
scenes. Taking this into account, it's surprising I liked this film, but I
guess I shouldn't look a gift horse in the mouth.
The setup to the story is so basic the film wastes no time in trying to
establish details and sub-plots. Oedekerk knows you want to see the funny
mismatched buddy comedy the promotions promise, and he gets right to it in
less than 15 minutes. 
We meet Nick (Robbins), your typical L.A. middle-aged yuppie who comes home
from work early one day to find his wife having an affair. But this film is
very lighthearted and instead of some piss-off scene, Nick just quietly walks
out the door and drives off in his GMC Yukon not knowing where he's going. Of
course when people are depressed they never make smart driving decisions and
thus he ends up on the wrong side of town and is carjacked by T. Paul (a
character that could only be played by Martin Lawrence). But Nick doesn't
care, he goes ballistic and drives his truck all over the place in a
situation that could only happen in such a Hollywood comedy. When the two
find themselves way out in Arizona it's obvious the roles have reversed.
The film goes through the motions you'd expect it to, first: bickering. T.
Paul can read Nick like a book and they start to argue, which then leads to
the next logical step: fighting. The two don't really get in a fist-fight,
instead they just wrestle around like kids - but the fact this takes place at
a redneck coffee shop with characters who interact is what makes it funny. 
Of course the next step is reconciliation. From here on the film becomes a
funny comedy about the two being in the wrong place at the wrong time. They
are mistaken for two highway robbers - Davis "Rig" Lanlow (McGinley) and
Charlie Runt (Esposito) who don't like their image being clouded by Nick and
T. What ensues are scenes on top of scenes of the comedic crime genre. I
don't think I've ever seen a film about "accidental" crime before, nor one
about a yuppie who decides to become a robber. Maybe this isn't the most
realistic premise, but you have to admit it's original.
Nick and T. figure out a way to rip off thousands of dollars from Nick's
boss, and the way they must go about this and the robbery itself is strange
but quite funny. I've always wondered why criminals have to be so mean and
the film answers this with another funny robbery scene in which the two argue
with an old clerk about who was "scarier."
Although the film remains pretty consistent in terms of storytelling and
comedy, it does start to weaken as the last act approaches. It's difficult to
describe specific flaws without spoiling the entire story, but let's just say
it doesn't live up to your expectations. On the other hand, I have to give
the film credit for throwing in as many plot twists as it does. 
I'm still not sure why I liked "Nothing To Lose." Was it the acting? Maybe.
Robbins and Lawrence make a funny odd couple. Was it the story? Maybe. It
certainly wasn't what I expected it to be. Was it the screenplay itself?
Maybe. I've seen better though. So what was wrong with it? Nothing as a
whole, but it's far from perfection.
Please visit Chad'z Movie Page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz - over 140
new and old films reviewed in depth, not just blind ratings and quick
capsules. Also, check out The FIRST Shay Astar Web Page @
http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz/ShayAstar.html

Title
Review for Bounce (2000)
Did you notice Hollywood doesn't really make romances anymore? Movies today 
are rarely centered around a man and woman who meet, fall in love, have their 
share of problems and either break up or stay together forever. That only 
tends to happen in "period pieces" or as sub-plots in movies about other 
subjects. "Bounce" is the first movie to come along in a while that's 
actually set in the present day, is about real people really falling for each 
other. The problem is there's a secret between them, it's the film's niche 
but it becomes so overbearing at times the romance becomes virtually 
unbelievable. 
Ben Affleck and Gwyneth Paltrow star here as Buddy Amaral and Abby Janello. 
They're good friends in real life and each has played romantic leads in other 
movies about modern-day star-crossed lovers. They come together here in a 
rather unusual way and once they get together they're immediately locked into 
a close-knit relationship. 
The film tells the story of how Buddy met Abby - through a traumatic situation
that some might pin on fate but others might attribute to luck but the 
most cynical will say randomness has nothing to do with it. 
Buddy is a Los Angeles-based advertising exec stuck at O'Hare airport in 
Chicago waiting for his flight to get clearance to take off in the snowy 
weather. While waiting in an airport bar he picks up a hot chick named Mimi 
(Natasha Henstridge) and befriends a man named Greg. The three converse as if 
they were old friends. Buddy is funny and charming and when he hears Greg 
talk about how he wishes he could get home to L.A. earlier Buddy gives him 
his plane ticket and manages to convince the airline's ticket checker to let 
him on no problem (which is a serious FAA violation in case you didn't know - 
I didn't). That plane crashes. Buddy feels a little relieved he wasn't on 
that flight and a little sorry Greg had to die but it bounces off his thick 
shell quite easily. Meanwhile we cut back to L.A.and meet Greg's wife Abby 
who is put through an emotional hell because she was certain Greg wasn't on 
that flight and shouldn't have been. 
I'd seen the preview for "Bounce" at least 20 times this summer and it 
portrayed the love affair between Buddy and Abby as being purely chance. 
However, the actual screenplay here is much different and I think I have to 
take the more cynical route in discussing how Buddy and Abby meet and fall in 
love. 
Buddy enters re-hab for three months and upon his release he tracks down 
Greg's family. He stalks Abby for a day and pretends to be an interested 
buyer in the property she's showing (Abby's a real estate agent), but is so 
smitten by her beauty he can't bring himself to tell the truth and pursues 
her as he would any other woman. Through a series of pretty quirky and 
somewhat humour events the two flirt, have a lot of awkward pauses, go on one 
date, almost decide to give up on each other, but then quickly realize they 
probably are perfect for each other and suddenly fall into a very serious 
relationship. 
There's really no sub-plots going on throughout this movie. The screenplay is 
focused mainly on Buddy and his battle with his inner demons over whether he 
should tell Abby he's responsible for her husband's death. He's also a 
recovering alcoholic and there's a few scenes of drama along those lines. Not 
surprisingly Buddy's assistant is a young gay man who's also a recovering 
drunk and gives him the kick in the pants and makes for the obligatory gay 
one-liners we've come to expect in such movies (but which are funnier on 
television). 
For the most part "Bounce" works as a fine dramedy. It's constantly on the 
edge between super-serious drama and all-out melodrama. Let's face it, under 
these circumstances can this story really be told in a believable, realistic 
manner? 
Writer/director Don Roos does his best to pull it off but he only partially 
succeeds. The film is very reminiscent of another Ben Affleck romantic 
dramedy, "Chasing Amy." The romance between Buddy and Abby is pretty much 
plugged-in and implied through a lot of musical montages and cute scenes of 
Buddy having to meet Abby's friends and relatives and relate to her two young 
boys. Paltrow's screen time is surprisingly short compared to Affleck's, and 
most of what she does on film is look pretty, try hard not to cry, and spout 
a lot of dramatic cliches. 
The last act of the film takes a turn for the worst in all ways, for both the 
characters and the movie itself. It becomes a rollercoaster of emotional 
battles and thus many tear-jerking scenes ensue. I have no problem with drama 
but "Bounce" dabbles with melodrama and tries to play it off as nothing and 
it doesn't work. The story is very predictable when things get so dramatic so 
you feel you're being pandered to than watching an authentic drama. 
"Bounce" might have worked a lot better if it had a different hook. That 
Buddy and Abby are able to get together despite the fact he's indirectly 
responsible for her husband's death is an acceptable premise. The way the 
story is told just doesn't convey that as plausible. 
------------------------------------------------------------------------ 
You can also read this review at: 
http://www.epinions.com/mvie-review-760A-3D19FAA5-3A22AADD-prod6 
And other reviews on the same topic at: http://www.epinions.com/mvie 
Check out my profile page at: http://www.epinions.com/user-chad9976 
*****
Chad'z Movie Page is back! 
In-depth reviews of nearly all mainstream films playing at your local 
cineplex. There's also reviews of a few classic films and some of your 
personal favorites.

Title
Review for Welcome to the Dollhouse (1995)
Welcome To The Dollhouse
Chad'z Rating: ***1/2 (out of 4 = very good)
1996, R, 87 minutes [1 hour, 27 minutes]
[drama/satire]
starring: Heather Matarazzo (Dawn Wiener), Brendan Sexton Jr. (Brendan
McCarthy), Eric Mabius (Steve), Matthew Faber (Mark Wiener), written,
produced, and directed by Todd Solondz.
Kids can be so cruel. We'd like to think that in America we live in a land
of individuals, and we do for the most part, but never in educational
institutions - why is that? Nowhere in the world is the invisible caste
system so rigid and strict as that of children in Junior and Senior high
school. "Welcome To The Dollhouse" is a different, creative, funny, and at
times disturbing story of a girl who isn't accepted at all. It makes us
wonder why she has to be such a pathetic victim.
Every school has at least one or two kids who never have and never will fit
it to any of the social groups because they are different and do everything
wrong. Heather Matarazzo stars as Dawn Wiener, a girl who fits that mold perfe
ctly. This is obvious right from the get-go as we see her walk through the
cafeteria in a desperate search for a seat where she might be "accepted."
Immediately we are given that feeling of cruel fate just from this shot
alone, but reality sinks in even more as the cheerleaders ask her if she is a
lesbian. We've known Dawn only a few minutes, and already we feel for her and
see the world through her eyes. No matter how hard she tries she'll never
win.
But the film is not entirely a dismal outlook, it's a serious drama but it
has a satirical tone to lighten it up. Reality isn't the same here because
everything is portrayed through Dawn's perspective. A bully named Brendan
(Sexton) tries to copy her test, but when she tries to turn him in she gets
in trouble too. To make matters worse, Brendan continues to taunt her during
the punishment without the teacher noticing. You just want to yell at the
teacher at tell her to look up for a second so justice might be done...
Dawn's home life is portrayed as just as unfair and satirical as school. Her
brother Mark (Faber) is a computer geek who also happens to have Steve
(Mabius), the guy all the girls want, in his garage band. But she can't
appreciate this because she always distracted by her annoying little sister
who can do no wrong in the eyes of her parents. 
These relationships often make for funny but sad encounters, such as when
Dawn and her sister get into a name-calling argument. Of course her sister
tattles and we hear a shouting match between Dawn and her mother in the
background. This is a great method of storytelling because it's reminiscent
of the times we went to our friend's house and heard them get in trouble with
their parents in the other room. The sibling rivalry comes to a boil when
Dawn purposely forgets to give her sister a message from her mother about
getting a ride home and results in her being kidnapped!
I realize Solondz is trying to make a point through exaggeration and brutal
reality, but sometimes it's difficult to tell where the reality ends and the
satire begins. For example, when Dawn is constantly harassed by Brendan, to
the point where he threatens to "rape" her, it seems a little out of touch
because he doesn't know what rape is. Just the fact Dawn agrees to go along
with him is unbelievable. 
"Welcome To The Dollhouse" is a good depiction of children's caste system
and cruel mistreatment of each other without purpose. There's a lot of unfair
things about life, it's nice to see a film play upon that universal truth. 
Please visit Chad'z Movie Page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz - over 140
new and old films reviewed in depth, not just blind ratings and capsules.
Also, check out The FIRST Shay Astar Web Page @
http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz/ShayAstar.html

Title
Review for Scream (1996)
Scream
Chad'z rating: *** (out of 4 = good)
1996, R, 111 minutes [1 hour, 51 minutes]
[horror]
starring: Neve Campbell (Sidney), Courtney Cox (Gail Weathers), Skeet Ulrich
(Billy), Matthew Lillard (Stu), written by Kevin Williamson, produced by
Cathy Konrad, Cary Woods, directed by Wes Craven.
Of all the genres out there, horror is probably the most difficult to work
with in terms of making something really original (aren't they all about
stupid teenagers getting hacked up?). Given that, you'd think satirizing the
genre would be simple, but "Scream" disproves both of these ideas. It works
as a wholly original horror film by, ironically, blatantly admitting it's a
"Dead Teenager Movie" and exploiting itself.
The film opens in typical "slasher flick" style by depicting a girl (Drew
Barrymore) home alone on a Friday night getting ready to watch some "scary
videos" with her soon-to-be-arriving boyfriend. The phone rings and it's a
guy with a scary, but somehow charming voice. The two talk until the guy
sounds like a psychotic stalker and the mood becomes full of thick suspense
within a matter of minutes. Since this is a horror film you know what's going
to happen, but the script is so fluid and the scene shot with such
plausibility you can't help but be caught up in the tension of it all. It's a
90s take on countless bad scenes of such from the 70s and 80s and it works.
In fact, this is how the film works as a whole. The horror genre is pretty
much dead (no pun intended) as far as Hollywood is concerned, so what makes
the film appealing is the realistic way it deals with the plot of
masked-psycho-killer-on-the-loose-in-a-small-town. The main characters are
mostly teens who grew up on "Dead Teenager" movies and look back at them with
a more intelligent and mature manner. When they hear about the masked
murderer they can't believe what's happening because it's so much like a
movie but this time it's real (well, you know what I mean).
I'm afraid to describe any of the numerous details, even giving away the
basic plot might be too much of a spoiler. Basically, it's the story of a
girl named Sidney (Campbell) whose mother was raped and murdered a year ago,
and now the masked murderer who killed the girl in the beginning is after
her. Since this isn't a sequel to anything it's obvious the killer must be
someone right under our nose, but who could it be? 
Williamson's script, as directed by Craven makes every character seem like a
suspect, not because they seem like they'd be a silent psychopath but because
they don't (it's always the last person you suspect eh?). One by one, main
and supporting characters are knocked off but done so in such close proximity
to each other (in terms of physical space and elapsed time) it's impossible
to tell who the killer is. 
The only problem I had was the execution scenes where the characters always
manage to fight back and stall the killer, but of course trap themselves in
the process. Sometimes this seems just plain  cheesy (why does only Sidney
turn into a superhero but not the other victims?).
I'm not sure about the ending though. In one way you could say it follows
the logical conclusion of the film when it reveals the killer and their
motive, but in another way you could say it contradicts the entire premise by
doing so. I found the ending to be a bit more surrealistic and violent than
necessary. Maybe there shouldn't have been an ending at all, but since the
entire film exploits itself in leading up to the ending I guess it makes
sense.
"Scream" isn't a work of genius, but it's not a bad movie. Sometimes it
tries too hard to make for suspense, but it works as a whole by constantly
throwing plot twists and making us wonder what's going to happen next. When's
the last time a horror movie did that?
Please visit Chad'z Movie Page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz - over 140
new and old movies reviewed in depth - not just quick capsules and blind
ratings. Also, check out The FIRST Shay Astar Web Page @
http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz/ShayAstar.html

Title
Review for Mission: Impossible (1996)
**1/2 (out of 4 = OK)
1996, PG-13, 110 minutes [1 hour, 50 minutes]
[thriller/action]
starring: Tom Cruise (Ethan Hunt), Jon Voight (Jim Phelps), Emmanuelle Beart
(Claire), Henry Czerny (Kittridge), written by  David Koepp, Robert Towne,
Steven Zaillian, produced by Tom Cruise, Paula Wagner, directed by Brian De
Palma, based on the television series created by Bruce Geller.
In Hollywood, the way to make an audience think a movie is well crafted and
full of detail is to make the plot very confusing but the individual events
interesting. "Mission: Impossible" is probably the epitome of this type of
mindset, as it follows it to the letter. Some of the scenes and events are
pretty interesting, but from beginning to end it's nearly impossible to
follow as a whole.
Although the movie is based on the television series of the same name, it
bears little, if any, resemblance to its inspiration. It starts off in the
spirit of the series by showing a team of super sneaks and computer hackers
trying to sabotage a foreign embassy banquet. There is Tom Cruise as Ethan
Hunt, the fearless agent who plunges deep into "enemy" territory under a
perfect disguise. There is Jon Voight as Jim Phelps, the wise old leader who
coordinates the team via super advanced technology. And there are also two
women (Emmanuelle Beart and Kristen Scott-Thomas) undercover, along with the
wiseass hacker (played by Emilio Estevez in an uncredited role). 
At first their teamwork seems to have a lot of potential to it; the
chemistry between the characters more than makes up for the loopy plot. It's
interesting to watch them use such fantastic technology, such as micro
cameras inside their glasses, and lots of computer hacking. The story doesn't
seem like something to take seriously, and it even could have been a good
satire like James Cameron's "True Lies." Unfortunately, something terrible
goes wrong and all the team members start getting killed, except for heroic
Ethan Hunt of course. And just as all these bad things start happening to the
characters, the same thing happens to the movie.
Ethan escapes and makes it back to the group's makeshift headquarters and
from here on the film has a huge snowballing effect with conspiracies,
espionage, computer crime, money laundering, and any government-related,
white collar crime you can think of. There are the token scenes as Ethan
starts to put clues together and realizes things that were under his nose all
along. Scenes like these can have a  chilling effect when done properly (a la
"Sneakers"), but it doesn't occur here because the story is too hard to
follow. For example, Ethan's mission was called "Job 314," and when he sees a
Bible, he realizes it's a code for the book of Job, chapter three, verse 14.
He even figures out someone's e-mail address from this quote!
You have to give this movie credit, it knows it's confusing, but at least it
throws in a lot of individual, [supposedly] suspenseful scenes. One such
incident involves the breaking into CIA headquarters with sensors so
sensitive alarms will go off even if a drop of sweat hits the floor. Break-in
scenes like this all always the same - the heroes barely accomplish their
mission by doing tasks at the last possible nanosecond and just when they
think they're in the clear, an accident happens and we get a terrific battle
and/or escape scene. 
The ending is an action/adventure extravaganza; the enemy turns out to be
the person you'd least expect with a lot of double crosses and tricks. Tom
Cruise peels off a mask to reveal his face so many times, it's difficult to
tell if his character is the same person in every scene. There is a scene
with fantastic stunts and special effects with a helicopter chasing a train
through a tunnel... if you've seen the highlights you know where this is
going (not to mention the whole movie for that matter).
I don't know why "Mission: Impossible" was made the way it was. You would
think the filmmakers would realize how confusing it is and try to clear up
the story a little, but they probably just assumed the whole reason to make
it and to watch it is for the special effects and the neat gadgets. Yes,
these elements are well done, but what good will they do if we have no idea
what's going on? 
Please visit Chad'z Movie page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz

Title
Review for Me, Myself & Irene (2000)
Carrey plays Charlie - an overly friendly, gutless Rhode Island bike cop who 
one day snaps and develops a
split personality whereby he becomes Hank - a ruthless, twisted enforcer. At 
first the extreme lengths
"Hank" goes to in order to get his way are funny, but it's a joke that can't 
carry an entire film. Especially
one where the plot is non-existent and the screenplay so poorly developed the 
cliches are about the only
thing going for it. 
The jokes here are intended to appeal to the modern audience's craving of the 
extreme, but it comes off as
tired and unoriginal. The film's vulgarity quotient is just absurd and 
offensive. 
Chad'z Movie Page is back! 
New reviews of the latest movies in easy-to-swallow capsule form with the 
trendy, Entertainment Weekly-style of letter grades instead of the old star 
system. Have I sold out? Visit my page and decide for yourself ;-)

Title
Review for Nineteen Eighty-Four (1984)
**1/2 (out of 4 = OK)
1984, R, 115 minutes [1 hour, 55 minutes]
[science fiction/drama]
starring: John Hurt (Winston Smith), Suzanna Hamilton (Julia), Richard Burton
(O'Brien), produced by Simon Perry, written by Michael Radford, Jonathon
Gems, directed by Radford, based on the novel by George Orwell.
When a film is based on a famous novel, the filmmakers often make the
mistake of assuming the viewer is familiar with the material and thus don't
provide necessary details. "1984" is a perfect example of this. The film has
what could and should be very intelligent themes, but it seems more
interested in its Gothic atmosphere than telling its story.
The film is based on George Orwell's novel and it does an excellent job of
capturing the dark mood of the extremely oppressive government where everyone
must work "for the common good" and free will and free thinking is not
allowed. 
The main character is Winston Smith (Hurt), a man who looks like he has been
worked to death his entire life. We learn he has a passionate, but silent,
hatred for his government. But the only thing Winston can do to fight back is
to keep a journal of his thoughts and a constant belief in hope.
The first act is a surrealistic experience. We often go inside the mind of
Winston and see encounters so bizarre it is often difficult to tell the dream
sequences apart from reality. There isn't much dialogue, so we learn about
the setting through Winston's thoughts, which sound so vague and overly
written they don't make much sense. 
Winston is some sort of record keeper for the government. He "erases"
certain people from existence and rewrites history according to the
government's demands. There is also a woman who seems to take an interest in
him, and the two must use very secretive measures to communicate with each
other. Eventually he learns her name is Julia (Hamilton), and they
immediately indulge in a secret, but  passionate affair. It is implied they
love each other even though they have no chemistry and barely know each
other. 
As easy as it is to understand how oppressive this government is, it doesn't
take the time to establish the necessary details which would explain why
Winston and Julia must be so secretive. There are two-way television monitors
just about everywhere, so to escape the eye of "Big Brother" (who has the
voice of a woman) they rent a room in the ghettos of the "Proletarians." The
Proletarians are poor people who seem to live in the same place as the
masses, yet are not oppressed and no reason for this is given, not even in
passing.
The final act aims to be the brilliant political allegory that is the basis
of the story, but only scratches the surface. Winston is befriended by a high
government official, O'Brien (Burton), who he believes is actually the leader
of an underground revolution. But everything falls apart when he and Julia
are caught, tortured, and brain-washed. Burton gives a cold, but powerful
performance as O'Brien as he speaks of the establishment in ways that should
be thought-provoking, but seem little more than fascist/sci-fi moviespeak. 
"1984"seems more like a collection of images rather than a straight story.
Radford is obviously trying to set up plot and theme through surrealism, but
it doesn't work because all the details seem to be implied.
Please visit Chad'z movie Page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz

Title
Review for 54 (1998)
Chad'z rating: ** (out of 4 = fair/below average)
1998, R, 95 minutes [1 hour, 35 minutes]
Starring: Ryan Phillippe (Shane O'Shea), Mike Myers (Stevie Rubell), Salma
Hayek (Anita), Neve Campbell (Julie Black); produced by Ira Deutchman, Richard
N. Gladstein, Dolly Hall; written and directed by Mark Christopher.
Seen August 30, 1998 at 6:45 p.m. at Rotterdam Square Mall Cinema 6
(Rotterdam, NY), with Renée Gentile for free using my Sony/Loews critic's
pass. [theater rating: ***: good seats, picture, and sound]
        Some films from the last few years have had simple stories and plot actions,
but have succeeded as fascinating pieces of film-making. Just the opposite is
true of "54," in which a large amount of action happens, and yet by the end,
nothing interesting has happened. It's the most commotion a film can make
without saying anything at all.
        Right from the opening it's clear the film doesn't want to make much of an
effort at detail, setting, or other such elements necessary to flesh-out an
atmosphere that a story like this should have. The time is the late 1970s
where the world seems to be in crisis, but everyone is partying like there's
no tomorrow. We only learn this through a quick montage and voice-over by the
main character Shane (Phillippe), a young stud from New Jersey (complete with
token accent) who lives across the river from New York City where he dreams of
going to make it big.
        But the film is not really Shane's story, it's the story of "Studio 54," an
infamous nightclub where anyone who is anyone is seen, from celebrities, to
artists, and all the regular, everyday people who are fortunate enough to be
hand-picked by the club's director, Stevie Rubell (Myers). Shane tells us
Rubell somehow built the club from the ground up, and managed to make it THE
place to be. But here's the first of the film's many holes - how did Rubell
manage to gain such an reputation from the club? Why does he claim it's a
place where the common can disco with the elite on the dance floor as equals
when he refuses to let the most common people in the door?
        Shane was one of those fortunate enough to be picked by Rubell because of his
image and attitude. Of course his dorky friends aren't allowed in, but after
initially defending them, he has a change of heart and almost instantly turns
into the Studio 54-type where all that matters is the glamour in the midst of
the anarchy. Nothing really surprising is going on at this club, so what if
people are doing drugs and having sex out in the open? I'm sure that was quite
shocking at the time, but the way writer/director Mark Christopher tells it,
it's brushed off as no big deal.
        What is a big deal is the money flow. Shane is hired as a busboy and quickly
learns the club is run the way the mob might run a casino, where everyone
skims off the top and moves cash around in secretive manners. As if the script
hadn't been generic enough, Phillippe's monotone narration makes it bland and
boring to make sure there's not much shock value. But this contradicts what
seems to be the entire point of the film - to shock us with the outrageousness
that went on there (this is supposedly based on a true story), but there's no
hook to the delivery.
        The film does try to expand by occasionally going off on tangents to define
some of the other characters such as fellow busboy Greg (Breckin Meyer) and
his coat-checking wife Anita (Hayek), who let Shane shack up with them for a
while. What's surprising is the fact no cheesy love triangles come into play.
Shane and Anita become good friends, but their friendship is just as corny and
poorly-acted as a teen melodrama. Everyone's constantly hugging and of course
hanky-panky is suspected, haven't we seen this all before?
        Approximately 80 of the 95 minutes are completely conflict-free. What we get
is a collage of scenes at the club that have very little significance to
anything. When things start to slow down Shane miraculously stumbles upon
another of 54's secrets such as the basement room where celebrities hang out.
Shane himself wonders how Rubell could make a dirty old room underground the
place to be for the glitterite, but we never get much of an explanation. Maybe
because everyone's too high on drugs to think care - that explains it!
        Not until the last act, which last about 15 minutes does anything remotely
complicated happen. Rubell is busted by the IRS for tax evasion, but it's
amazing they took as long to shut the place down as they did. But the final
scene is a happy one, so at least we don't have to go home sad.
        I'm sure there's a message to "54," but how we're supposed to find it in the
midst of such a mess is beyond me. Maybe it's that having too much fun can be
hazardous to your health, but I think this film confuses fun with stupidity.


Title
Review for Devil's Advocate, The (1997)
1997, R, 138 minutes [2 hours, 18 minutes]
starring: Keanu Reeves (Kevin Lomax), Al Pacino (John Milton), Charlize
Theron (Mary Ann Lomax), Jeffrey Jones (Eddie Barzoon), written by Tony
Gilroy, Jonathon Lemkin, produced by Arnold and Anne Kopelson, Arnon Milchan,
directed by Taylor Hackford, based on the novel by Andrew Neiderman.
Seen Monday, October 20, 1997 at 7 p.m. at the Glenwood Movieplex Cinemas in
Oneida, N.Y., by myself for free (free pass). Theater rating: ***1/2
It's clear the premise to "The Devil's Advocate" is, "What if the devil came
to Earth in human form today?" That's certainly an original concept, and
surprisingly, this isn't any kind of disguised horror film. The problem is,
it's impossible to tell where the film intends to go with this concept until
the very end. 
Keanu Reeves stars as Kevin Lomax, a defense attorney from Florida who
doesn't always enjoy defending the accused, but he's never lost a case and
sees no reason to quit. The opening scene involves the trial of a child
molester which seems realistic for the most part, although one can't help but
notice the Hollywood atmosphere to it all. Still, Lomax manages to get
through the trial by introducing new evidence and twisting facts. For some
reason, it's hard to dislike Reeves' character, especially considering how
stiff he seems (playing a lawyer doesn't help any).
Soon the movie progresses as Kevin and his wife Mary Ann (Theron) move to
New York City where Kevin has just been offered a job at the top law firm in
the country. He knows how to pick favorable juries, and he proves his mettle
with these big shots as soon as he arrives. Kevin is so good, John Milton
(Pacino), a senior partner of the firm, not only congratulates him but
completely befriends him. Pacino is excellent and especially charming here as
this confident, intelligent executive. Milton  takes Kevin under his wing and
for the entire mid-section of the film, we get nothing but the atmosphere of
the rich, debutante lifestyle. Unfortunately, this is also the film's biggest
problem.
We already know Milton is actually Satan himself, but why is he here on
Earth and what does Kevin have to do with anything? The film barely provides
us with any clues to these questions. Some hints are slowly dropped, but
they're done so in generic horror manners. Instead of the characters'
dialogue and actions revealing their true identity, we get visions of demons
that are more startling than they are scary. Most of these incidents involve
Mary Ann, and of course she tries to explain what's going on and begs Kevin
to leave, but she also seems to be going insane. There's also an overall
feeling of surrealism and it's difficult to tell if things are real or
hallucinations or dreams. The screenplay's pacing does this in a
Hitchcock-esque way, but it doesn't play up its humanism as well as it
should.
For much of the film I just wondered where everything was going. There is
essentially no plot at all, and although the storytelling is fine, there just
seems to be an emptiness to it all. The first half concentrates mostly on the
characters which makes for good drama, but the second half seems to turn on a
dime into melodrama. All Mary Ann does is cry and scream while all Milton
does is talk to Kevin in more rhetoric which doesn't seem to have any
relevance.
The last act is not a resolution, but a culmination of the everything to
come before. The entire film exists for the ending, which is a cross between
modern mythology and classic philosophy. It's interesting to watch at the
time, but in retrospect, there still seems to be something missing. There's
actually two endings to the film - the first of is poetic, but the second I
didn't think was necessary (hint: it's reminiscent of "The Shining").
There's a lot of good stuff to "The Devil's Advocate," but the screenplay
and the individual events never seem to lead to anything or have a point. Its
originality is commendable, but this film could have been and should have
been much better than it is because it doesn't take enough advantage of its
thematic elements.


Title
Review for Independence Day (1996)

****
1996, PG-13, 145 minutes [2 hours, 25 minutes]
[science fiction]
starring: Bill Pullman (President Thomas Whitmore), Will Smith (Captain
Steve Hiller), Jeff Goldblum (Dave Levinson), Margaret Coplin (Connie),
Randy Quaid (Russell Case), Robert Loggia (General Gray), Judd Hirsch
(Julius "Pops" Levinson), produced by Dean Devlin, written by Dean Devlin,
Roland Emmerich, directed by Roland Emmerich.
        Wow! I am so blown away by this film that I am nearly speechless.
Rarely does a film come along that is such an excellent blend of excellent
storytelling, suspense, and adventure and is able to synchronize it as
well as this film does. At times this movie becomes something more, it is
something that can unite everyone together and move an audience. This is
an excellent achievement in great storytelling, special effects, and most
of all its ability to take a rather complicated plot and make it so
breezy. The sensation and excitement are unlike anything I've ever
experienced since the "Star Wars" trilogy, and that's something even
remotely difficult to stand up to.
The story starts out with some scientists realizing that something
huge is approaching the Earth and is giving off a radio code that is
reducing itself as it constantly recycles - a definite warning of some
type. It gets closer until they realize that it is actually a group of
huge UFOs approaching the Earth's atmosphere. Even though not much has
happened, the sense of intense excitement and suspense builds very
quickly, we are wondering who these aliens are and why they are here.
When the ships finally enter the atmosphere, panic ensues and
President Thomas Whitmore (Pullman) addresses the country and tries to
calm everyone down. One of the scientists who first discovered the aliens
(Jeff Goldblum as Dave Levinson) has an ex-wife (Margaret Coplin as
Connie) who is an assistant to the president and is able to meet with him
and warn him of the countdown. Suddenly the suspense builds to a boil as
they realize that they are about to be obliterated. We get quite a cliche
escape scene and many terrifying devastation scenes, but the suspense,
combined with the excellent special effects are so unbelievable that it is
all breathtaking.
What follows is a fantastic aerial battle between U.S. Marine F-18
Tomcats and alien ships, perhaps one of the single most exciting scenes I
have ever viewed. Just consider the situation for a minute, our own
military up against aliens from another planet - how cool is that? In most
stories of the genre we are so far behind in technology that we are
immediately incinerated, here we at least fight back, but do not win (at
first). 
Will Smith also stars as one of those pilots - Captain Steve
Hiller, and he was perfectly cast for the role. His character is quite
hyper and yet easy going, he seems so right for the film, unlike a
character that could have been played by Harrison Ford or Tom Cruise. When
Hiller is psyched to "whoop E.T.'s ass" we know exactly how he feels, and
when he is actually able to shoot down one of the aliens he is still so
psyched that he cold cocks the alien and knocks him out! It does not seem
at all corny or trite at the time, the audience is just as psyched and as
scared as Hiller is, it works well and this is how the entire movie feels.
We did not win because we cannot overpower their technology, will
these visitors conquer the planet or just destroy it? When the president
and the military all meet at super secret "Area 51" they realize that the
CIA had captured an alien ship 50 years ago and has learned much about
their anatomy and technology. This is the only real time that film starts
to become a little too formulated, just the basic idea of what is
happening reminds one of an Ed Wood film. We even get a mad scientist of
sorts, but is this a parody or something to be taken seriously?
Like all other stories of the sort, Devlin and Emmerich's script
makes us wonder if there is any chance at all for victory, and of course
some kind of loophole is found, and of course it will take a super
exciting, cliffhanger scene to overcome the conflict but the payoff is
well worth it. At first we witnessed our boys lose to the aliens and it
was exciting just because of the mood, now that the entire world is united
together and actually winning it brings about a sense of courage, pride,
excitement and suspense.
"Independence Day" isn't Shakespeare but it's still very
excellent, it might not be the most realistic story but I think that's the
point. We tend to take our movies too seriously today, if we just leave
our cynicism behind and use our imagination we'll experience something so
fantastic words will not be able to describe it. (7/7/96) (12/9/96) [other
films of this genre: the "Star Wars" trilogy, "The War Of The Worlds,"
"V," other films by Emmerich: "Stargate"]

Title
Review for Donnie Brasco (1997)
 1997, R, 127 minutes [2 hours, 7 minutes]
 Starring: Johnny Depp (Joe Pistone/Donnie Brasco), Al Pacino (Lefty), Anne
 Heche (Maggie Pistone), Michael Madsen (Sonny); written by Paul Attanasio;
 produced by Louis DiGiaimo, Mark Johnson, Barry Levinson, Gail Mutrux;
 directed by Mike Newell; based on the book "Donnie Brasco: My Undercover Life
 in the Mafia" by Joseph D. Pistone, Richard Woodley.
 Seen February 15, 1998 on home video (borrowed from Chris Wessell).
        When it comes to modern gangster movies, it's really difficult to describe
 and review them without making comparisons to other films of the genre and/or
 just using the word "routine." I've always subscribed to the philosophy that
 any idea (no matter how many times it's been used before) can provide for a
 good story and "Donnie Brasco" clinches this idea. It's not unlike most of the
 great films of the genre, yet it never apes another's style as it has a good
 layer of authenticity, even if its core is a tad stale.
        The film starts off in typical fashion by defining its atmosphere of New York
 City in the late 1970s and the mobsters who inhibit it. We meet Lefty
 (Pacino), an aging wiseguy who can still walk the walk and talk the talk. He
 and his associates go through the generic motions you expect to see in crime
 films like this. Somehow he comes across Donnie Brasco (Depp), a younger guy
 with a lot of spunk who isn't afraid of Lefty and his rep, and even manages to
 befriend him after Lefty was ready to kill him. It's clear Donnie is new to
 the life and Lefty recognizes this immediately, telling him all the tricks of
 the trade. I have never seen this technique of actually revealing the Mafioso
 idiosyncrasies done before and for this the film deserves credit. However, we
 soon realize Donnie is actually Joe Pistone, an FBI agent working undercover -
 a character who symbolizes the viewer as he will soon be purged into the
 lifestyle and treated as a newcomer.
        The first act works as a guided to
ot of rhetoric about wiseguy honor, a brief history of the mob,
 definitions of their slang, and where their money comes from and who it goes
 to. The screenplay is rather sketchy on the details surrounding these
 elements, however, the fact they are mentioned at all is quite original. Most
 gangster movies seem to be made with the notion the viewer already knows how
 the mob works (probably from watching other gangster movies), and although
 this attitude comes across, the film tries to fill in all the holes where and
 when it can and the effort is appreciable.
        Thankfully the film doesn't become too caught up in the tedious details of
 organized crime, and instead opts for character development. Much of the story
 is told simply through the interaction between Lefty and Donnie. Pacino is
 outstanding here as the pathetic hood who speaks of his job in the same manner
 any blue collar worker would. He's old and exhausted but seems to enjoy what
 he does, just as anyone loyal to the same employer for over 30 years might be.
 We learn of his accomplishments, which are quite impressive within their
 context, and when he complains about not being made top boss, it's easy to
 sympathize with him. Newell constantly plays up this aspect, making it a major
 theme which works well in the long run. As Donnie is constantly impressing and
 even one-upping Lefty, it's hard to tell which emotion is more powerful: the
 fact Donnie is getting closer to nailing the mob; or the fact Lefty has once
 again been over shadowed.
        Most of the film tells the story of Donnie's life in Mafia, which creates for
 many sub-plots and individual conflicts, but doesn't always seem to come
 together as a whole. The storytelling is genuinely interesting throughout,
 even when the motions the characters go through seem familiar. The resonance
 to Donnie's actual assignment varies, he often reports back to the Feds with
 detail of his progress, but it doesn't always seem to have much meaning. Back
 home, his wife Maggie (Heche) is ready to divorce him because he's never
 a
 and the family is suffering. Since this is based on a true story I
 wouldn't doubt this would happen, although the way it is handled often borders
 on the melodramatic.
        My only major complaint is the film seems to have no final act, or at least
 any real sense of closure. A climax of sorts does occur, but there's little
 feeling of a payoff. We get a happy ending, which is good, but perhaps a sad
 ending would have been more powerful.        
        Aside from a few minor, general flaws, "Donnie Brasco" manages to be a solid
 piece of storytelling and character development. It may be routine, but it's
 good, and that's respectful.
 Please visit Chad'z Movie Page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz - over 190
 new and old films reviewed in depth, not just blind ratings and quick
 capsules. Also, check out The FIRST Shay Astar Web Page @
 http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz/ShayAstar.html

Title
Review for Billy Madison (1995)
*** (out of 4 = good)
1995, PG-13, 90 minutes [1 hour, 30 minutes]
[comedy]
starring: Adam Sandler (Billy Madison), Bridgette Wilson (Miss Veronica
Vaughn), Bradley Whitford (Eric), Darren McGavin (Mr. Madison), written by
Tim Herlihy, Adam Sandler, produced by Robert Simonds, directed by Tamra
Davis.
Sometimes things come along that are so insanely stupid they border on sheer
genius. "Billy Madison" is an example of this. It is both a cliche and
original comedy, full of wacky jokes and total idiocy, but for some reason it
works well. So well in fact, we actual laugh along with the film rather than
at it, and that's what makes for good comedy.
Adam Sandler stars as idiot manchild Billy Madison, the son of a billionaire
who owns a chain of hotels. All he does is hang around his mansion, drinking
and going nuts with his two other idiot friends. Billy acts like he's seven
years old and it's hilarious to watch him be so stupid. For example, he gets
so excited when he realizes it's "nudie magazine day" and Sandler's baby talk
is hilarious. 
But the attitude doesn't stop there. Even his magazines are wacky: "She-Male
Fiesta," "Women Over 80," and "Drunk Chicks." Another funny scene involves
Billy and the boys playing practical jokes on people, and their victims are
even bigger idiots than they are. No, this is not the most believable story
in the world, but it certainly is fun to watch. 
Then the movie has to go normal by bringing in a plot. Mr. Madison (McGavin)
knows Billy is a blithering idiot and he always wanted to hand the Madison
Hotel Company over to him when he retires, but how can he give it to such a
moron? When he tells Billy this, they make a deal: if he can pass grades 1 -
12 all over again in 24 weeks, he'll be qualified to take over the company,
otherwise Eric (Whitford), Madison's snotty second in command, will get it.
Eric is the standard comedy villain, his arrogance and vileness are obviously
exaggerated, but so is everything else, so nothing seems too zany here.
And so Billy ventures off to school and the real hilarity ensues. The style
isn't so much "fish-out-of-water" as it is just watching an idiot be an
idiot. Even the teachers are portrayed as very kooky. All of this absurdity
adds up and is funny and likable even though it shouldn't be.
Of course there has to be the
sexy-woman-who-won't-give-the-main-character-the-time-of-day, and that
character is Billy's third grade teacher Miss Veronica Vaughn (Wilson). Is it
necessary to mention what will happen between her and Billy? Another generic
comedy element unfolds when Eric somehow gets to the hero by blackmailing his
principal.
To settle everything once and for all, Billy challenges Eric to an "Academic
Decathlon" in which they will battle for the company - guess who wins?
"Billy Madison" is thin on plot, but big on laughter. It's pathetic humor in
a way, but it's funny, and I can respect that.
visit Chad'z Movie Page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz/index.html

Title
Review for Little Nicky (2000)
Adam Sandler's latest flick has him playing the son of the devil. Must.... 
resist.... obvious.... one-liner. 
But seriously folks I'm starting to think Mr. Sandler must be the most 
powerful person in Hollywood because every celebrity on the planet is willing 
to appear in his movies no matter how bad they are. Technically, "Little 
Nicky" should be his worst movie to date because it is so unabashedly 
commercial and outrageous, but it's not. 
Sandler's style of comedy is directly responsible for a lot of the humor we 
see on TV and in the movies today. It's the "lowest common dominator" 
philosophy multiplied by stupidity. He's crude and lowbrow but he's also 
using ideas most others aren't. He'll do pretty much anything for a laugh and 
he never expects you to take him seriously. That worked back in his debut 
starring vehicle "Billy Madison" and it still works here. 
As I mentioned before, Sandler plays the son of the devil, Nicky. Actually, 
he's just one of the devil's three sons and he's the "good" one. A goofy guy 
with a speech impediment and a wacky face who doesn't really comprehend what 
it means to be part of the evilest family in existence. Harvey Keitel plays 
Satan who's trying to decide which of his sons will succeed him. But since 
he's the devil he of course chooses himself which irks the two really nasty 
sons Adrian and Cassius who flee Hell to set up camp on Earth. That screws up 
everything, the devil begins to "die" and Nicky is the only one capable of 
capturing his two mean brothers and making sure Hell stays where it belongs. 
The plots to Sandler's movies aren't exactly the most intellectually 
stimulating are they? His prior box office blockbusters have kept the story 
"realistic" for the most part, but this is his first foray into something 
more supernatural and more of a fantasy. When you're making a movie about a 
regular human guy you're kind of limited as to who the supporting characters 
and story situations can be. When you're making a movie about the idiot son 
of the devil whose friends include a talking foul-mouthed bulldog, an 
ambiguously gay actor, two stoned-out headbangers, and a homely designer 
student - you can go a bit hog wild. 
A lot of the film talks place in Hell and there's minor characters running 
all over the place, such as Rodney Dangerfield as the original Lucifer, a 
gatekeeper with breasts on his head and lots of demons and other monsters. 
Sandler's brand of comedy has been pretty lowbrow before, but since Satan 
himself is actually a major player in this story, the cruel, mean comedy is a 
bit more justified. Not that I condone the scenes of sodomizing Hitler with a 
pineapple, but the stuff that happens up above on Earth where Nicky must 
track down and battle his brothers is funny. 
Take for example a scene in which Cassius has possessed the referee at a 
Harlem Globetrotters game. When he makes the players bash their heads on the 
table, and throws everyone out Nicky steps in and the two battle each other 
with their "magic powers." The audience just thinks it's part of the show 
even though the things they do are totally impossible. Another showdown 
occurs near the end where Nicky and Adrian actually get into a pillow fight ov
er who the next leader of Hell will be. In between there's a lot of other 
stupid jokes such as Henry Winkler getting stung by a million bees and Nicky 
convincing Adrian's minions that bunnies are cute and Popeye's chicken is 
really delicious (not-so-subtle product placement has always been one of 
Sandler's most unique talents). 
"Little Nicky" doesn't have the best screenplay in the world, in fact it's 
probably one of the most contrived to come along in a few years. However, I 
must admit most of the jokes pay off. Sandler and his crew tend to repeat 
themselves with jokes about transvestites, bathroom functions, bodily fluids, 
and outrageous cartoony characters that end up getting hurt a lot. 
Technically, this stuff isn't much different from a b-movie but what makes it 
work is that it's consistent, and so over-the-top you know there's no way it 
can be taken seriously. It's almost as if you're laughing AT the movie 
instead of at the individual jokes. But as long as you enjoy yourself then 
what's the problem? 

*****
Chad'z Movie Page is back! 
In-depth reviews of nearly all mainstream films playing at your local 
cineplex. There's also reviews of a few classic films and some of your 
personal favorites.

Title
Review for Tomorrow Never Dies (1997)
1997, PG-13, 119 minutes [1 hour, 59 minutes]
starring: Pierce Brosnon (James Bond), Jonathon Pryce (Elliot Carver),
Michelle Yeoh (Wai Lin), Teri Hatcher (Paris Carver); written by Bruce
Feirstien; produced by Barbara Broccoli, Michael G. Wilson; directed by Roger
Spottiswoode; based on characters created by Ian Fleming.
Seen December 28, 1997 at 8:45 p.m. at the Crossgates Mall Cinema 18
(Guilderland, NY), theater #8, with Matt Perreault and my sister Jena for free
(Matt paid using pre-paid passes).
        If there's ever been an exception to the perils of excessive cliches and non-
stop action, the James Bond films are it. And if there's ever been a James
Bond film that not only proves this, but does so by pushing it to the extreme,
"Tomorrow Never Dies" is it.
        Opening sequences almost always make or break action films. When done
properly, not only are they actually exciting, but they foreshadow things to
come. This film starts off on the right foot by establishing the kind of
atmosphere that could only be found in an action movie, but with a sense of
the self-aware, enclosed universe where James Bond movies take place in. 
        First there's a high-tech, slightly complicated scene involving a British
warship crossing into unfriendly, Chinese waters. There's definite tension as
there seems to be an unknown, but certainly hostile, third party involved who
is manipulating both sides. When the scene ends in tragedy, it's clear there's
some kind of powerful conspiracy going on, and who else to call on for such a
case but James Bond?
        The film uses good judgment in the way it introduces us to Bond (Brosnon). As
the enemy was portrayed as evil and mysterious, Bond is clearly (and
obviously) depicted as an out-and-out hero. He single-handedly takes out a
small army of terrorists, and then must escape in the nick of time by flying
away in a fighter jet while the co-pilot tries to strangle him and a terrorist
in another jet tries to shoot him down! This might sound like the kind of
cliches films like this are notorious for (over-)using, but it works here
because the film knows how to get our attention quickly. It's not about the
payoff because it's obvious Bond will escape, instead, it's the way it
processes the action sequences by going over the top and not apologizing for
it, all the while creating for witty, hysterical comedy.
        It seems less emphasis is placed on the villains in thrillers anymore,
because of political correctness, and just plain copping-out on behalf of the
filmmakers (even the term "villain" sounds passe). What the film deserves
kudos for is its ability to create a villain as heinous as they come, yet
making him seem completely plausible. Jonathon Pryce delivers a perfect
performance as the arrogant, cunning Elliot Carver, a media mogul whose goal
is to take over the world, that is, through his massive media empire, not
through nuclear weapons. Through some interesting detective work, Bond and the
English Ministry of Defense believe Carver is behind the trouble brewing in
the southern Asian seas as a way to create and accurately cover his own news.
Not only is that an original idea for a conflict, but one which could carry
over into reality.
        Surprisingly, this is about as detailed as the story allows the specific plot
to become. The film's hook is the action, and of course those cool gadgets and
we get plenty of that here as Bond goes out to investigate Carver and finds
himself in a jam or two along the way. The story works much like Bond himself
- always on the run and concentrates more on the individual conflicts than any
general plot. Somehow a Chinese agent, Wai Lin (Yeoh), bumps into Bond a few
too many times and they find themselves working together. The chemistry
between Brosnon and Yeoh is rigid, but also works because of this, not in
spite of it. The two are constantly on the run from Carver and his goons, yet
the film manages to balance the stunts and special effects with its clever
story.
        Although "Tomorrow Never Dies" is far from perfect, it is quite an impressive
film in terms of its ability to be so cliche and cartoony and not make
plausibility an issue. 
Please visit Chad'z Movie Page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz - over 180
new and old films reviewed in depth, not just blind ratings and quick
capsules. Also, check out The FIRST Shay Astar Web Page @
http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz/ShayAstar.html
To receive Chad'z movie reviews directly, send e-mail to ChadPolenz@aol.com
with "subscribe plan#_" in the header (plan 1 - new releases, plan 2 - all
movies reviewed).

Title
Review for 2010 (1984)
2010: The Year We Make Contact
Chad'z rating: ***1/2 (out of 4 = very good)
1984, PG, 116 minutes [1 hour, 56 minutes]
[science fiction]
starring: Roy Scheider (Dr. Heywood Floyd), John Lithgow (Walter Curnow), Bob
Balaban (Dr. Chandra), Helen Mirren (Tanya Kirbuk), written, produced, and
directed by Peter Hyams, based on the novel by Arthur C. Clarke.
It's impossible to discuss Peter Hyams' "2010: The Year We Make Contact"
without comparing it to its predecessor, Stanley Kubrick's "2001: A Space
Odyssey." This film incorporates many of the essential elements of the
original, but it is not the brilliant philosophical allegory of its
counterpart, nor does it try to be. However, it does succeed in taking a
mainstream approach to the "invisible forces" that make these stories what
they are.
The story takes place nine years after The Jupiter Mission. Dr. Heywood
Floyd (Scheider) is approached by a Russian diplomat who tells him they are
going to investigate the U.S.S. Discovery-1 and the mysterious monolith still
orbiting Jupiter. An intense cold war exists between the two nations and the
film does a fine job of dropping the appropriate hints to add detail. Floyd
knows it will be difficult to convince both governments, and especially his
own family, of the benefits that could result from teamwork. Needless to say,
Floyd, along with Walter Curnow (Lithgow), the engineer of the Discovery, and
Dr. Chandra (Balaban), the designer and programmer of HAL 9000, convince the
government and hitch a ride with the Russians aboard their ship The Leinov.
Most of the first and second acts are spent defining mood. Much like "2001,"
it is dark and technical but more modern which makes the story easier to
follow. Although Hyams' modernism clashes with Kubrick's nearly cubist
design, the film is able to present the older elements in a new light, and
thus they synchronize well.
The bulk of the film does not have a specific plot to it but many
interesting events take place. For example, when Floyd and the Russian
captain, Tanya Kirbuk (Mirren), send a probe to explore what they believe to
be life forming on the surface of Europa, it is flung into space like a
baseball being hit out of a ballpark. Later, the same thing occurs when a
probe (manned by a likable character) is sent to investigate the huge
monolith.
Dave Bowman's (Keir Dullea) transformation at the end of "2001" was so
enigmatic it seemed to have a supernatural presence. The way in which this
film returns to his character and his symbolism is done in such an strange
manner it's so moving it's scary (I'm getting goosebumps just writing this).
Bowman appears to both his ex-wife and Dr. Floyd and tells them "something
wonderful" is going to happen.
A war has broken out on Earth between America and Russia, so the crew is
ordered to separate. Meanwhile, the monolith has multiplied itself millions
of times over on Jupiter and the crews must defy their orders and work
together while at the same put their trust in HAL, who it seems could just as
easily malfunction as he did nine years prior. The last few scenes are
basically routine suspense but at least it's plausible. The ending itself is
strange, but certainly original.
Although "2010: The Year We Make Contact" doesn't have the genius "2001," it
provides for a pretty good message about the pettiness of man and makes for a
good, original sci-fi story. 
Please visit Chad'z Movie Page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz - over 140
new and old films reviewed in depth, not just blind ratings and quick
capsules. Also, check out The FIRST Shay Astar Web Page @
http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz/ShayAstar.html

Title
Review for Me, Myself & Irene (2000)
>From the Farrelly brothers, the guys behind "Dumb & Dumber," "Kingpin" and 
"There's Something About Mary" comes this year's challenge to tasteful comedy 
starring none other than Jim Carrey - the man who may actually be a living, 
breathing cartoon. It's a shame this movie's not a cartoon though because all 
the gags that are supposed to work here come off as childish, amateurish, 
dumb and unfunny. 
Carrey plays Charlie - an overly friendly, gutless Rhode Island bike cop who 
one day snaps and develops a split personality whereby he becomes Hank - a 
ruthless, twisted enforcer. At first the extreme lengths "Hank" goes to in 
order to get his way are funny, but it's a joke that can't carry an entire 
film. Especially one where the plot is non-existent and the screenplay so 
poorly developed the cliches are about the only thing going for it. 
The jokes here are intended to appeal to the modern audience's craving of the 
extreme, but it comes off as tired and unoriginal. The film's vulgarity quotie
nt is just absurd and offensive. 
------------------------------------------------------------------------ 
You can also read this review at: 
http://www.epinions.com/mvie-review-F32-40F75B8-39D14C72-prod1 
And other reviews on the same topic at: http://www.epinions.com/mvie 
Check out my profile page at: http://www.epinions.com/user-chad9976  
*****
Chad'z Movie Page is back! 
In-depth reviews of nearly all mainstream films playing at your local 
cineplex. There's also reviews of a few classic films and some of your 
personal favorites.

Title
Review for Men in Black (1997)
1997, PG-13, 98 minutes [1 hour, 38 minutes]
starring: Tommy Lee Jones (Agent K), Will Smith (James Edwards/Agent J),
Linda Fiorentino (Dr. Laurel Weaver), Vincent D'Onofrio (Edgar - The Bug);
written by Ed Solomon; produced by Laurie MacDonald, Walter F. Parkes;
directed by Barry Sonnenfeld; based on the comic book and characters created
by Lowell Cunningham.
Seen Sunday, November 2, 1997 at 2:20 p.m. at the Crossgates Mall Cinema 12
(Guilderland, N.Y.), theater #6 [?], with my brother John for $4.75. [Theater
rating: ***: good seats, picture, and sound] 
Movies geared towards massive audiences tend not to be too complicated or
have much intelligence to them. Americans especially like to watch things
they don't have to think too much about. What's good about "Men In Black" is
that, technically, it's another lightweight, mass-market comedy/adventure,
but it's also a clever satire. It appeals to both the child and the adult in
us.
It's difficult to make a film intended for the family that can actually be
enjoyed by all members.  But this movie starts off well by displaying its
ability to do just that. The first scene depicts a truck full of illegal
aliens which is stopped by highway patrolmen, until two men in black suits
show up and take over. Agent K (Jones) singles out one of the immigrants and
brings him back into the desert where his true identity is revealed. He's an
illegal alien all right - one from another planet who doesn't have a
passport. 
The dialogue between K and the alien is cartoony, but witty, in a
"Simpson's" sort of way. Even though there's a slimy sight gag, it was built
up through satire, which shows how the comedy succeeds on many levels.
Satire derives its power from great acting. Anyone can write a joke, but it
takes talent to make subtle comedy funny. Tommy Lee Jones is fantastic here
as the Joe Friday-like Agent K. His sense of timing is perfect and his
deadpan delivery makes everything he says or does seem both serious and
funny. 
Then there's his counterpart, the always hyperactive Will Smith as James
Edwards, an NYPD officer who is asked to join "Men in Black" (the secret
agency K works for), because of an encounter he had with an alien.  Many
consider Smith a typecast actor who always plays characters like himself -
but it doesn't matter because he's hilarious! It seems like he improvises
every joke and gag, yet he never repeats himself.
The actual plot of the film involves some kind of pending inter-galactic war
with Earth in the middle. Agents J and K's job is to find a "bug" (D'Onofrio
as "Edgar") whose ship crash-landed on a farm in upstate New York. He has
made his way to NYC and wreaks havoc like a zombie in an Ed Wood movie, and
if they don't find him soon something terrible is going to happen. 
There's a lot of detail and attention given to the MIB operation, which not
only makes the comedy even funnier and the satire more clever, but shows how
the film doesn't cop-out where most others would. Everything the characters
do has a purpose, and there's a good sense of mystery here. At times I wasn't
quite sure what was going on, but because the story is so lighthearted I was
never hopelessly lost.
Not much more needs to be said about the film because the comedy is so
broad. It would be difficult to list even a few examples without describing,
in detail, the context in which they take place. Everything's just plain fun,
and the ending is a real hoot.
Special mention must be given to Linda Fiorentino as Dr. Laurel Weaver, the
sexy coroner who never plays the role of the damsel in distress nor the
butt-kicking, "strong-willed woman" stereotype. 
"Men In Black" is the epitome what the summer blockbuster movie should be:
just plain fun.
Please visit Chad'z Movie Page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz - over 180
new and old films reviewed in depth, not just blind ratings and quick
capsules. Also, check out The FIRST Shay Astar Web Page @
http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz/ShayAstar.html
To receive Chad'z movie reviews directly, send e-mail to ChadPolenz@aol.com
with "subscribe" in the header.

Title
Review for Pulp Fiction (1994)
**** (out of 4 = excellent)
1994, R, 154 minutes [2 hours, 34 minutes]
[crime/satire]
starring: John Travolta (Vincent Vega), Samuel L. Jackson (Jules Winfield),
Bruce Willis (Butch Coolidge), Uma Thurman (Mia Wallace), produced by
Lawrence Bender, written by Quentin Tarantino, Roger Avary, directed by
Quentin Tarantino.
"Pulp Fiction" is such a landmark film it's difficult to describe the many
nuances and offbeat elements that make it great. It's greatness lies in the
fact that right from the get-go it establishes an entirely different, yet
completely plausible reality.
The title refers to those old cheap magazines not unlike comic books that
tell stories of "lurid subject matter," and that is exactly what we get here.
>From the basic plots and stories, to the characters' dialogue, to the
individual props, and the way they all work together to create such an
uncanny story.
As the film opens we see a seemingly normal couple having breakfast in a
coffee shop. We realize they are robbers complaining about their "job" and
it's funny not only because of the dialogue, but because it's relatable even
though the characters are not. They decide to rob the restaurant and the tone
of the film is set from this short scene alone.
The film then cuts to a different setting as we again eavesdrop on another
strange conversation, this time between two men describing the funny
differences between Europe and America. We later learn their names are
Vincent (Travolta) and Jules (Jackson) and they are hitmen about to go to
"work" themselves. But this is no ordinary crime film, and what we get is so
offbeat, "pulp" is really the only way to describe it.
As Vincent and Jules walk to their destination they start an interesting
conversation about their mob boss and his wife. This subject then leads to a
hilarious discussion about the differences between foot massages and oral
sex. Although the dialogue is laced with profanity and the overall basis of
the conversation (and the film as a whole) is taboo in nature, the way
everything is depicted is genius because it's so original and fascinating.
Since this film is a modern day pulp magazine it is not a linear story, but
a collection of at least three different ones that come together as a whole.
Tarantino's script is not so much concerned with overcoming a conflict as it
is showing how the characters affect each other. 
After Vincent and Jules do their work, we then follow Vincent as he takes
his boss's wife, Mia (Thurman), out to dinner. Their night out becomes
something very bizarre, yet totally believable all along. It flirts with
disaster but the brilliant satirical mood keeps it funny and interesting, and
(gasp!) also starts to convey a theme.
Basically, the film is about salvation and justice where you'd least expect
to find it. Vincent and Mia narrowly escape death, and a similar theme of
redemption is portrayed when Butch Coolidge (Willis), a struggling boxer,
disobeys the mob boss Marselius Wallace (Ving Rhames), and through a series
of undescribable events, the two must work together to save themselves from a
common, twisted enemy.
The ending itself comes full circle back to the beginning which could be and
probably is reflective of some kind of spiritual philosophy of "The Circle of
Life."
Everything that could be great about "Pulp Fiction" is: the acting; the
story; the offbeat, funny dialogue; and especially the film's ability to be
so complex and profound yet so interesting and easy to follow. 
Please visit Chad'z Movie Page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz

Title
Review for Amadeus (1984)
**1/2 (out of 4 = OK)
1984, PG, 158 minutes [2 hours, 38 minutes]
[drama]
starring: Tom Hulce (Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart), F. Murray Abraham (Salieri),
Elizabeth Berridge (Constanze Mozart), Jeffrey Jones (Emperor Joseph II),
written by Peter Shaffer (based on his play), produced by Saul Zaentz,
directed by Milos Forman.
At first glance, "Amadeus" seems like a filmed version of a classic story,
but it quickly throws in modern elements to lighten the mood and make
everything more relatable. I liked what I saw at first, but in a way I felt
as if I was being talked down to. And just as I started to catch on, the film
lost me.
The opening scenes quickly establish and foreshadow the mood and settings
for the rest of the film. We meet Antonio Salieri (Abraham), an old man in an
asylum in early 19th century Europe. He is a bitter old man and when he is
visited by a Catholic priest he is very spiteful, almost hostile towards him
and what he stands for. He then proceeds to tell his tale of his personal
vendetta against "The Great" Mozart. 
Tom Hulce stars as Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart, who seems like a college frat
boy stuck in the body of this period character. I really didn't have a
problem with this because this is supposedly true and it does keep with the
rest of the lighthearted, almost satirical mood. Salieri is the court
composer to Emperor Joseph II (Jones), and when Mozart is invited into the
royal manner and astounds everyone, Salieri is quietly enraged with
jealously. He seems to be the most serious character and aspect to the film
throughout the first half. 
There isn't really a definite plot to this film, and it doesn't make a
difference for the most part. The story is somewhat of a biography of Mozart
and his rebellious lifestyle as he constantly writes operas that shock the
royals and the higher-ups, but always seem to accomplish his goals in the
end. It is also a philosophical and spiritual allegory as we learn how
Salieri forms a hatred against God. Why should this "punk" be blessed with
such talent when he has worked so much harder and is not recognized as the
genius he is?
Like most people, I don't understand opera and the first half seemed to
recognize this and worked around it well. The movie had been an interesting
biographical drama up until the very middle and then seemed to take a nose
dive. We had been following Salieri's subtle plans of sabotage, but this
element seems to be forgotten and all that we get is a confusing story of
Mozart's later works and his complicated relationship with his wife Constanze
(Berridge) and the generic love/hate relationship with his overbearing
father. 
The music itself also plays a very important role in the film, and I'd have
to applaud the filmmakers for being able to synchronize it as well as they
did. The only problem is there's too much of it here. Just scene after scene
of operas that are probably symbolic of the conflict between Mozart and
Salieri, his father, and his wife. But it's not nearly as easy to follow as
the beginning of the film had been and I felt stupid for not being able to
follow it.
There is a scene in the first act that perfectly symbolizes my view of
"Amadeus." After Emperor Joseph II has watched his first Mozart opera, he
says he liked it, but there were "too many notes." I'd have to say the same
to Shaffer, Zaentz, and Forman: "Your movie is good but it's just too much. I
don't understand what the point was, but you did a fair job in making it."
(4/3/97) (5/21/97) [also by Forman: "One Flew Over The Cuckoo's Nest," "The
People Vs. Larry Flynt"]
visit Chad'z Movie Page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz/index.html

Title
Review for Thunderheart (1992)
Thunderheart
Chad'z rating: ** (out of 4 = fair)
1992, R, 118 minutes [1 hour, 58 minutes]
[thriller/mystery]
starring: Val Kilmer (Ray Levoi), Sam Shepard (Frank "Cooch" Coutelle),
Graham Greene (Walter Crow Horse),  Sheila Tousey (Maggie Eagle Bear),
produced by Robert De Niro, Jane Rosenthal, John Fusco, written by John
Fusco, directed by Michael Apted.
For all it has going for it, "Thunderheart" certainly is a disappointment.
It's a film with a serious attitude that tries, with complete logic, to mix
too many genres together to tell a relatively simple story. Thus it gets tied
up in knots and sinks under its own weight.
Val Kilmer stars as Ray Levoi, a young FBI agent who has been assigned to
investigate a murder on an Indian reservation in the badlands of South
Dakota. The homicide supposedly has ties to an Indian militia group the
Aboriginals' Resistance Movement. We also learn Ray has Native American
ancestry but does not know, nor care much about them. When he arrives at the
reservation he denounces his heritage and is prejudice against the people
living there. I predicted by the end of the film he would be completely
"enlightened" with his ancestral ways... and I was right.
Ray is teamed with Frank "Cooch" Coutelle (Shepard), and the first 20
minutes or so is routine cop-buddy/detective material. Cooch does most of the
talking which establishes the story's basic framework, and it seems as if
this will be a straight mystery film, but nothing could be further from the
truth.
Since this is a film about white government officials interacting with
Native Americans the element of prejudice becomes a central theme. When the
local sheriff, Walter Crow Horse (Greene), tries to help Ray and Cooch by
advising them to get in touch with nature, they of course ignore and mock
him. What bothered me was the manner in which this aspect was played upon -
so blatantly that we have no choice but to see the feds as "bad" and the
Native Americans and their lifestyle as innocent and "correct." The Indians'
mystical and supernatural elements are presented so seriously it's quite
distracting.
Eventually, the mystery Ray was sent to solve seems to be completely
forgotten about. The story seems to be told through a series of
misunderstandings and depicts Ray's contrast, lame, soul-searching. We also
see his constant interaction with Crow Horse and a Native American woman,
Maggie Eagle Bear (Tousey), who is the typical, sensitive, intelligent
teacher/environmentalist. Thankfully there is no cheesy romance between the
two, which is one of the few cliches the film does not exploit. 
Most Hollywood thrillers tend to use confusion as a cop-out, and although
this film is confusing at times, it doesn't placate to the viewer until the
final act. Ray suddenly figures out who the killer is, but he doesn't arrest
him even after the killer confesses! What we get is an unbelievable,
unrealistic conspiracy and the "real" killer turns out to be someone that was
under our nose the entire time (nah, that never happens!). The ending itself
plays like a cross between an episode of "Starsky And Hutch" and a bad
western. This was supposedly based on a true story, but Apted tries to blame
the whole situation on corporate greed.
I'm not sure what the point of "Thunderheart" is. It doesn't work as a
commercial thriller, mystery, nor drama because it's too over-the-top to take
seriously. It's a shame. 
Please visit Chad'z Movie Page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz - over 140
films reviewed in depth, not just blind ratings or quick capsules.
E-mail: ChadPolenz@aol.com
(C)1997 Chad Polenz

Title
Review for Trois couleurs: Rouge (1994)
Chad'z Rating: *** (out of 4 = good)
1994, R, 99 minutes [1 hour, 39 minutes]
[drama]
starring: Irene Jacob (Valentine), Jean-Louis Trintisnant (The Judge),
Frederique Feder (Karin), Jean-Pierre Lorit (Auguste), written by Krysztof
Piesiewicz, Krzysztof Kielowski, produced by Marin Karmitz, directed by
Krysztof Kielowski.
If we could interfere with fate, we would (or should we) do it? Perhaps the
reason some people believe in fate is because of our sense of privacy. If
everyone knew each others' business the world would be a much different place
wouldn't it? "Red" tries to play up that theme through an encounter between
two strangers. 
Irene Jacob stars as Valentine, a fashion model who is likable and very
sweet. We follow her around for a while, and at first the film seems a bit
confusing as it's hard to tell where it's going. At the same time we also met
a young, successful businessman named Auguste (Lorit). He doesn't have much,
if anything, to do with Valentine, only that he lives near her. However, his
entire character is a great technique in storytelling and filmmaking.
One day Valentine accidentally hits a dog with her car and when she returns
it to its owner, a retired judge (Trintisnant), he seems totally apathetic.
We can't help but be put off by his attitude, but at the same time he makes
for an interesting character because of his bitterness. After several
encounters Valentine realizes the judge listens in on his neighbors'
telephone conversations for amusement. He doesn't seem so much perverted as
he is curious. 
Throughout the film the storytelling is breezy as it just tries to define
the mood of their rather odd relationship. They discuss his habit of
eavesdropping: Valentine claims it's a breach of privacy, but the judge
doesn't seem to care anymore. One conversation involves a man's secret affair
with his gay lover, and Valentine decides to tell him about the judge. When
she arrives at his house she meets the man's wife and child and knows if she
were to tell them what is happening it would ruin their lives. This idea of
interrupting with fate is the central theme of the film. The judge knows some
day the wife will catch her husband and the family will be shattered, had
Valentine told them she would have only sped up their misery.
There isn't much else to "Red." It's charming but not sappy. It could be
enjoyed by almost anyone, but I would recommend it for mature audiences.
Maybe Kielowski isn't trying to make a statement about love or fate, but just
present them as he sees them. It's nice to know these kinds of things are
relevant all over the world. 
[Note: The film is rated R for a sex scene that last about four or five
seconds. Besides that, there is no other sex, profanity, nor violence and the
film should be suitable for ages 14 and up.]
Please visit Chad'z Movie Page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz

Title
Review for Ransom (1996)
Chad'z Rating: *** (out of 4 = OK)
1996, R, 121 minutes [2 hours, 1 minute]
[thriller]
starring: Mel Gibson (Tom Mullen), Gary Sinise (Jimmy Shaker), Rene Russo
(Kate Mullen), Delroy Lindo (Agent Lonnie Hawkins), written by Cyril Hume,
Richard Maibum, Alexander Ignon, Richard Price, produced by Brian Grazer,
Scott Rudin, Kip Hagopian, directed by Ron Howard.
"Ransom" is a typical Hollywood thriller, but it presents itself in a rather
original manner. It becomes overly dramatic and action-packed at times, but
everything is connected by such an interesting and suspenseful story it works
quite well.
Mel Gibson stars as Tom Mullen, a rich CEO of an airline company. Tom and
his wife Kate (Russo) host a science fair in New York's Central Park, and the
second they turn their back on their pre-teen son, he is gone. Suddenly the
story becomes fast-paced and the suspense element kicks into full gear. When
the kidnapper calls we hear a scary, distorted voice which works well.
However, I think the film tries too hard to be modern by having the Mullens
receive a picture of their son handcuffed to a bed via e-mail (couldn't they
just look at the address of the sender to find out who the kidnapper is?). 
The film does not focus solely on the Mullens, it also takes time to
establish the kidnappers and their efforts to extort $2 million from the
Mullens. The kidnappers themselves are the most surprising element to the
movie: they are both high and low tech at the same time. It's hard to believe
a handful of second-rate computer hackers would be able to elude the FBI as
they do. However, the fact they do not fit the organized crime mold is
original. We even get some comic relief and good characterization despite the
choppy story.
The film is able to balance the drama of the Mullens' grief with some
exciting action and an interesting crime story. Gary Sinise is excellent as
Jimmy Shaker, a corrupt cop who is the criminal mastermind. He seems to have
a personal vendetta against Mullen, but we never really find out why. You
love to hate him because he's always in control and there aren't any cheesy
evil laughs.
Mullen turns the tables on the kidnappers by refusing to pay their ransom,
and instead offers it as a reward for their capture and the return of his
son. I thought this plot device was great, the only problem it causes is lots
of melodramatic screaming arguments between Tom and Kate, between the
kidnappers, and between both. 
Twist endings are the backbone of great thrillers and crime stories, and
this film is no exception. The game of cat and mouse is essentially reversed
throughout the last act. It's difficult to describe all the details and
twists, but the final act is loaded with them.  Both sides win and lose at
the same time, unfortunately, this is accomplished through a completely
over-the-top sequence the film seemed to be avoiding all along.
It's difficult to make films that combine drama, crime, action, and
suspense, and although "Ransom" isn't perfect, it's still a good effort. 
Please visit Chad'z Movie Page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz

Title
Review for Election (1999)
1999, R, 103 minutes [1 hour, 43 minutes]
Starring: Matthew Broderick (Mr. Jim McAllister), Reese Witherspoon (Tracy 
Flick), Chris Klien (Paul Metzler), Jessica Campbell (Tammy Metzler); written 
by Alexander Payne, Jim Taylor; produced by Albert Berger, David Gale, Keith 
Samples, Ron Yerxa; directed by Alexander Payne; based on the novel by Tom 
Perrotta.
Seen May 7, 1999 at 7 p.m. at the Crossgates Cinema 18 (Guilderland, NY), 
theater #10, with Chris Wessell and Shawn O'Shea for free using my Hoyts 
season pass. [Theater rating: ****: excellent, seats, sounds and pictures]
        Politics are by far one of the easiest and most frequent topics 
subject to brilliant satire in many forms. But when we think of politics we 
usually think of the bigger races: president, senate, congress, governor, 
even our local aldermen, not president of a high school student government 
association which is where `Election' gets its niche. However, the film isn't 
so much concerned with being an allegory for real politics as much as it is 
using a seemingly ordinary high school election to tell a story of some of 
the blackest comedy which is often cruel but sinfully tasty.
        WHO:
        Mr. Jim McAllister (Broderick): A 30-something social studies teacher 
who is also the advisor to the SGA and monitor of the school elections. He 
tells us a little of his life's background and present situation, most 
importantly that he and his wife have been having minor marital problems over 
the years which they hope will cease since they finally have the time to have 
a baby. McAllister is a pretty nice guy for the most part except he seems to 
take his job too seriously, especially when it comes to...
        Tracy Flick (Witherspoon): A high school over-achiever to the nth 
degree who is very smart but also extremely lonely. She has a cute face like 
a porcelain doll and is such a `good girl' she's sickening (like trying to 
down spoonfuls of sugar). We're told she was pushed by her single mother to 
be the best at everything possible and she lives up to that, but this also 
creates for her a major character flaw: jealousy. This is brought out and 
spotlighted in her race for SGA president, initially unopposed, but then 
comes...
        Paul Metzler (Klien): Former athletic hero for the high school until 
a skiing accident left him permanently hobbled. Paul is a complete and total 
mimbo (male bimbo), so much so that he talks and acts like he's stoned when 
he's always sober. He's also a popular guy because everyone at the school 
sympathizes with him, plus the fact he's a rich kid. All of which are perfect 
reasons for a good head-to-head race against Tracy, if it wasn't for...
        Tammy Metzler (Campbell): Younger sister of Paul whose secret 
girlfriend dumps her for her own brother and in the process reveals a case of 
jealousy. But Tammy is a bit more passive with her jealousy and often lets it 
out through depression, not hostility like Tracy. She enters the race simply 
to spite Paul, Tracy and the entire school establishment.
        WHAT:
        Anal-retentive Tracy begins her campaign and is determined to beat 
the Metzlers at any costs. But neither of the Metzlers take the election too 
seriously and at least Paul has fun participating in it. Meanwhile, Mr. 
McAllister's personal life is becoming too boring for him and in a 
subconscious effort to liven things up, he finds himself hopelessly drawn to 
his wife's best friend, who also happens to be the ex-wife of his own best 
friend (who has a disturbing connection to Tracy which is briefly touched on 
but is better off interpreted by the individual viewer).
        CRITIQUE:
        The film's screenplay deserves the most credit for making an 
otherwise shocking story flow so smoothly. Every character's motivation is 
clearly spelled out and often times done so well it's more than we need to 
know. Having the four main characters constantly recite their own narration 
from their perspective is  an original storytelling device and works well 
here since it actually helps the film to pace itself.
        If we were to simply list some of the factors at play here, this film 
could be seen as twisted and mean-spirited: the three candidates all screw 
over each other both consciously and unconsciously simply to win an election. 
We can at least chalk this up to immature children, but even our central 
adult figure, Mr. McAllister, isn't much of a role model since he's just as 
deviant as the mudslinging, lying, cheating, backstabbing, crybaby actions of 
Tracy, Paul and Tammy. But the fact he still comes off as the protagonist at 
all is nothing short of amazing (especially his role in the story's climax).
        The film definitely has a special, unique sense of satire and often 
manages to make for themes and issues that symbolize the real world, and not 
just of politics. In fact, there's very little specific issues of politics 
spoofed here. Tracy's narration of how she's had to work for everything just 
to have to run against people who have had everything handed to them might be 
a good example. A scene of a school assembly in which Tammy conveys a message 
of pure unadulterated apathy for the system to the audience's delight is 
another good one. In the end, it's just modern society that takes a beating - 
an easy target but it's not any kind of cop out.
        `Election' succeeds because it manages to take so many lurid elements 
of pop culture and society and somehow throw them at the viewer through a 
form of witty black comedy. But it reminds us that even black comedy is still 
a comedy, and who doesn't like to laugh?
---------------------------------
Please visit Chad'z 
Movie Page
 - over 220 new and old movies reviewed in-depth, not just blind ratings 
and blather capsules.
Member of The O.F.C.S. (Online Film 
Critics Society)

Title
Review for Rock, The (1996)
**1/2 (out of 4 = OK)
1996, R, 136 minutes [2 hours, 16 minutes]
[action]
starring: Nicholas Cage (Dr. Stanley Goodspeed), Sean Connery (John Patrick
Mason), Ed Harris (General Frank X. Hummel), John Spencer (FBI Director
Womack), produced by Jerry Bruckheimer, Don Simpson, written by David
Weisberg, Douglas S. Cook, Mark Rosner, directed by Michael Bay.
I had a difficult time trying to finalize my verdict of "The Rock." It's
completely over-the-top, but it knows this and makes no apologies. At times,
it shows signs of originality, but sometimes it seems like another exhausting
rip-off of a Schwarzenegger flick. I enjoyed it simply for the ride, but at
the same time I couldn't help being cynical.
The film uses all the standard elements for action thrillers involving the
government and terrorists: new weapons, government conspiracies, and a
futuristic, high-tech mood. A ballistic U.S. General, Frank X. Hummel
(Harris), has formed a militia of his friends and fellow Marines. His goal is
to compensate the families of soldiers who were killed during secret
government operatives. His team storms Alcatraz Island, holds 81 tourists
hostage, and threatens to use a powerful chemical weapon against the city of
San Francisco if he, his team, and the unhonored dead soldiers' families are
not paid millions of dollars.
Had the film's biggest flaw not been so obvious, perhaps the countless
other, smaller ones wouldn't have been as noticeable. Why would General
Hummel resort to terrorism to extort money? In this age of technology and
information (especially in the movies), wouldn't it be easier to steal money
through computers? But then again, this is a matter of war-related honor, and
no one can be more stern than insane militias with powerful weapons.
It's obvious someone is going to have to go in and stop Hummel, and the
modern action movie needs an odd couple to make for characterization and
comic relief. This is provided with the characters John Patrick Mason
(Connery) and Dr. Stanley Goodspeed (Cage). Mason is the only person to ever
have escaped Alcatraz, so the government needs his help to break in.
Goodspeed is an FBI scientist who is experienced with the chemical weapons
Hummel is armed with. Connery and Cage have some chemistry, with Cage as the
so-called common man and Connery as an even older Schwarzenegger or
Stallone-type character. Of course they constantly argue and threaten each
other, but always save the other's life when minutes before they would have
killed them.
But this is not a film about dialogue or characterization. It's an action
movie, and there is action here, lots of it. There are car chases that have
almost nothing to do with the plot; scenes in rooms full of gears, steam, and
fire that don't do anything other than pose a threat to the heroes. There's
lots of shootouts, fist fights, knife fights, people dangling from ledges, a
long-lost daughter, a pregnant fiancee... but mostly there's just shootouts
and fist fights. Not to mention the super suspenseful scenes where if the
character twitches, all are dead.
Despite all these gratuitous elements, I never found myself feeling bored.
At times I was a bit worn out by the action and the constant dragging and
milking of the story, but never bored. The stunts and special effects are
fantastic, but not necessarily impressive. For the most part, the dialogue
and storytelling style are easy to swallow, although sometimes it becomes so
trendy (a la Quentin Tarantino, James Cameron) it's distracting.
It's obvious "The Rock" doesn't want to be taken seriously, and for that
it's enjoyable. Then again, it's not as lighthearted as it should have been,
and thus it's difficult to appreciate it as quick fun. 
visit Chad'z movie Page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz/index.html

Title
Review for Lost in Space (1998)
starring: William Hurt (Prof. John Robinson), Matt Leblanc (Major Don
West), Gary Oldman (Dr. Smith), Heather Graham (Judy Robinson);
written by Akiva Goldsman; produced by Carla Fry, Akiva Goldsman,
Stephen Hopkins, Mark W.  Koch; directed by Stephen Hopkins; based on
the 1965 CBS television series.
Seen May 2, 1998 at 3:40 p.m. at the Crossgates Cinema 18, theater
#13, with Chris Wessell and Sean O'Shea for $5. [Theater rating:
***1/2: very good sound, picture, and seats]
        The big-budget, mega-hype "event" movie is becoming so trendy
now it is becoming a weekly routine instead of a seasonal
one. Gluttony is Hollywood's favorite sin, but it is the movie-goers
who pay the price by being dealt the same things over and over on an
ever-worsening basis. "Lost In Space" is the latest such offering - a
film so poor it would be twice as good if it were mediocre. It's made
up of every element of science fiction, but at no time does it evoke
the slightest amount of wonderment the genre was meant for.
        Audiences' attention spans are rapidly decreasing and as is
the trend with such films, this one opens with a fast-paced space
battle which serves not only as the most interesting scene in the film
(probably because it has "Star Wars" written all over it), but as the
producers' way of showing off their budget through the special
effects. Battle scenes are worthless without tension, and since we
have no idea what the setting is it's impossible to care about
anything that happens. In essence, the entire segment works like a
teaser for an arcade game, not a piece of filmmaking.
        We meet the Robinson family - a family of five that does not
get along but has been chosen to act on Earth's behalf in effort to
find another planet worthy of colonization due to the exhausting of
our natural resources. Each member of the family has a special trait
and personality, and yet none of them seem like actual
people. Professor John Robinson (Hurt) is the intelligent, quiet
leader who has devoted so much time to his work his family and
marriage are suffering without his realizing it (it's obvious what
role this aspect will play). Of course this is all established through
extremely melodramatic scenes such as the children and parents arguing
and bickering among themselves and with each other, while the
necessary problems are "resolved" at the right moments. The only thing
worse than the screenplay is the fact it's presented in a completely
serious manner without a trace of satire, and is so pathetic it's
laughable.
        The first act is not a building of a story, but a
juxtaposition of scenes that serve no purpose other than to plug in
all the required elements (such as plot, conflict, and
characterization - God forbid!). We're provided with the minimum
amount possible of these elements to keep the film from being
completely silent. In fact, it might as well be since the dialogue is
virtually non-existent. Yes, the characters do speak, but they do not
talk.  They say things that only relate to the conflict, but they
never really interact (unless it's the cartoony flirting scenes
between arrogant Major Don West (Leblanc) and uptight, unemotional
Judy Robinson (Graham)).
        It's amazing that after an hour of trite dialogue and generic
plot devices that so little happens. Eventually the pacing rapidly
increases, but the amount of genuine interest does not. The story
finally gains some prospective by living up to its title as the
Robinsons find themselves lost in space after narrowly managing to
defeat Dr. Smith (Oldman), the cartoony villain, and his plans for
sabotage.
        What ensues is a series upon series of completely unrelated
conflicts. The first such scene takes place on an abandoned spaceship
and what ensues could best be described as "Alien"-lite. The story
changes again when the Robinsons crash land on an alien planet and
must act quickly to escape it and survive.  But there's never any real
notion of suspense here because the script constantly wanders
aimlessly. Plotlines are developed, but each becomes totally
irrelevant as the story changes from scenario to scenario. The
atmosphere attempts to be surreal by incorporating time travel and
various time paradoxes, but it's presented in such a ridiculous way
it's utterly boring. By the time the last act rolls around, there is
no sense of a payoff building. The ending does not go out on a high
note with any kind of climax, instead, it seems to come to a sudden
halt (but at least it ends at all).
        "Lost In Space" is major film production at its worst. It's
frightening that a film so poorly written, directed, and acted might
be considered mainstream entertainment.


Title
Review for Blood Simple (1984)
*1/2
1985, R, 96 minutes [1 hour, 36 minutes]
[drama/crime]
starring: John Getz (Ray), Frances McDormand (Abby), Dan Hedaya (Marty), M.
Emment Walsh (P.I.), produced by Ethan Coen, written by Ethan and Joel Coen,
directed by Joel Coen.
"Blood Simple" acts like some kind of genius, psychological thriller, but
all I saw was one of those B movies they show on UHF stations at 3 a.m. It is
a fair attempt at making a good, macabre, crime story, but not much works
here. 
The story revolves around some hick town in Texas where a young woman, Abby
(McDormand), is cheating on her husband Marty (Hedaya) with Ray, one of the
bartenders (Getz as Ray) at Marty's strip club. We don't learn much about the
affair except that Marty must be the typical, insanely jealous type. 
They sleep at the Ray's house, and then somewhere else, but nothing happens
to create for a plot. The story lingers on events that are of absolutely no
importance to the rest of the of story as a whole. There is some dialogue
pushing the story along, but it isn't very interesting because they're not
talking about anything relevant. 
Marty meets a generic P.I. (Walsh) who seems too bubbly and happy compared
to Marty's nearly psychotic attitude. The two characters clash like polkadots
and plaid. This isn't anything moody or intense, it's just plain dumb and
boring. Marty wants the P.I. to kill Abby and Ray, and so the P.I. stalks the
two, and forms an insane obsession with them.
Meanwhile, Abby and Ray get their own apartment in order to stop Marty from
harassing them, but suddenly the story becomes even more bizarre when the
P.I. kills Marty. From here on the events are just too strange to comprehend.
It's not artistically surrealistic, it's just typical B movie trash disguised
as an intricate crime story.
The characters all seem to be going crazy and there's no explanation for
this insanity. The film essentially becomes a horror flick by the end with
three dead bodies and no reasoning.
"Blood Simple" definitely has a tremendous amount of potential, but its
organization and execution are too bizarre for its own good.
visit Chad'z Movie page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz/index.html

Title
Review for Gone in Sixty Seconds (2000)
Nicholas Cage is Randall "Memphis" Raines, a retired car thief who is
blackmailed back into the business by a really creepy crime ring
leader who will kill Raines' younger brother Kip (Giovanni Ribisi)
because of something he messed up. Raines has to steal 50 cars in a
short amount of time and in order to do he has to round up a gang of
characters that could only be found in a Jerry Bruckheimer movie.
If you saw "Armageddon" or "Con Air" you can make a lot of assumptions
about this film and be correct.  The difference this time is that the
subject matter is a little more tame, the tone is lighthearted and
fun, it's not so trite and unbelievable. Raines is a nice guy but
technically, he's a criminal, yet we don't want him to be
caught. There's a subplot involving two detectives' efforts to catch
Raines and his gang and amazingly, it works well and is actually
suspenseful and exciting - exactly what a summer movie should be!
Think of as a thriller for the whole family.
Chad'z Movie Page is back! 
New reviews of the latest movies in easy-to-swallow capsule form with the 
trendy, Entertainment Weekly-style of letter grades instead of the old star 
system. Have I sold out? Visit my page and decide for yourself ;-)

Title
Review for True Romance (1993)
True Romance
Chad'z rating: **1/2 (out of 4 = OK)
1993, R, 116 minutes [1 hour, 56 minutes]
[crime/satire]
starring: Christian Slater (Clarence Worley), Patricia Arquette (Alabama
Worley), Dennis Hopper (Clifford Worley), Michael Rapaport (Dick Richie),
produced by Bill Unger, Steve Perry, Samuel Hadida, written by Quentin
Tarantino, directed by Tony Scott.
The appeal of "True Romance" is that it has no appeal. Its offbeat nature
gives the film its hook, but the motions it goes through often become
overwhelming.
We meet Clarence (Slater), who isn't your typical movie hero because he's...
well... a dork. He works in a comic book store, watches kung-fu movies, and
talks to Elvis in his fantasies. When he meets a woman named Alabama
(Arquette) at a kung-fu triple feature, the two really hit it off. It's
interesting to watch these two people who are so different seem so right
together. When Clarence finds out is a hooker, he's doesn't get mad because
he had such a good time with her. Although there seems to be detail here, we
really don't get to know the characters that well. The story is told in a
manner that makes for many inferences and seems a little distant. 
Somehow the two fall in love and get married. But Clarence is obsessed; he
convinces himself he must get "revenge" on Alabama's pimp, but for what
reason? And so the film starts to become standard in plot, but not so in
script. For example, when Clarence confronts Alabama's pimp a scene of
fantastic violence ensues, but he doesn't win. In fact, the nasty villains
"kick him while he's down" by making fun of his driver's license! 
The real adventure begins as Clarence and Alabama head out to Hollywood
hoping to sell $5 million in cocaine that Clarence accidentally stole when
fleeing the scene. Soon a complicated and strange string of events start to
unfold involving Clarence and Alabama's cross-country trip to Hollywood not
knowing the mob is on their tail. More gratuitous violence ensues, and
eventually the film's attempt at being a serious crime story seems like just
too much to swallow.
Clarence meets his friend Dick Richie (Rapaport) and they set up a deal to
sell the coke. This enables the film to incorporate some good Hollywood
satire, but what we get here isn't so much satire as it is just surrealism.
Yes, it is funny at times, but it's hard to tell what's important in terms of
plot, not to mention the fact the characters aren't very likable, thus it's
hard to care about where the story is going. The situation comes to a head
when three different parties all end up in the same room, guns blazing,
fighting over the cocaine. Guess who survives?
"True Romance" could have been a better film had it not been bogged down by
its weird satire. The absence of a hook is the hook, but that doesn't
necessarily make for superb filmmaking. 
Please visit Chad'z Movie Page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz - over 140
new and old films reviewed in depth, not just blind ratings and capsules.
Also, check out The FIRST Shay Astar Web Page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPol
enz/ShayAstar.html

Title
Review for Clerks (1994)
****
1994, R, 92 minutes [1 hour, 32 minutes]
[comedy]
starring: Brian O'Halloran (Dante), Jeff Anderson (Randal), Marilyn
Ghiglotti (Veronica), Jason Mewes (Jay), Lisa Spoonauer (Caitlin),
produced by Kevin Smith, Scott Mosier, written and directed by Kevin
Smith.
        "Clerks" is really a landmark in film history, although I don't
think anyone will recognize it as such. This is a film that cost about
$25,000 to make, yet it is much more enjoyable and better written than
most commercial films costing a thousand times as much. This is a film
about Generation X slackers hanging out in a convenient store talking
about their lives and little idiosyncrasies in a way that is so mundane,
yet so unique and sometimes vulgar, but still brilliantly hysterical. We
don't get a story with characters trying to overcome a conflict, we
essentially get a fictional documentary that really captures the essence
of dialogue, especially modern dialogue. Many non-Gen Xers may find it
rather offensive and unrealistic at times, but those of us who are
essentially the same as the characters in the film can relate all too
well.
This is a film about two buddies hanging out in their place of
employment. There is Dante (O'Halloran), the clerk who tries to do his job
and get on with his life -  "I don't bother them and they don't bother
me." Dante hates his life but somehow finds a way to deal with it, he
comes to work and does his job just hoping that tomorrow will be a better
day. And then there is Randal (Anderson), the rude, but very funny slacker
who represents the attitude that we Gen Xers think, but don't say aloud.
He speaks his mind, he poses questions that we don't really think about
(one involving an extremely detailed, but very hilarious analysis, of the
"Star Wars" films), he also refuses to be nice to customers, nor swallow
his pride just for the sake of etiquette and courtesy. 
Dante and Randal are both 22, work full time at minimum wage jobs
serving the public, are not in school and may never go back. They hate
everyone and everything, and this tension is often relieved on their
customers. The entire atmosphere of the film is so campy and almost
"realistic" in a way, as it was shot in a very grainy black and white and
does not feature a celebrity, which only makes the tone more suited for
the story. These bare essentials are what force us to pay attention to the
basic elements of theme, mood, and dialogue.
I can relate to this film so well because I have had experience in
very similar occupations. There are conversations in this movie that are
almost word-for-word duplications of conversations I have had with
co-workers. For example, when Dante and Randal start to complain about
customers and their stupid questions, I was dying laughing because it was
just so true for me. There is a very funny scene in which Randal beats a
customer at their own game, as he blatantly admits that he doesn't care
for them and that it feels good to point out the shortcomings of others,
ahh... how true that is. Even if you are not, or never have been in a
position like this, it is still hysterical because of the genius knack of
dialogue that Kevin Smith has, and his sense of character for Gen Xers. 
Dante and his girlfriend Veronica (Ghiglotti) constantly argue
over the importance of college, the differences in the requirements to
make men and women come to orgasm, and deciding who and what is most
important in a relationship. Specific examples are not given, but the
entire atmosphere of the film really gives one the sense of what modern
relationships are based on, that is, nothing. 
At some points "Clerks" can get rather crude, but the dialogue did
not seem unbelievable to me. Even though the actors are not professionals,
they are able to deliver a credible and very entertaining performance.
There are many scenes where it is obvious that they are reading cue cards,
one scene even shows the actor admitting that he messed up the line, but
the improvisation is still funny and does not break our concentration at
all. 
I still think that "Clerks" is truly a landmark of sorts, as it is
somewhat following a trend of telling funny stories about "nothing" as
this story is the epitome of that idea and does not become commercial at
all, as it relies upon its originality and comical genius to provide for a
very funny, very entertaining, and very unique film unlike any you will
ever see. Kevin Smith has basically exploited my generation, and for that
I thank him. [other films by Smith: "Mallrats"] (3/19/96) (12/18/96)

Title
Review for Best in Show (2000)
"Mockumentaries" are an under-appreciated genre of film. I'd imagine making 
one would be more difficult than making a regular comedy because you have to 
convey an atmosphere of reality while being satirical and sometimes all-out 
hysterical. That said I'd like to go on record as saying "Best In Show" will 
be the most over-looked film this year. It's one of the smartest comedies 
I've seen in years. 
Last year a mockumentary called "Drop Dead Gorgeous" did a good job in 
zinging the beauty pageant industry. That film had some pretty big names to 
it but didn't do as well as expected at the box office.  That film took a 
biting look at how serious some people get over such a relatively superficial 
event. With "Best In Show," co-writer and director Christopher Guest realizes 
human vanity is an easy target to parody and he succeeds by taking human 
vanity a step further to the point where vanity becomes a lifestyle. No, it's 
not about rich snobs (although the film does spoof them too), it's about 
people who are active participants in the dog show circuit. To them their pet 
is not really a companion but a ticket to fame and fortune and the lengths 
they'll go through for that is unbelievably funny. 
The film is an ensemble of about 20 main characters who are all realistic 
people but have their own quirkiness. I hesitate to list the "stars" since 
most of the characters are given equal screen time and contribute to the 
comedy in their own way. 
We start by meeting many different people from around the country who are 
about to travel to Philadelphia for the supposedly world-renowned Mayflower 
Dog Show. They all have different breeds of dogs and treat them in a 
different way. Some practically worship their canine, others order them 
around like a parent would to a small child. Some pamper their pooches like 
babies and some treat them like equals. What they all have in common is a 
desire to win the Best In Show award because they have truly dedicated a 
piece of themselves to their dogs and would like to think it's something more 
then just an owner-master relationship. 
Of course the humans' personalities play an integral role in making the film 
the delight it is. To really do the movie justice I should go over ALL of 
them individually, but instead I'll just give a few good examples. 
Eugene Levy and Catherine O'Hara play a Florida couple who seem to be 
experienced in the dog show industry. Levy's character Gerry is a dorky wuss 
married to a buxom blonde named Cookie who, shall we say, "has a reputation." 
Levy is excellent in this role because you don't know if he's clueless or too 
shrewd to do anything every time his wife meets another man who seems to know 
her from somewhere. There's one particular scene where the two stop at a 
couple's house and the husband (played perfectly by Larry Miller) is all over 
Cookie in front of both his wife and Gerry. 
Another strange couple is Meg and Hamilton Swan (Parker Posey and Michael 
Hitchcock) who are so obsessed with their dog and perfection from it they 
actually visit a pet psychologist and discuss how their sex life effects 
their dog and their chances of winning at the show. Posey has some 
outstanding scenes where she flies off the handle when the slightest problem 
crops up.  What she does to anyone who gets in her is what exemplifies smart 
black comedy. 
Two other couples to mention are a stereotypical gay couple who are genuinely 
funny and not offensive, and a gold-digging bimbo and her ambiguous female 
friend who handles her award-winning poodle. There's also a southern man 
whose best friend is a purebred bloodhood. 
In writing these character descriptions just now I noticed I either used or 
wanted to used a term to describe how excellent the performances were. I have 
never seen such commitment to character in a comedy before. Since this is a 
mockumentary I would imagine many of the lines were ad-libed because they 
never come across as forced or cliche. If you listen closely you'll hear some 
fantastic lines and quick comments that add to the detail of the characters 
and their situations. They're like inside jokes that don't need any 
explanation. 
And that all comes back to the direction and production of the film. Guest's 
camera work keeps the atmosphere realistic with characters talking over other 
characters and constant activity in the background (again, listen for those 
subtle one-liners). There's a few scenes of people talking directly to the 
camera to voice their thoughts on things but Guest doesn't rely on this 
technique to fill in characteristics or plot points. In fact I'd criticize 
him for not using ENOUGH of these sequences. 
Special mention MUST be made to the contribution of Fred Willard as a TV 
commentator covering the dog show as if it were a major sporting event. 
Willard is the king of Hollywood's working actors in my mind. His presence 
alone automatically makes any scene or sketch funny because he's so deadpan 
in his approach. He comes up with comments that are usually silly but catch 
you off guard and you can't help but laugh. Here he's teamed with an Engl
ishman playing the role of the expert on dog shows who has terrific comic 
timing and chemistry with Willard. 
What makes "Best In Show" great is how smoothly it flows between the 
performances, the screenplay and the direction. Most comedies have funny 
jokes and average performances, but how many comedies can you name where the 
direction was one of the reasons it worked as well as it did? 
------------------------------------------------------------------------ 
You can also read this review at: 
http://www.epinions.com/mvie-review-4219-1FCC11C5-39EB7487-prod3 
And other reviews on the same topic at: http://www.epinions.com/mvie 
Check out my profile page at: http://www.epinions.com/user-chad9976 
Chad'z Movie Page is back! 
In-depth reviews of nearly all mainstream films playing at your local 
cineplex. There's also reviews of a few classic films and some of your 
personal favorites.
*****
Chad'z Movie Page is back! 
In-depth reviews of nearly all mainstream films playing at your local 
cineplex. There's also reviews of a few classic films and some of your 
personal favorites.

Title
Review for High Fidelity (2000)
John Cusak stars in the adaption of the popular British novel about a broken 
hearted record store-owner
who spends most of the movie wondering why all his romantic relationships 
have failed to materialize his
whole life. Chicago is the backdrop to make the setting and characters more 
American-friendly but the
English style is ever present. 
Think of it as a really mature Kevin Smith flick (but not TOO mature), 
there's tons of discussions analyzing
pop culture and music and relationships with an added dash of brash comedy 
and the like. The comedy and
the drama (the main plot about Cusak's recent break-up with his long-time 
girlfriend and his attempt to
win her back) balance nicely - so that you have one scene of serious human 
interaction and the next is
banter about "Top five side A's, track 1's." 
It's a cute movie that has more to offer than the typical Hollywood romantic 
comedy. Probably one of the
best [first] date flicks to be released in a long time. 
Chad'z Movie Page is back! 
New reviews of the latest movies in easy-to-swallow capsule form with the 
trendy, Entertainment Weekly-style of letter grades instead of the old star 
system. Have I sold out? Visit my page and decide for yourself ;-)

Title
Review for Ronin (1998)
1998, R, 121 minutes [2 hours, 1 minute]
Starring: Robert De Niro (Sam), Jean Reno (Vincent), Natascha McElhone
(Dierdre), Stellan Skarsgĺrd (Gregor); written by J.D. Zeik, David Mamet [as
Richard Weisz]; produced by Frank Mancuso Jr.; directed by John Frankenheimer.
Seen October 4, 1998 at 1:40 p.m. at the Rotterdam Square Mall Cinema 6
(Rotterdam, NY), theater #6, by myself for free using my Sony/Loews critic's
pass. [theater rating: ***: good seats, sound and picture]
        Mercenaries never get a good rep in the movies. They always come off as cold-
hearted, inherently evil guys who enjoy killing people they don't know for
money. Maybe they're not really so vile in reality, maybe they're the same
flesh-and-blood people as everyone else, and that's the angle "Ronin" takes
with its story of modern day warriors just looking for a purpose for their
existence.
        The problem the huge blockbuster Hollywood films about international
espionage, terrorism and other such things that will lead to double-crosses,
shoot outs, explosions, and other forms of action is that they try too hard to
create a convincing story. They just drop tons of meaningless details on us as
if we could really follow them. This film takes just the opposite angle. It
barely tells us anything, five minutes into the film and we're already in the
middle of something. It's significance is unknown at the time, but it's pretty
exciting because it doesn't try to dumb its story down.
        We meet a group of international mercs who have been hired, apparently, by an
Irish revolutionary lead by a stern woman named Diedre (McElhone), who is as
gruff as any of the men she has hired, but still has a sense of delicateness
to her. Her team is the generic multi-pack of specialist mercs. There's Sam
(De Niro), an American with great detective and field skills - he's probably
ex-CIA as he uses tactics to further his and the group's mission that anyone
could do, such as take a picture of the enemy and test his reflex skills
without seeming remotely suspicious. De Niro is great here, as if he's wanted
to be in a role like this for years - he's practically Batman. Jean Reno co-
stars as a French operative named Vincent. If Sam is Batman, then he's Robin -
not quite as cunning, but learns fast and then applies his knowledge. Other
members of the group include a cocky British merc, an American car and weapons
specialist, and a Russian computer specialist named Gregor (Skarsgĺrd) whose
brain is his best weapon, although it does tend to backfire on him.
        The crew's mission is to retrieve a steel suitcase from a group of generic,
well-armed and equipped villains who will be intent on stopping them. Sam
constantly questions the contents of the case, but he never gets much in the
way of answer. All we know is it's worth killing people over and thousands of
dollars in compensation to the mercs if they can get it.
        This plot setup might seem a little basic, but that's where the film throws
us for a loop. What seems like such a simple task (well, if using computers to
track the villains and lots of heavy artillery to slaughter carloads of them
is considered simple) turns out to be quite complicated. We don't know what's
in that case but its importance continues to escalate once the massive action
scenes kick in showing the mercs attempts to nab it.
        And the action scenes are totally fantastic in all meanings of the word.
Those kinds of car-chases-through-narrow-city-streets-while-firing-
machineguns-and-blowing-stuff-up scenes have become generic to the extreme
over recent years, and yet they're captivating here, even when the "fruit
cart!" is obvious and the precise driving at tremendously high speeds are
Hollywood staples all the way. Why do such cliches work here when they rarely
do elsewhere? I can't answer that honestly, but I guess it's because there's a
sense of old-school roots here. Director John Frankenheimer is no stranger to
action, in fact, he's one of the founding fathers of the genre. His direction
makes for a sense of organized chaos, not just chaos as other directors might
go for. There's a real sense of danger and reality here. Setting the film in
the old, narrow streets of France, mostly in Paris is a nice change of pace
from the freeways of L.A. and the back alleys of New York.
        But the story is not as simple as car chases and fire fights. As intense as
they are, the sense of mystery is just as compelling. One of the mercs has
turned out to be a traitor and the rest are then disbanded and some killed.
Sam and Vincent stick together forming a friendship and a real trust for each
other. They reveal what they've learned over the years and continue to
demonstrate their excellent detective skills. They don't have access to a
roomful of computers and high-tech gadgets, they use common sense and the
reliable gut instinct. Sometimes this takes them places, sometimes it nearly
kills them. 
        In any case the story is constantly evolving, revealing more and more about
the nature of all the parties involved. Who's REALLY working for who and what
their goal is. The significance of the case continues to shape the story, not
only in terms of the people who want it, but its simpler aspects such as where
a duplicate could be bought and switched. It's this kind of basic logic that
the film uses to show how clever it can be. 
        What's also unique is the film's use of selective scripting. David Mamet co-
wrote the film under a pseudonym, and his scenes of dialogue and mood are
quite obvious. I suspect he had much to do with the film's idiosyncratic and
detailed moments between the action. The scene in which the title is
explained, that is, of warriors in Feudal Japan whose masters were killed and
were then dishonored before of it, is one of the best. These men could
certainly serve their counties well, but why don't they? Perhaps they once did
but found that playing by the rules sucks, or perhaps they were at one time
and were evicted in one way or another and are convinced that being a
mercenary is the way of penance or perhaps just to spite the world.  
        Not only are the effects and direction convincing, but it's the words the
characters say to support each other that show a sense of initiative. In
Hollywood, blood is only to be splattered, good guys never get shot, and
wounds are taken care of by just wrapping them in gauze. Here we're shown a
few scenes in which one of our main characters has been shot and needs real
medical attention, not just first aid. How many other action movies take
bullet-removal from the abdomen seriously?
        The only major problem is the final act could have been a bit stronger and
more plausible. The film is very complicated but why does it feel the need to
slow down as it approaches its climax? The climax isn't that much more
thrilling than what had come before, and doesn't answer many questions. 
        I don't think Jerry Seinfeld would have liked "Ronin." He claims to be "the
guy you see standing around in the parking lot afterwards saying, 'Oh, you
mean that was the same guy from the beginning? Oh.' and the guy that keeps
asking, 'Wasn't he with them? Why'd they kill him if he was with them? Oh, he
wasn't really with them? It's a good thing they killed him then.'"


Title
Review for Alienł (1992)
1992, R, 115 minutes [1 hour, 55 minutes]
starring: Sigourney Weaver (Ripley), Charles S. Dutton (Dillon), Charles
Dance (Clemens), Paul McGann (Golic); written by David Giler, Walter Hill,
Larry Ferguson, Vincent Ward; produced by Gordon Carroll, Walter Hill, David
Giler; directed by David Fincher; based on characters created by Dan
O'Bannon, Ronald Shusett.
Seen November 23, 1997 on home video (borrowed from my sister's roommate).
During the opening credits to "Alien 3" I could tell it was going to be
different from the others in the series, and that gave me high hopes. And
there is a major difference here that is somewhat of a relief, but at the
same time the difference is the problem. If the other films failed from
excessiveness, this one fails from depravity and blandness.
Like the first two films, the opening sequence has the credits appearing
over the void of space. But this time they are intercut with quick images of
something strange happening on the ship Ripley (Weaver) and the survivors
used to escape from the alien planet. And wouldn't you know it - one of those
pesky aliens somehow got on the ship too. 
Ripley's ship crash lands on a desolate planet used as a prison for violent
criminals, who seem to have formed some sort of cult. They have little
technology but manage to save only Ripley.
The first third is extremely slow in its storytelling. Almost nothing
happens in terms of plot development, instead we just get interaction between
Ripley and the prison doctor, Clemens (Dance), and the cult leader Dillon
(Dutton). The alien itself is barely shown, only in the shadows, and in
disorienting shots at that (how original). Somehow a larvae is imbedded in a
dog's body, and during a scene in which Ripley, Clemens, and Dillon cremate
the bodies of Newt and Hicks, we see it be "born" while Dillon recites an
eerie eulogy.
At first I was intrigued by the Gothic atmosphere here, and the
aforementioned scenes built up  at least some suspense. It's clear Fincher
wants to do something different, and for that I applaud him. However, just
when he had us in the palm of his hand and ready to squeeze, he lets us go by
allowing the story to become a complete re-tread of the first two films.
Ripley never mentions the aliens and her experience until almost the halfway
point, and of course when she does no one believes her. Therefore, is it
surprising the most cynical, easy-to-hate character is killed by the alien
for all to see?
You would think once some semblance of plot and conflict is established the
film would have direction. Unfortunately the second half is just as slowly
paced as the first. Not only that, but we get many of the same old gimmicks
such as Ripley and the others having to wait a long time for a rescue party;
the fact there are almost no weapons; supporting characters getting killed by
the alien; and of course lots of tunnels, drains, and other places for the
alien to hide, and for the people to trap themselves in.
The last act contains the same old climax with the five-minute countdown
that will "certainly" lead to the alien's doom, but kills off more supporting
characters in the process. Fincher at least shoots these scenes in a bizarre
manner that gives one a sense a vertigo. Elements like this crop up
throughout the picture and it's a shame they weren't taken advantage of.
It's not that "Alien 3" is a bad movie per se, there's just not enough to
appreciate.

To receive Chad'z movie reviews directly, send e-mail to ChadPolenz@aol.com
with "subscribe" in the header.

Title
Review for Good Will Hunting (1997)
Chad'z rating: **** (out of 4 = excellent)
1997, R, 126 minutes [2 hours, 6 minutes]
starring: Matt Damon (Will Hunting), Robin Williams (Prof. Sean Maguire),
 Stellan Skasgĺrd (Prof. Gerald Lambeau), Ben Affleck (Chuckie); written by
 Matt Damon, Ben Affleck; produced by Lawrence Bender; directed by Gus Van
 Sant.
Seen March 18, 1998 at 7 p.m. at Rotterdam Square Mall (Rotterdam, NY),
 theater #3, by myself using my Sony/Loews critic's pass. [Theater rating: ***:
 good sound, picture, and seats]
        Most genres use story as a device, backdrop, or a conveince, but drama is a
 genre all about story and is just as likely to suffer from problems that
 hinder the storytelling process (i.e. predictability, question of
 plausibility, etc.) as anything else. Perhaps the reason drama gets a bad rap
 is due to our concentration on these elements where we might not notice them
 otherwise. In its most basic form, "Good Will Hunting" is as classic a drama
 as they come, but like its hero, it manages to exceed well beyond the
 standards to the point where it creates new ones. It isn't just  a
 surprisingly enjoyable drama, it IS drama.
        The film opens by introducing us to Will Hunting (Damon), a suave young man
 who holds a custodial position at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
 Looking at him one could never tell (or even believe, for that matter) that he
 is actually an orphan, a criminal, and a born genus. Thankfully, these aspects
 are put on the back burner for the sake of character development, which makes
 them all the more relevant later.
         Will likes to do things any another college-aged guy in a big city would do,
 such as hit the bars and clubs with his friends and mingle with the ladies.
 The initial atmosphere and dialogue is very realistic as the performances,
 combined with the terrific directing create for the kind of authentic
 camaraderie most films only try for. The delicate pacing allows us to learn
 things about Will by carefully dropping hints at the right moments without
 rushing anything. In fact, some elements are purposely left open-ended and
 contain little explanation, such as a scene in which Will and his best friend
 Chuckie (Affleck) attempt to beat up some guys over an elementary grudge. When
 Will is arrested he is freed with help from Gerald Lambeau (Skasgĺrd) - an MIT
 professor who has realized Will's hidden talent and wants to help him.
        Part of Lambeau's plea bargain with the judge is that Will must undergo
 therapy, but when a few confrontations with psychiatrists go bad, Lambeau
 finally finds the perfect shrink - his old college friend Sean Maguire
 (Williams). Here is where the film begins to prove its merit even as the story
 works as expected. Will is a good kid at heart, but he has a tremendous
 problem with authority, but only Maguire is able to get past his violent
 temper and feel the ability (and need) to help him. Within just a few minutes
 time both men are able to analyze each other: Will because he is a genus, and
 Maguire because he's a psychologist. The process by which this occurs is
 nothing short of amazing, especially considering how quickly it happens
 without becoming the least bit trite. 
        And if the film hadn't already established itself as a power character-driven
 drama, it manages to top itself as the story continues to expand. It's not
 surprising that Will meets a girl (Minnie Driver as Skyla), but what is
 surprising is the way in which the relationship works in conjunction with the
 various sub-plots. Damon and Driver have great chemistry together, and the
 screenplay allows them to be more than simply generic lovers, but as two
 intelligent people who genuinely care for each other. Will discusses the
 relationship with Maguire, whose analysis is fascinating as he draws parallels
 to his relationship with his now-deceased wife and thus provides for good
 character development and interaction.
        Although the film is comprised of various highly intellectual elements,
 intelligence without application is a pretty boring thing. Affleck and Damon
 realize this and have managed to chisel their script with the tiniest details
 of insight. The characters are so likable because we're allowed to learn what
 makes them tick - they're not simply people involved in conflicts for the sake
 of a Hollywood drama. And when Will and Skyla's romance becomes troubled it
 seems realistic as it isn't used as a gimmick.
        A countless number of minor topics come up and are dealt with accordingly,
 such as Will refusing to take a government job because of the harm it might do
 to people he doesn't know, or how his job as a construction worker is more
 honorable than a mathematician. Many idiosyncratic observations are also made,
 mostly through common dialogue, all of which continue to demonstrate the
 film's remarkable insight into everything it deals with.
        What's great about a film like "Good Will Hunting" is that within the course
 of a couple of hours it manages to deal with some of the heaviest subjects of
 life and always in the greatest of ways. It's emotionally powerful and an
 example of great story-telling. If there's any justice it will become a modern
 classic.
Please visit Chad'z Movie Page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz - over 190
 new and old films reviewed in depth, not just blind ratings and quick
 capsules. Also, check out The FIRST Shay Astar Web Page @
 http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz/ShayAstar.html

Title
Review for Dick (1999)
Dick
Chad'z rating: ** (out of 4 = fair/below average)
1999, PG-13, 94 minutes [1 hour, 34 minutes]
[comedy]
Starring: Kirsten Dunst (Betsy Jobs), Michelle Williams (Arlene Lorenzo), Dan 
Hedaya (President Richard `Dick' Nixon), Will Ferrell (Bob Woodward), Bruce 
McCulloch (Carl Bernstein); written by Andrew Flemming, Sheryl Longin; 
produced by Gale Anne Hurd; directed by Andrew Flemming.
Seen August 6, 1999 at 4:40 p.m. at Crossgates Cinema 12 (Guilderland, NY), 
theater #25, by myself for free using my Hoyts season pass. [Theater rating: 
***: good picture, sound and seats]
    `Dick' is not a film meant for the theaters. It's not that it's super 
raunchy or in bad taste or the like, it's just a made-for-television movie 
that somehow got promoted to feature film status. You can practically hear 
the Hollywood suits glancing over the script thinking `Ooh, this is so funny 
and witty. Why haven't we done this before?'
    The truth is everything in `Dick' has, in fact, been done before and a 
lot better too. 
    The basic premise is a tired idea, but since it's a political satire 
there's a sense that a witty, zingy, hilarious satire is about to unfold. 
Unfortunately, the closest the film comes to creative comedy is through a few 
new `Dick' jokes (and I don't mean the nickname for Richard). Everything else 
is mostly there to fill in for a minimum running time.
    Kirsten Dunst and Michelle Williams star as Betsy and Arlene, two high 
school students who happened to be in the wrong place at the wrong time when 
the Watergate break-in and the elaborate scandal following take place back in 
the early 1970s. The film is meant as a laugh-out-loud comedy so the basis 
for the jokes throughout the entire first act and most of the film in general 
deal with the fact that these girls are too stupid to understand what's 
really going on. When they find themselves being interrogated by Nixon's 
goons there's little to laugh at here. It's not a case of the girls thinking 
they're in big trouble for mailing a letter so close to midnight (which would 
have been remotely funny), it's a case of them being considered serious 
threats to national security which goes completely over their head. Playing 
off characters' idiocy is one thing, but these girls aren't dumb enough to be 
obnoxiously funny (a la `Dumb & Dumber') and aren't smart enough to see what 
is so blatantly obvious.
    To their credit, the contrived screenplay and poor performances by every 
working actor in Hollywood don't help much either. Dan Hedaya, the king of 
Hollywood working actors, co-stars as President Richard `Dick' Nixon, one of 
the most easy-to-make-fun-of figures in modern history and yet there's just 
nothing that goes `spoof' here. Hedaya's performance tends to flip-flop - 
first he's nice, likable as a cartoony image of Nixon, but later he's a 
totally different person - malicious and mean-spirited and disappears for 
large blocks of time (wouldn't you think the actor playing the title 
character would get just a bit more screen time?)
    The story follows Betsy and Arlene and their bimbotic (is that a word?) 
adventures as they find themselves being flattered by Nixon and have a ball 
being `official White House dog-walkers,' and `secret youth advisers,' which 
they proceed to tell everyone about despite Nixon's plead with them to keep 
it quiet. What a shock that no one believes them. 
    And so the film runs around in circles with Betsy and Arlene continuing 
to accidentally uncover more dirt on the Watergate scandal without realizing 
it, while at the same time dealing with even more ridiculous subplots. For 
example, Arlene finds herself more attracted to Dick than Bobby Sherman, 
which I suppose could symbolize a more recent case of a young woman being 
attracted to the president, but just isn't believable at all. Then there's 
the factual events that are attempted to be explained through the girls' 
actions, such as their tipping off of Washington Post reporters Bob Woodward 
(Ferrell) and Carl Bernstein (McCulloch). When the two call the `Commie 
muck-raking bastards' they think of it as a joke, yet go so far as to reveal 
the names on a CREEP list (`It must be a list of creeps' they say when they 
first find the list... stuck to G. Gordon Liddy's shoe!). Later, when they 
take the `prank' a step further, their pseudonym of `Deep Throat' comes from 
the porno movie Betsy's brother was caught attending.
    Much of the film is more of this material - corny, trite, unfunny satire 
that comes across as a comedy with a identity crisis problem. Is it a 
straight comedy? Is it an insightful satire? Having the girls' 
marijuana-laced cookies be the catalyst to many of Nixon's biggest decisions 
and accomplishments (withdrawing from Vietnam, avoiding a nuclear war with 
Russia) is a funny idea and sounds like something easy enough to carry out 
and have more zing than Miracle Whip mayonnaise, but it just doesn't happen. 
It doesn't even go the route of bawdiness or raunchiness, it's just plain 
boring (I laughed maybe four times at some slapstick jokes, but the other 
people in the theater didn't laugh at all). 
    It's easy to pin the blame on the film's co-writer and director Andrew 
Flemming for botching what should have been a cakewalk film, but that really 
wouldn't be an honest criticism. Instead, I think everyone is at fault here: 
the actors for failing miserably at their portrayals (as talented as Dunst 
and Williams may be, they never seem like high school students nor hippies) 
and the casting directors for making the film one big sitcom-star-o-rama; the 
costume, makeup and production crew for making the 1970s look a helluva lot 
like the 1990s; the music supervisor for using the same old soundtrack songs 
(it plays more like an homage to `Reservoir Dogs' than a real establishment 
of the music of the era); the cinematography for making the sheer look of the 
film drab and static... even the credits feel ripped-off from `Austin Powers' 
(there's thousands of fonts available, they couldn't find another one to 
use?)!
    Maybe there's just nothing left of the Nixon and hippie era worth 
spoofing.
---------------------------------
Please visit Chad'z 
Movie Page - over 230 new and old movies reviewed in-depth, not just 
blind ratings and blather capsules.
Associate member of The O.F.C.S. (Online 
Film Critics Society)

Title
Review for Taxi Driver (1976)
Taxi Driver
Chad'z rating: ***1/2 (out of 4 = very good)
1976, R, 114 minutes [1 hour, 54 minutes]
[drama]
starring: Robert De Niro (Travis Bickle), Cybill Shepherd (Betsy), Jodie
Foster (Iris), Harvey Keitel (Matthew), written by Paul Schrader, produced by
Michael and Julia Phillips, directed by Martin Scorsese.
What's great about the movies is they allow us to get to know anonymous
strangers. Usually the characters we meet are likable and relatable, but
"Taxi Driver" tries to rob us of the innocence we're used to with a character
study of a person everyone's encountered but never given a second thought to.
New York City has been and always will be associated with crime, pollution,
ghettos, and the "scum" that comes with them. Everyone thinks the streets
could and should be cleaned up, but most realize there's nothing that can
really be done about it and don't let it get to them. Travis Bickle (De Niro)
wishes he could feel that way, he's a Vietnam veteran who drives a taxi
throughout city and can't help noticing the Hellish nature of the city and
the society it breeds. Bickle himself seems to be forming his own reality as
we constantly hear his narration of his obsession and hatred for the city and
his own life.
It's easy to sympathize with Bickle as Scorsese paints a bleak, Gothic-like
portrait of the city by emphasizing the heat and humidity of the summer as
there always seems to be steam or mist rising from the sewers and the
streets. Most of the action takes place at night where only the neon signs
from cheap diners and adult movie theaters provide light. Bickle's passengers
tend to be the "spooks" people avoid such as drunks, prostitutes, two-bit
criminals, and "normal" people who relieve their neurosis in the privacy and
anonymity of the cab (including one funny, yet disturbing scene with a cameo
by Scorsese).
The entire film seems to be a long letter to society, written by Bickle,
attempting to justify his mental deterioration. The first half shows his
struggle to cope and be a normal person. He charms a political organizer
named Betsy (Shepherd) into going out with him (why she ever liked him is
beyond me). But he blows it and when she refuses to see him again he blames
her and thinks she's the same as all the other scum, just better dressed.
As the film progresses Bickle slips deeper and deeper into his own world. He
buys several guns illegally and it seems as if he will become a vigilante,
but besides stopping a robbery, this doesn't happen. He also finds himself
bumping into a young teenage prostitute named Iris (Foster) whom he wants to
"save" from her pimp Matthew (Keitel). 
Little happens in terms of plot, and although there are a few good scenes of
Bickle's attempt to make a difference with Iris, he becomes entirely too
twisted to relate to because there isn't enough (if any) back-story present.
I'm sure the fact he's a veteran has something to do with it, but why not
have flashbacks to something traumatic in his life? As good a job as Scorsese
does in depicting the nihilism Bickle is obsessed with, he doesn't give
enough specific examples. The ending is too surreal for its own good, but I
guess it follows the film's logical conclusion.
Although "Taxi Driver" works as a good narrative and establishment of mood,
there's still a lot more that could have been done. De Niro's performance is
excellent especially considering how pathetic his character is and how
exhausting it must be to carry the film virtually solo. Still, the elements
that make it up are well assembled and entertaining, but most of all
original.
Please visit Chad'z Movie Page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz - over 150
new and old movies reviewed in depth, not just blind ratings and quick
capsules. Also, check out The FIRST Shay Astar Web Page @
http://membersa.aol.com/ChadPolenz/ShayAstar.html

Title
Review for Jackal, The (1997)
1997, R, 124 minutes [2 hours, 4 minutes]
starring: Bruce Willis (The Jackal), Richard Gere (Declan Mulqueen), Sidney
Poitier (FBI Deputy Director Carter Preston), Diane Vernon (Major Valentina
Kolovska); written by Chuck Pfarrer; produced by Michael Caton-Jones, Sean
Daniels, James Jacks, Kevin Jarre; directed by Michael Caton-Jones; based on
the screenplay "The Day Of The Jackal" by Kenneth Ross.
Seen Tuesday, November 18, 1997 at 7:10 p.m. at The Glenwood Movieplex
Cinemas (Oneida, N.Y.), theater #1, by myself for free (press pass). [Theater
rating: *** - good sound, good picture, good seats]
They say there's only a certain amount of plots that any story can use. I'm
sure I've seen them all by this point, and the movies never cease to amaze me
in their efforts to convince me I haven't. Watching nearly every minute of
"The Jackal" I constantly felt a sense of Deja Vu, as if I'd see it all
elsewhere. But what's really scary is the fact I had seen most of it in films
just as mediocre as this.
The film wastes no time in setting up its premise and revealing itself as
the generic thriller it is. The first scene takes place in modern day Moscow
where we witness an attempt to arrest a mobster by tough Russian cop Major
Valentina Kolovska (Vernon), FBI Deputy Director Carter Preston (Poitier),
and a slew of police in full riot gear. When the mobster actually tries to
escape and is killed in the process, it's symbolic how this film will go
about developing its story.
The Russian "Godfather" gets word of the incident and becomes so enraged he
kills one of his own men (a la James Bond-villain/Darth Vader-style), and
hires "The Jackal" (Willis), supposedly the world's best hitman, to
assassinate a top American official as payback.
It's bad enough there are remarkably few details here, such as why the U.S.
and Soviets are working together, or even how Kolovska got a distractingly
ugly scar on her head, but what's really annoying is how serious the film
presents itself. Like every other "high-tech" thriller, there's lots of
technical jargon here to make it seem realistic, but the pacing is so quick I
missed even the most general plot details. For example, I can't describe how
the FBI learns of The Jackal and his plan because I didn't understand it
myself. 
>From this point on, the sense of Deja Vu really started to kick in. At
first, the story works much  like "The Saint," only from the opposite
perspective, as we follow The Jackal from Europe to Canada and see how he
fakes his IDs and constantly disguises himself (although how he smuggles in a
huge artillery gun is conviently left out). Meanwhile, Preston and Kolovska
team up and try to convince a convicted terrorist (a la "The Rock"), Declan
Mulqueen (Gere), to help them find The Jackal. Do I really have to tell you
how poorly explained this element is and how much blackmail is used as
justification for the plot?
Most of the film shifts back and forth between The Jackal's clever
assassination plan, and Preston, Kolovska, and Mulqueen's efforts to track
him. It's a generic cat-and-mouse story which walks a fine line between
realistic detective work (a la "The Fugitive"), and the same old governmental
thriller stuff (a la "Patriot Games"). I was surprised by the attempt at
detail made here, and some it was actually quite interesting. 
Unfortunately, as is the case with most modern thrillers, once the film
showed potential for authenticity and intelligence, the cliches and action
sequences take over. First there's a pointless scene of The Jackal testing
his gun's remote targeting system on the hillbilly who made it for him
(played by the funny, but typecasted, Jack Black). Then there's a chase scene
at a crowded regatta, the revelation of a leak within the FBI, and a sudden
realization The Jackal will kill Mulqueen's long lost love (who of course
plays an important role in the end).
The final act is unoriginal to say the least. Mulqueen realizes The Jackal
isn't after the director of the FBI, but the First Lady. It's all downhill
from there as the film uses the most worn out of cliches such as the
last-second, life-saving-dive-in-slow-motion, and the man-against-man chase
through subway tunnels and all the danger that could be involved in that
situation. Not to mention the beyond predictable ending.
Note to Hollywood: if you insist on making movies like "The Jackal," which
recycle and rip-off, at least do so with good movies. 

To receive Chad'z movie reviews directly via e-mail, send e-mail to
ChadPolenz@aol.com with "subscribe" in the header.

Title
Review for Boyz N the Hood (1991)
Chad'z rating: ***1/2 (out of 4 = very good)
1991, R, 112 minutes [1 hour, 52 minutes]
starring: Cuba Gooding Jr. (Tre Styles), Ice Cube (Doughboy Baker), Morris
Chestnut (Ricky Baker), Laurence Fishburne (Mr. Furious Styles), produced by
Steve Nicolaides, written and directed by John Singleton.
There have been many movies about life in black ghettos, but most of them
were made by white, mainstream directors using Hollywood money. But with
"Boyz N The Hood," director John Singleton approaches his canvas in an
expressionist manner. He doesn't concentrate so much on story and plot as he
does character development and atmosphere. The result is an insightful,
thematic film, even if the themes are blatantly plugged in.
The films opens with a 20-minute flashback to 1984. We meet our main
characters as children growing up in South Central Los Angeles. The immediate
atmosphere is bleak and disturbing from the dialogue and background alone.
The children are only 10 or 11 years old, yet they find themselves looking at
dead bodies, fighting with each other, and talking and acting like Mafia
hitmen. It's a shame they would be so apathetic at such young ages, although
the importance of their friendship is inspiring.
Flashforward seven years to the present as the main characters are now
seniors in high school but each have different plans for after graduation.
Tre Styles (Gooding Jr.), the film's main character, plans to go to college
and be someone. His father, Mr. Furious Styles (Fishburne), raised him well.
He taught Tre morals and values, how to be a winner in life, to respect his
fellow man and woman, and to stay off drugs and out of trouble. 
Too bad some of that advice didn't rub off on Doughboy Baker (Ice Cube),
Tre's friend who has been in and out of jail since he was a kid. He doesn't
do much in film other than sit on the porch of his house with his friends,
cuss, and drink 40 ounces of beer. His half-brother Ricky (Chestnut) doesn't
have the bad attitude Doughboy has. He admires Tre, but his
born-out-of-wedlock son proves he isn't always responsible.
Most of the events in the film do not create nor follow a plot other than
Tre, Doughboy, and Ricky's efforts to get by and survive. Although they talk
like hoodlums, none of them actually belong to an organized gang. They simply
stay close to their extensive crew for support and protection. The "hanging
out" atmosphere makes for good camaraderie and interesting dialogue. Their
diction is vulgar, but it's realistic and often leads to philosophical
discussions such as the existence of God, why they have to use the words
"bitch" and "nigga," and what their purpose in life is.
Surprisingly, the atmosphere is not as pessimistic as you'd think it would
be. Fishburne's character allows Singleton to make some important points
about the people and society in the film. One such incident has Mr. Styles
telling Tre and Ricky about how "The man" is trying to exterminate blacks by
using the ghetto as a voluntary prison. This scene takes place in the
dangerous section of Compton. As Styles preaches, hoodlums, kids, and an old
man gather and listen. Although I doubt this would happen in reality, it is
uplifting at the time to think violent, ignorant gangsters would even listen
at all. 
Styles' speech symbolizes the entire film because when he is finished,
everyone has an opinion but they eventually go back to what they were doing.
The same thing happens when you see the film - you know something should be
done because no one deserves to live like this, but what can you do?
The last act pretty much follows the film's logical conclusion. What makes
it sad is not the fact it's a case of classic irony and vengeance, but
because it involves a tragedy with characters we've just started to get to
know and sympathize with.
It's hard to think of "Boyz N The Hood" as a movie, but more like a
collection of images. In fact, this is probably what Singleton intends the
film to be. Still, those images are unlike anything I've ever seen before and
they made me think, thus the film is a success.
Please visit Chad'z Movie Page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz - over 150
new and old films reviewed in depth, not just blind ratings and quick
capsules. Also, check out The FIRST Shay Astar Web Page @
http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz/ShayAstar.html

Title
Review for Space Jam (1996)
Space Jam
Chad'z rating: *** (out of 4 = good)
1996, PG, 81 minutes [1 hour, 21 minutes]
[comedy]
starring: Michael Jordan (himself), Billy West (voice of Bugs Bunny, Elmer
Fudd), Dee Bradley Baker (voice of Daffy Duck, Tazmanian Devil), Wayne Knight
(Stan Podolak), written by Leonardo Benvenuti, Timothy Harris, Steve Rudnick,
Herschel Weingrod, produced by Daniel Goldberg, Steven Paul Leiva, Ivan
Reitman, directed by Joe Pytka.
"Space Jam" is like a short movie they incorporate with thrill rides at big
amusement parks: it's not big on plot and is really just a long
advertisement. However, this film is funny and enjoyable and I can respect
that.
The Looney Toons characters (Bugs Bunny, Daffy Duck, Porky Pig, etc.) have
entertained us in the form of animated shorts for years, and this film proves
their gags and routines can still work in the form of feature films. We seem
to have forgotten cartoons were designed to make us laugh (not to be overly
dramatic musicals), and this film not only re-establishes that concept, but
does it through an original, humorous manner. 
On the planet Moron Mountain (now there's a cartoon name if I ever heard
one!), a fat, greedy, cigar-smoking alien (voiced by Danny DeVito), who runs
a fledging amusement park, sends five scouts to Earth to kidnap the Looney
Tunes characters to enslave them as novelty acts for his show. 
Back on the "real" Earth, former basketball star Michael Jordan is
struggling with his baseball career and finds himself annoyed by his new
bumbling assistant Stan (Knight, the only fictional real-life character in
the film). The initial atmosphere is a bit choppy as Jordan is upstaged by
the professionalism of Knight and Bill Murray (as himself), but he isn't bad
and I couldn't help but be curious.
The five-inch tall aliens arrive in the land of the Looney Toons packing
powerful weapons and attempt to kidnap the 'toons. Using cartoon logic, Bugs
Bunny (voiced by West) convinces them the only way they can be kidnapped is
if they beat them in a game of basketball. So the aliens make their way to
the "real" world and steal the talents from some top NBA players (through
some very funny scenes), which causes them to morph into gigantic monsters.
So Bugs travels to the "real" world and brings back Michael Jordan, hoping he
can help them win.
An interesting subplot begins to develop regarding the players (Charles
Barkley, Shawn Kemp, Mugsy Bouges, Patrick Ewing, and Larry Johnson) who were
robbed of their talents and essentially become zombies. We get some slapstick
jokes, but it keeps with the cartoony nature of the film. When the players go
to strange means to get their talents back, the comedy works in both a
childish and mature manner: childish in the delivery, but mature in the witty
content. Throughout the film are  parodies children wouldn't understand, but
are still good anyway (including a hilarious "Pulp Fiction" spoof).
Describing the final act would be pointless wouldn't it? It's as cliche and
cartoony as they come, but I didn't mind.
"Space Jam" isn't anything genius, but it's a good, decent movie. Mixing
animation with live action is a difficult process to synthesize, especially
when the comedy is cartoony in nature (and using people who aren't really
actors), but this film has a lot of wit and cleverness that more than makes
up for its rough edges. 
Please visit Chad'z Movie Page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz
E-mail: ChadPolenz@aol.com
(C)1997 Chad Polenz

Title
Review for Contender, The (2000)
Starring: Joan Allen (Senator Laine Hanson); Gary Oldman (Congressman Shelly 
Runyon); Jeff Bridges (President Jackson Evans); Sam Elliot (Kermit Newman); 
produced by Willi Bar, Marc Frydman, James Spies, Douglas Urbanski; written 
and directed by Rod Lurie. 

Joan Allen stars as Laine Hanson, a democratic senator from Ohio who has been 
selected by President Jackson Evans to fill the vacancy left by the death of 
the vice president. Hanson's a patchwork assemblage of so many politicians in 
Washington today: she's a Harvard graduate; the daughter of a former 
governor; her husband is her top advisor who also has a history of political 
experience; she's every bit as hip and trendy as Hillary Clinton and when she 
speaks she's charismatic and believable. 
We're not immediately provided with the details of Hanson's political ideals, 
just three basic things: she's an atheist, she's pro-choice and she used to 
be a Republican but switched parties a few years ago. Maybe that's enough for 
you to get a sense of her character but I would have liked a little more. 
When the major players begin to discuss why she's been selected as the top VP 
contender and ramble off jargon about how she's not too liberal but not 
conservative enough (and the other fictional politicians she's compared to), 
it seems like a bit of a shortcut. But this is a movie whose characters are 
highly motivated by their image and it's clear what the filmmakers want her 
image to be. Hanson's not made out to be a saint or a revolutionary, she's 
just trying to make a living as a big-shot politician. 
The yin to Hanson's yang is Congressman Shelly Runyon, a fairly conservative 
Republican from Illinois who appears to have a lot of tenure and seniority in 
the political world. He's a codger who doesn't like Hanson because she's 
pretty much the opposite of him in every way. Runyon heads a congressional 
committee who must interview and approve any vice presidential candidate 
before they can be sworn into office. His first choice was the governor of 
Virginia, a Bill Clinton look-a-like who failed to save a woman whose car 
crashed into a river where he happened to be fishing at the time (that scene 
opens the movie). President Evans also likes the governor but is afraid he'll 
be crucified by the committee as another Ted Kennedy. Runyon disagrees and 
will stop at nothing to prevent Hanson from becoming the vice president. 
The first act of the film does an excellent job in setting up all these major 
characters and their motivations. None of them come across as pawns in the 
political circus but as real people with intuition. They're politicians who 
actually seem to care about the issues and how their constituents would want 
them to vote. For example, Christian Slater has a supporting role as a 
freshman congressman who tells President Evans right to his face and in all 
honesty he can't and won't play a political game because it's not in his 
heart. It's a cheesy scene because you know this a movie but at the same time 
it's refreshing to hear this from this type of character in this type of 
movie. Maybe it's one of those scenes thrown in just to impress Academy 
members, but nevertheless it works. 
Around this point is where the film's major conflict comes in. It's a 
shocking revelation at first and thankfully it doesn't become the entire 
focal point of the plot once it's introduced. Runyon somehow manages to dig 
up the dirtiest of dirt of Hanson. It appears our upright citizen is not as 
squeaky-clean as you'd think (a politician with a corrupt past - what are the 
odds of that!?). To be blunt, she was Marilyn Chambers for a bunch of drunken 
frat boys doing the kinds of things to her you'd only see in a hardcore XXX 
porno movie. There's even some ambiguous photographs and witnesses to back it 
up. Things start to snowball for Hanson going from bad to worse mostly 
because she refuses to even respond to these accusations. 
Do we want people serving in the highest level of government who were and 
could possibly still be sexual deviant? 
Those are the kinds of questions Runyon asks aloud during his committee's 
grilling of Hanson. They're fair questions and I'm sure everyone who sees 
this film will have their own answers based on their personal politics. But 
that's not the questions writer and director Rod Lurie wants you to ask. 
Instead, substitute references to "people" with "women" and you've got one of 
the themes of this film. Lurie's depiction of the double standard is 
hard-hitting and provocative. It's an issue that's been on the feminist 
agenda for years (centuries even) and no matter how conservative you are 
you'll at least understand the rationale for trying to eliminate this form of 
hypocrisy. 
However, an even more important theme is at work in "The Contender." It's the 
question the characters never ask - "Does what someone did in the past 
reflect their character today?" It's a similar idea to political views on the 
death penalty but since it's related to sex we comprehend it differently. 
Sometimes we can understand why a person might commit homicide but for most 
normal people it's difficult to understand why someone would want to be 
promiscuous. 
In telling his story Lurie seems to come off as a liberal on the issues, and 
this is likely going to effect your enjoyment of the film. As a storyteller 
he's much more moderate. Runyon isn't made out to be an evil zealot and 
Hanson is far from being an innocent victim. His screenplay does a fine job 
in keeping everything as realistic as possible because anywhere else this 
film would be all about the games politicians play instead of philosophies 
behind the politics. For a rookie he's banged out an impression script and I 
have a feeling the Academy is going to take note of this. 
If there's anything I could fault "The Contender" for it would be the direct 
references to the Monicagate scandal. At one point Hanson admits she voted 
for Clinton's impeachment but uses what will likely become the next "Show me 
the money"-like catchphrase: "Responsible but not guilty." If Lurie wants 
this film to be a show of support for Clinton and a message that the attempt 
to impeachment was unnecessary he should have been more subtle. 
I also take issue with some scenes in which there's a "great speech" made by 
either Hanson or Evans about "The church of democracy" and "traitors among 
us" complete with the sappy orchestra music and intense mood. As much as I 
like the characters and thought the themes were powerful the use of this 
technique seems more like kissing-up to the Academy than honest filmmaking. 
The ending is surprising because a lot of answers are provided. Whether they 
work and whether they were needed at all is certainly open to interpretation. 
Maybe it's a bit too Hollywood in some aspects but the fact it could still be 
surprising after all that has happened is a form of quiet brilliance. 
In glancing over some reviews of this film by professional critics I noticed 
it's either praised mightily or harshly scorned. I am even more surprised to 
see a lot of bashing of this film on the Internet. That just means "The 
Contender" is going to be remembered as a pretty controversial film in the 
ranks of "The Blair Witch Project" and "The Cook, The Thief, His Wife And Her 
Lover" and I think that's exactly what it set out to do. 


Title
Review for Shining, The (1980)
1980, R, 143 minutes [2 hours, 23 minutes]
starring: Jack Nicholson (Mr. Jack Torrance), Shelly Duvall (Mrs. Wendy
Torrance), Danny Lloyd (Danny Torrance), Scatman Crothers (Dick Hallorann);
written by Stanley Kubrick, Diane Johnson;  produced and directed by Stanley
Kubrick, based on the novel by Stephen King.
I've always been fascinated by Stanley Kubrick's ability to tell deep,
thematic stories using bare essentials. Unfortunately, this is what keeps
"The Shining" from being any kind of intriguing or scary film. The film goes
out of its way to avoid becoming a generic bloodbath, but in turn alienates
itself from all plausibility.
The basic setup is quite simple, we meet our main character, Mr. Jack
Torrance (Nicholson), who is about to become the winter caretaker for the
Overlook Hotel in the Colorado mountains. He's a recovering alcoholic and
prospective writer, and he hopes the job will give him the privacy he needs
to write his masterpiece. Jack brings his feeble-minded wife Wendy (Duvall)
and his nearly schizophrenic child Danny (Lloyd) along with him. But since
this is a horror film, there must be a catch, and this element comes into
play when we learn a former caretaker went crazy and killed his family with
an axe. Jack scoffs at the notion that "cabin fever" like that could happen
to him, but the more he denies it, the more it's clear what's going to
happen.
The first act of the film is very straightforward in its establishment of
the mood and atmosphere of the hotel. Every character is so normal here they
seem stiff, except for Danny. Danny is a disturbed child who has an imaginary
friend "Tony" living inside him who often speaks through his finger. Danny
also has constant visions of dead bodies, a river of blood, and two girls so
innocent-looking they seem evil. He obviously has some kind of psychic power,
but where did it come from and how will he use it? What's so frustrating is
the fact this element is built up so much and yet it has almost no relavance
in the long run.
The mid section accounts for the majority of the film's running time, but
it's amazing so little happens. One minute Jack is normal and sane, the next
he is obviously insane - how and why this change came about so abruptly isn't
justified well (if at all). Meanwhile, Danny becomes completely possessed by
Tony and he keeps chanting "redrum." In an earlier scene, Dick Hallorann
(Crothers), the head cook of the hotel, told Danny he's not the only one with
special powers. But it's just left at that without any further explanation.
If this is supposed to be a long-term scare tactic it doesn't work. The
suspense is probably supposed to be elaborated through our fear of the
unknown, but everything's too bizarre to take seriously.
Where the script fails, the direction attempts to make up for it. Kubrick
does a fine job in establishing the gigantic size of the hotel and the
emptiness to it all. There are some great Steadicam shots of Danny riding his
Big Wheel throughout the hotel, which is nicely complimented by loud echoes
and the eerie music. We also see reality through Danny's over-active
imagination and Jack's twisted mindset. Everything seems like one big
illusion and after a while it's nearly impossible to distinguish reality from
fantasy.
I believe the film tries to provide a back story through Jack's
hallucinations, but even this efforts seem futile. He has conversations with
a bartender and an English butler (who turns out to be the original axe
murderer) who tell him to "fulfil his destiny," but this only progresses the
story a little bit.
The entire last act, and the ending, especially, are both weak and
disappointing. When Jack attacks his wife with an axe, and Wendy screams her
head off, it doesn't seem any more intelligent than any other slasher flick.
The finale itself has almost nothing to do with all the surrealistic and
supernatural devices present throughout the film, so you really have to
wonder what the point was.
It's a shame "The Shining" turned out the way it did. There was so much
potential here and somehow it was wasted. Some films are over-written, this
one was over-directed.


Title
Review for Murder at 1600 (1997)
Murder At 1600
Chad'z rating: **1/2 (out of 4 = OK)
1997, R, 104 minutes [1 hour, 44 minutes]
[thriller/mystery]
starring: Wesley Snipes (Detective Harlan Regis), Diane Lane (Nina Chance),
Daniel Benzali (Nick Spikings), Dennis Miller (Detective Stengel), written by
Wayne Beach, David Hodgin, produced by Arnold Kopelson, Arnon Milchan,
directed by Dwight Little.
You may have noticed there's a trend happening among Hollywood thrillers, or
more specifically, thrillers concerning the government. Filmmakers know
audiences want detailed (read: "complicated") stories about conspiracies so
that even if they can't understand them, they won't notice the cop-outs and
cliches. "Murder At 1600" lies somewhere in between the trend setters and
followers as it starts out as a standard detective story but eventually
becomes another over-the-top thriller.
The opening sequence does a fine job in establishing a mysterious atmosphere
as we see bits and pieces of a sex scene taking place somewhere in the White
House. Soon we realize the girl involved in the scene was murdered and so the
"whodunit?" routine kicks in. But what's so different and interesting here is
the fact the murder took place in White House, which means everyone inside,
including the First Family, could be suspected.
Wesley Snipes stars as Harlan Regis, a Washington, D.C. homicide detective
who is called in to investigate the murder. And since this is a political
thriller you know this won't be an easy case for anyone to solve because of
the element of national security. The first act lays a good, basic framework
of the power of the government while at the same time making supporting
characters suspects.
Of course what's a strong male lead without a female counterpart? Diane Lane
co-stars as Nina Chance, an Olympic sharpshooter now a Secret Service agent
who is assigned to work with Regis. At first they bicker, then they get
along, and by the end they find themselves saving each others lives (at least
they don't fall in love!). Let's not forget Dennis Miller as Detective
Stengel - Regis' wisecracking buddy who doesn't get nearly enough screen
time.
The majority of the film goes through the motions you'd expect: a possible
conspiracy crops up, Regis and Chance investigate and soon find themselves in
over their heads, then the process repeats.  Little seems to assume anyone
who's seen films like "Clear And Present Danger" and "Patriot Games" should
be able to figure out what's going on, or at least be entertained by the
process. 
There's also those moments of cliffhangers and sudden revelations, and
interaction with characters who think Regis knows too much. But every time
they think they've got a suspect, a motive, and evidence it turns out what
they have points at someone or something else. The plot is also conducive to
double-crosses which in turn lead to chase scenes and shootouts - which is
what we critics call "movie convenient."
Everything comes together for the characters in the final act, but the rest
of the film breaks down. Regis, Chance, and Stengel must break into the White
House in order to "catch" the killer and save the president in the process.
The fact the line "We've never had a security breach in 180 years" is uttered
pretty much says it all.
I think the idea behind "Murder At 1600" was to combine the commercialism of
"Mission: Impossible" with the intelligence of "JFK" and "The Fugitive." Had
it not tried so hard to do both at the same time it could have been something
original, but the net result is at least watchable.
Please visit Chad'z Movie Page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz - over 150
new and old movies reviewed in depth, not just blind ratings and quick
capsules. Also, check out The FIRST Shay Astar Web Page @
http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz/ShayAstar.html

Title
Review for Swingers (1996)
Swingers
Chad'z rating: ***1/2 (out of 4 = very good)
1996, R, 96 minutes [1 hour, 36 minutes]
[comedy]
starring: Jon Favreau (Mike), Vince Vaughn (Trent), Ron Livingston (Rob),
Patrick Van Horn (Sue), written by Jon Favreau, produced by Victor Simpkins,
directed by Doug Liman.
        Considering the success of independent films aimed at and made by
20-something GenXers, "Swingers" seems like a film that had to be made. It
follows many of the styles set recently by Kevin Smith, Richard Linklater,
and Quentin Tarantino as it comprised mostly of offbeat dialogue and comical
situations, funny dialogue, and realistic characters with a story that might
be a bit trendy but is still fun to watch.
        Like many recent independent comedies there really isn't a plot to this
film, it's just an exercise in characterization and dialogue. Now this has
been done before ("Clerks," "Pulp Fiction") but it's become so hip by now
it's practically a cliche, and yet this film still makes it work. 
        The first scene establishes the basic setting and a clever layer of satire
as we meet Mike (Favreau), a struggling comedian and actor who has moved to
Los Angeles from New York and can't get over the fact his [ex-] girlfriend
hasn't called him in six months. He plays his messages and all say the same
thing, "Get over her and go out and party!" Even his answering machine joins
in the coercion.
        Then there is Trent (Vaughn), a producer of sorts who feels the need to take
advantage of his situation, that is: a handsome, single, Hollywood-type with
money to spend. He talks Mike into going to Las Vegas in the middle of the
night on a Wednesday and here is where the real comedy begins by showing
their "swinging" lifestyle. When they arrive in Vegas they try to make an
impression at the Black Jack tables, and a sit-com-esque atmosphere starts to
form. Although it's hilarious at the time, it also seems a bit strange, but
the film eventually finds its niche through character interaction.
        They don't call the film "Swingers" for nothing, so naturally the two try to
pick up women for some fast action. Needless to say this does happen but it
doesn't seem cliche in the way it happens. Favreau's script is able to
maintain a level of realism even as the film tends to go through the motions.
For example, the film does not cut straight to sex scenes, instead, it shows
Mike and Trent and their "dates" continuing their conversations even when
they go back to "her place."
        Most of the film depicts Mike, Trent, and their friends Rob (Livingston),
Sue (Van Horn) and Charles (Alex Desert), hanging out and hitting clubs,
bars, and parties. They see women, make eye contact, flirt with them, and
eventually go over. This might sound a little repetitive, but again, it's the
script and the realistic dialogue that makes this film different. These guys
talk and act like real men, they know what women want to hear and don't act
nor talk like movie characters, but like realistic, horny men. They're not
just out for sex, you can tell deep down they want a relationship, but conside
ring who they are what the premise of the film is, there's no way that will
happen.
        I've noticed films about nihilism like this tend to end on conservative
notes, but often they become sappy and/or just plain cheesy, but that doesn't
happen here. Mike is constantly whining about not being able to meet the
right woman and about how hard it is to get over his girlfriend, so guess
what happens to him?
        Some might say "Swingers" is just another independent, plotless, slightly
raunchy, character and dialogue-driven GenX comedy, but there isn't nearly
enough films like this (at least good ones) to refer to it as "just another."
Even if it was, it's still good and you have to respect that.
Please visit Chad'z Movie Page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz
E-mail: ChadPolenz@aol.com
(C)1997 Chad Polenz

Title
Review for Roger & Me (1989)
America is a country of opportunity because of its capitalist system where
anyone can make something for his/her self if they aim high and work hard.
The downside to so much freedom is the fact many may have to suffer in order
for others to succeed. "Roger & Me" proves this to be true as an entire city
is made to suffer because of the greed of a few. 
General Motors is the largest and richest auto manufacturer in the world. It
got its start in Flint, Mich., where it employed more than 30,000 workers up
until the mid-1980s. When GM Chairman Roger Smith announced the closing of
the Flint plant, the city was devastated and Moore decided to make this
documentary about his efforts to meet with Smith to voice his concern and
show him how badly Flint was hurt. 
Moore narrates and directs this documentary about his hometown of Flint,
which quickly deteriorates from a booming industrialized city almost to a
modern ghost town. But this is not a grim, depressing story. The film has a
lighthearted and satirical tone: instead of narrating the film through
graphic reality, Moore instead uses "Americana" footage to reflect the
subjects, such as clips from old comedies, movies, television, etc. 
Usually the subjects of documentaries are not the filmmakers, but Moore
becomes another victim of GM's business decisions as he tries to find Smith
and is constantly ejected from restaurants, country clubs, health centers,
and GM headquarters in Detroit. 
Sometimes reality can be more brutal than fiction, but sometimes it can be
funnier too, and both happens here. Throughout the film there are several
instances of people obviously lying to Moore and giving him the run-around
just to get him to leave. It's funny to watch because they are such terrible
liars, but it's also disturbing when we realize how cruel some people can be.
What is so unique about this film is its ability to tell a rather bleak
story through lighthearted methods. A parade is held and the entire city
turns out for it, but as Miss Michigan rides atop a float, in the background
we can see dozens of boarded-up stores and the frowns on the people's faces.
Moore also throws in several celebrity interviews, and they all say the same
thing; "Keep your head up and your spirits high. Work hard, and things will
pick up eventually." Try telling that to the woman who sells rabbits out of
her backyard for $20 a week, or to the guy whose job it is to evict people
from their homes.
After three years of trying to contact the GM execs, Moore is finally given
a chance to speak at a GM stockholder's convention, Roger Smith himself
abruptly ends the meeting and no one seems to notice Moore.... you don't know
whether to laugh or cry.
The last line of the closing credits reads: "This film may not be shown in
Flint..... because all the movie theaters have closed." This line sums up the
entire mood and theme of "Roger & Me" - lighthearted, but shockingly real. 
Please visit Chad'z Movie Page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz
E-mail: ChadPolenz@aol.com

Title
Review for Apollo 13 (1995)
**** (out of 4 = excellent)
1995, PG, 140 minutes [2 hours, 20 minutes]
[drama]
starring: Tom Hanks (Jim Lovell), Bill Paxton (Fred Haise), Kevin Bacon (Jack
Swigert), Gary Sinise (Ken Mattingly), written by William Broyles Jr., Al
Reinert, produced by Brian Grazer, directed by Ron Howard.
"Apollo 13" seems more like an experiment in suspense rather than a movie,
because it is so well crafted in every way that we care about everything that
happens.This film is based on a true story, and although Hollywood has the
tendency to exaggerate, this one stays realistic and believable the entire
time. 
Tom Hanks stars as Captain Jim Lovell, one of the earliest astronauts, who
is slated to command Apollo 14 in 1970, but is bumped up to 13 and to a more
important mission. We meet Lovell's family and really get a sense this is a
real man, not another movie character. 
The story revolves around the flight of Apollo 13 to the moon. It has only
been a little over six months since man first walked on the moon, and this
was considered a "routine" space flight, but as Lovell points out, "There's
nothing routine about going to the moon." We see the crew training in
simulators, sometimes failing and this really makes you wonder if they'll be
able to handle it in the real situation. 
Lovell, along with his crewmates Fred Haise (Paxton), and Ken Mattingly
(Sinise) make up the core team, while Jack Swigert (Bacon) leads a backup
team. Two days before launch it is discovered that Mattingly is coming down
with a case of the measles and will not be able to go into space so Swigert
is assigned to take his place. The team must practice continually to prepare
in such a small amount of time. We see them say goodbye to their families and
this gives a good sense of humanism and realism.
Everything seems to be running smoothly... at first. Down in Houston they
tell the Apollo to do some routine procedures. All of a sudden, an explosion
occurs in one of the oxygen tanks and the ship goes haywire. As if the film
wasn't already a great drama it becomes a fantastic suspense story as we see
the Houston ground controllers panic in a frenzy, trying to figure out what
is going on and how to help them out. It is amazing to watch this, especially
today as we have much more advanced technology than they did. In fact, this
computer I'm typing this critique on might be smarter or more powerful than
all the computers used on the Apollo!
The movie really picks up the pace and runs with it at this point, every
second is nail-biting, edge-of-your-seat storytelling. As one problem is
solved, two more pop up. At times it seems like all hope is lost, but somehow
they miraculously survive. Hanks delivers a pretty good performance, but I
was even more amazed by Paxton and Bacon, who prove they can handle high
pressure roles like these.
Not too many movies could make me cry, but this film's ending could. The
suspense is based in the unknown and no one knows if the crew will ultimately
survive. We see short clips of Walter Cronkite reporting the events, showing
the entire planet praying for them. Cronkite's voice alone can make anything
seem emotional and sensational. 
"Apollo 13" is filled to capacity with emotion and sensation, you can't help
but be caught up in the suspense and drama. The story of the Apollo 13 needed
to be told, and this film did it justice. (12/31/95) (12/9/96) (5/23/97)
[also by Howard: "The Paper," Ransom"]
visit Chad'z Movie Page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz/index.html

Title
Review for Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles (1990)
Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles
Chad'z rating: *** (out of 4 = good)
1990, PG, 95 minutes [1 hour, 35 minutes]
[adventure]
starring: Judith Hoag (April O'Neil), Elias Koteas (Casey Jones), Josh Pais
(voice of Raphael), Corey Feldman (voice of Donatello), Robbie Rist (voice of
Michelanglo), Brain Tochi (voice of Leonardo), produced by Kim Dawson, Simon
Fields, David Chan, written by Todd W. Langen, Bobby Herbeck, directed by
Steve Barron, based on the comic book and characters created by Kevin Eastman
and Peter Laird.
Now this is a first. For once, Hollywood was able to make a movie based on a
popular [children's] trend that is not total stupidity. In fact, "Teenage
Mutant Ninja Turtles" is really quite original as it combines some of the
gritty elements from the comic book with storylines from the animated series
to tell a lighthearted, campy story.
The setting takes place in New York City where some kind of invisible crime
wave going on. As we hear the voice of journalist April O'Neil (Hoag)
describe the situation, we see for ourselves just how masterminded the
criminals are. Surprisingly, they are teenagers with the stealth and other
abilities of ninjas. As April leaves she is mugged by some of the thieves,
but they become victims themselves  when someone puts out the lights and
disarms them. Of course we know it's the turtles and we then proceed to
follow them home and learn a bit about them. 
The TMNTs are four, huge, mutated turtles who wear masks and are obviously
ninjas. They live in the sewers with their mentor, a mutated rat named
Splinter. The only problem is the story tries to counter the turtles'
hyperness with the serious, metaphoric words of their sensi. One minute
Splinter is giving an important analogy or proverb (a la Yoda in "The Empire
Strikes Back"), and the next minute the guys are partying... but then again,
they are teenagers.
Through some good cop-out devices, April finds herself warned by the Foot
Clan (the perpetrators of the crime wave) to "shut it." She then meets the
turtles after Raphael comes to her rescue. We also learn about the Foot's
secret headquarters through a character with ties to April. There isn't much
here in terms of explaining the genius of the criminal organization or why
they are committing so much theft, just the fact they are ninjas, and
therefore invisible, seems to be reason enough.
The Foot learns about the turtles, and kidnaps their master, and thus fight
scenes ensue and a plot of sorts begins to form. We get good characterization
of the turtles though, they are quite human in their personalities and
actually likable because they don't seem like big cartoons. In fact, the
general attitude of the film works like this as a whole. Yes, sometimes the
script provides for fight scenes but there is actually a story and a fun
spirit to it all. 
If the film succeeds in any way, it would have to be the cleverly scripted
and well choreographed fight scenes. They are hilarious because of the way
the turtles fight, using household objects and all the while exclaiming
wisecracks and one-liners. The violence isn't even graphic, but portrayed in
such a way that we know who's winning.
I don't have to tell you how the film ends, it's typical but somewhat
suspenseful. Considering all the elements that make up and surround the film,
this is really quite an accomplishment.
Even if "Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles" is  just an exploitative children's
film, the fact remains it has a decent story to tie it all together. Its
lightheartedness gives it the charm those other adventure flicks miss. 
Please visit Chad'z Movie Page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz - over 140
films reviewed in depth, not just blind ratings or quick capsules.
E-mail: ChadPolenz@aol.com
(C)1997 Chad Polenz

Title
Review for Mr. Holland's Opus (1995)
**1/2 (out of 4 = OK)
1995, PG, 143 minutes [2 hours, 23 minutes]
[drama]
starring: Richard Dreyfus (Mr. Glenn Holland), Geane Headly (Mrs. Iris
Holland), Joseph Anderson (Cole Holland at age 15), William H. Macy
(Vice/Principal Walters), produced by Ted Field, Michael Nolin, Robert W.
Cort, written by Patrick Sheane Duncan, directed by Stephen Herek.
There seems to be only two types of dramas: those that are good because
they're true to themselves, and those that are sappy and pander to the
audience. "Mr. Holland's Opus" is one of the latter. This is a pretty good
movie for what it is, but it tries so hard to be something it is not,
throwing in every overly dramatic element you can think of.
Richard Dreyfus stars as Glenn Holland, a musician with dreams of composing
The Great American Symphony. But, like most dreamers, he is knocked back down
to Earth and realizes he better settle for a steady job instead, so he
becomes a music teacher in a typical high school in a typical suburban town. 
Movies about teachers are pretty much the same: a new teacher comes in...
the students do not like and/or do not understand them... the teacher
realizes they've been going about it all wrong and all of a sudden figure out
what to do... the students love the teacher... a controversy ensues. 
Mr. Holland realizes the students are trying to learn notes on paper, not
the music itself, and so when he tries to use rock music as a teaching device
they are suddenly interested. Of course this is all set in the mid 1960s so
the administrators protest his actions and we are supposed to get angry with
them alongside Mr. Holland because "they're just plain wrong!" The choppy
storytelling style makes it seem as if this is going to be the entire premise
of the film, but it is not and I felt confused and anxious while watching the
rest of it.
If the movie machine had not already been set into motion, it really starts
to kick in when Mr. and Mrs. Holland (Headly) have a baby and later realize
he is deaf. What a case of tragic, but cliche irony. It is this kind of
sappiness and drama for the sake of being dramatic that is symbolic of the
entire film. A more general example of this is the constant musical montages
showing pictures of historical events and things that happen in Mr. Holland's
life. But the world is not as simple as this movie would make it out to be -
life's problems aren't solved by cliche montages. This also detracts from the
story and from building characterization.
The last act depicts a brief encounter Mr. Holland has with a beautiful and
talented student named Rowena (Jean Louisa Kelly). It seems as if the two
might be falling for each other despite their age difference, but one can
only assume what they are actually thinking because the story is so quickly
paced. 
We also suddenly realize his son, Cole (Anderson) is 15 years old already
but neither he, nor we the viewers, seem to know him at all. Herek keeps
making this mistake of trying to cram too much story into too little space.
All the little plotlines and conflicts that happen within the movie could be
entirely separate films, especially these two storylines. 
I didn't hate "Mr. Holland's Opus," but I didn't love it either. It does
have an overall sense of goodness and quality to it, but it is just too sappy
and too formulated for its own good. 
Please visit Chad'z Movie Page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz

Title
Review for Dead Man Walking (1995)
**** (out of 4 = excellent)
1995, R, 122 minutes [2 hours, 2 minutes]
[drama]
starring: Susan Sarandon (Sister Helen Prejean), Sean Penn (Matthew
Poncelet), Raymond Barry (Earl Delacroix), R. Lee Ermey (Clyde Percy),
produced by Jon Kilik, Tim Robbins, Rodd Simmons, written and directed by Tim
Robbins, based on the novel by Sister Helen Prejean.
Capital punishment is one of the most difficult issues of all time. Many
people base their opinion upon ethical and spiritual values, but we usually
don't stop to consider the prisoner as a person do we? "Dead Man Walking" is
quite an accomplishment as it sheds light on the issue from all angles. 
Susan Sarandon stars as Sister Helen Prejean, a very friendly and kind nun
who suddenly finds herself drawn to a convicted murder and rapist named
Matthew Poncelet (Penn) in his time of need. She believes anyone is capable
of salvation and murder is wrong whether it be in combat, crime, or
authorized by the government. 
Throughout the film Poncelet declares his innocence, claiming he was framed
and the real killer is walking free. All criminals tend to say this, and
after a while they convince themselves they really are innocent and feel no
remorse for their crime. 
Robbins carefully places flashbacks of the night of the crime to show just
how brutal the crime was and to prove Poncelet's guilt. This is a great
method of storytelling because each person who views this film will form a
different opinion. He obviously is a vicious criminal and he should pay, but
because of the love that Sister Helen has for him we really start to consider
other options.
At first Sister Helen tries desperately to fight his death sentence, but
since she is poor she cannot get a good lawyer. This is very realistic
because we all know the rich and powerful are able to buy their freedom.
In some ways it's difficult to relate to the situation of the story. Most of
us are not family members of murder victims, and so we can only imagine the
pain and rage the family members of Poncelet's victims must feel. In any
other film we wouldn't get to hear their "side" at all, but this film does an
excellent  job in depicting all the possible viewpoints. Raymond Barry
co-stars as Earl Delacroix, the father of one of the victims, who hates
Poncelet and can't understand how a nun could defend that "monster." When
Sister Helen tries to explain her reasoning, we realize she might be
following a foolish heart. 
One of the most moving scenes occurs when Sister Helen visits the family of
the other victim and hears them tell the horrible story of when they heard
their daughter was dead. R. Lee Ermey and Celia Weston (Mr. and Mrs. Percy)
give incredible performances. At first, they think Sister Helen is on "their
side," but they become almost as furious with her as they are with Poncelet
when they discover that she wants to save his life.
It seems what everyone is missing is Sister Helen is not so much trying to
save Poncelet's life so much as his soul. She frequently visits him in prison
talking to him about the Bible and about the teachings of Jesus. "And the
truth shall set you free" she tells him. At first he doesn't understand it,
but after deep contemplation he confesses his sins and seems to make peace
with himself, although I am not completely sure if he makes his peace with
God. There are many unresolved themes and elements like this throughout the
film, but this is probably the most significant.
Maybe "Dead Man Walking" leans a tad to the left because of its detailed
characterization of, and our sympathy for Sister Helen and Poncelet. But what
it really wants to show is the criminal is a human being with a soul, and
therefore is able to redeem themselves if they so choose.

Title
Review for Saint, The (1997)
Chad'z rating: ** (out of 4 = fair)
1997, PG-13, 116 minutes [1 hour, 56 minutes]
[thriller/action]
starring: Val Kilmer (Simon Templar), Elisabeth Shue (Dr. Emma Russell), Rude
Sebedzija (Ivan Tretiak), Valeri Nikolayev (Ilya Tretiak), written by
Jonathon Hensleigh, Wesley Strick, produced by David Brown, Robert Evans,
William J. MacDonald, Mace Nuefeld, directed by Phillip Noyce.
"The Saint" is probably one of the most mindless and typical of the modern
Hollywood thrillers. It has a dashing hero, a beautiful damsel in distress, a
villain from the cliche vaults, and an overly complicated plot which
conviently provides for lots of action and special effects. But it is not
these elements alone that make it mediocre, the film is just not interesting
or impressive to begin with.
The film opens with a flashback to establish the main character's "origin."
The setting is an old Catholic orphanage where the priests and nuns aren't
just mean, they're evil. One boy refuses to go by his Catholic saint name, so
he is  beaten and the children's food is locked up until he complies with the
priest's demands. But the child is clever and brave as he leads the children
on a revolution of sorts. This scene did not serve any purpose at all. It
seemed to be the worst case of Catholic bashing I have ever seen and was
quite offensive. 
We then skip ahead to the present day and meet the adult version of the
rebellious child. His  name is Simon Templar (Kilmer) and he seems much like
James Bond, but instead of being a spy, he is a thief. And since this is a
commercial film (with a huge budget) about espionage, the film tries to
impress us quickly  by having Templar attempt to steal a microchip from a
highly secured building in Moscow. Of course he must single-handedly beat all
the computer security systems (a la "Mission: Impossible"), fight a mobster,
fall 40 stories and land safely, and then proceed to outrun and outwit lots
of goons with Uzis.
The film then starts to form a plot as Templar's next assignment is to steal
the formula for cold fusion from an American scientist in London. Her name is
Dr. Emma Russell (Shue), a blonde bombshell who just happens to keep the
formula for cold fusion on some Post-It notes in her bra! It's obvious where
this film is going and it wouldn't have been so bad had it not presented
itself in such a serious manner. 
Templar proceeds to seduce Russell and steal her formula, but after being
with her for only 24 hours the two seem to fall in love. Relationships in
thriller and action movies such as these are always taken seriously because
of the danger. Fear can be an erotic sensation, but here it is totally
shallow.
Ever since the Cold War ended we haven't had a Russian villain, so it was
actually a pleasure to have see one crop up. Rude Sebedzija co-stars as Ivan
Tretiak, a Russian mobster who will stop at nothing to get Russell's magical
formula. From the second act on, the film revolves around Templar and
Russell's escape from Tretiak and his son Ilya's (Nikolayev) goons. 
Along the way we get a lot of violent chase scenes, passion scenes, scenes
that trick both the characters and the audience, but mostly a lot of
action-packed chase scenes.
Major motion pictures such as these often use complex plots to make the
viewer think it is an intelligent thriller when it's not. This film simply
plugs in the villains, the plotlines, and the action at all the right places.
None of these characters have much depth to them, their dialogue is too
"written" to take seriously, even the actors seem bored at times. When the
suspenseful, climatic scenes kick in, it's hard to be swept up in the
adventure because you don't care.
The plot to "The Saint" was so confusing I'm having a difficult time
recalling it, much less describing it. There isn't much to it, just another
high tech government thriller that happens to take place in modern Russia.
The reason most films of this genre fail is because they try too hard, this
film doesn't try hard enough. 
(4/8/97) (6/29/97) [see also: "Mission: Impossible"]
please visit Chad'z Movie Page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz
E-mail: ChadPolenz@aol.com

Title
Review for Dinosaur (2000)
A boy dinosaur is raised by monkey-like creatures and takes on their 
charming, playful personality. When
the dino and his family find themselves struggling for survival with a pack 
of dinosaurs the film turns into a
preachy debate over Darwinian philosophies. 
Parents, don't be fooled, this isn't "Toy Story" with dinosaurs, it's pretty 
much a soap opera and a horror
movie meant for children. Since there's dinosaurs you know there's going to 
be the friendly, cute ones we
love versus the huge, ugly, scary monsters that make a lot of noise and want 
to eat our heroes. At least that
would be original, which is more than I can say for the script which is so 
lame and boring it just keeps
wandering for most of the film without much characterization or point. The 
battle scenes are pretty intense
and will probably scare younger children. 
Chad'z Movie Page is back! 
New reviews of the latest movies in easy-to-swallow capsule form with the 
trendy, Entertainment Weekly-style of letter grades instead of the old star 
system. Have I sold out? Visit my page and decide for yourself ;-)

Title
Review for Waterworld (1995)
Waterworld
Chad'z rating: * (out of 4 = poor)
1995, PG-13, 136 minutes [2 hours, 16 minutes]
[science fiction/thriller]
starring: Kevin Costner (The Mariner), Jeanne Tripplehorn (Helen), Dennis
Hopper (Deacon), Tina Mojorino (Enola), produced by Charles Gordon, John
Davis, Kevin Costner, written by Peter Roder, David Twohy, directed by Kevin
Reynolds.
I feel sorry for the financial backers of "Waterworld," which is supposedly
the most expensive film ever made (at $172 million!), and is also one of the
stupidest - boy did they get ripped off! In fact, this film is not really a
movie, but more of an amusement park ride with a plot. It's not even just
another case of cliches strung together (well, it is that too), it's
something that's painful to watch because it relishes in its flaws.
Kevin Costner stars as a man who is some kind of mutant half man/half fish.
He is an explorer/mariner on an alternate Earth that is completely covered by
water because the polar ice caps melted. He's referred to as The Mariner, but
they "The Meaner" would have been a more appropriate title because he's cold,
rigid, and strict - and he's supposed the be the good guy! He docks at a
small floating village of sorts. He trades dirt for money and this introduces
us to the other important characters. First we meet one of the villains, then
the soon-to-be heroine, a child prodigy, a wacky inventor, and a group of
primitive people that somehow have some of the technology we have today, but
also some of the low-tech tools used by pirates and Vikings. 
Immediately the film's biggest flaw is apparent: are these people primitive
or highly advanced? It doesn't seem like anyone can read yet they have
Ski-Doos and airplanes! How are these things powered? And if they have
airplanes, couldn't they just keep flying until they reached dry land? Also,
if the planet is completely covered in water where did they get the materials
to make these things? I'm sorry, I'm all for checking your brain at the door
when going to the movies, but elements like these cannot go unnoticed because
they draw our attention away from the story and confuse us. There was
potential here for a good pirate story set in medieval times before modern
technology, so why mix the two together? It doesn't make any sense.
There really isn't much of a plot here because the story moves so quickly it
never takes time to explain anything. The only thing we learn is that the
prodigy child, Enola (Mojorino), has a tattoo on her back that is supposedly
a map to "Dryland." Who put the tattoo there and how come it has taken them
this long to figure this out? We never get an answer, just a stupid action
movie about whoever can get the girl will be the victor of sorts if they
reach Dryland. 
To make a long, boring, stupid, and just plain bad story short; the mariner
escapes with a woman named Helen (Tripplehorn) and Enola. They sail for a
long time, encountering some strange people in the process and fight off "The
Smokers" as lead by the idiot villain Deacon (Hopper), who kidnaps Enola. The
story becomes a overly grand adventure with the mariner taking on an army of
goons, rescuing Enola, and bringing them all to salvation (how original).
Even with all its special effects, action, and adventure this film is
boring. Not a single character is likable, therefore neither is the plot.
Dennis Hopper completely rips off Jack Nicholson's Joker, while Costner just
plain rips.
Still, "Waterworld" is professionally made with a good production design and
an original idea but no substance to it. I just hope they don't make a
sequel! 
Please visit Chad'z Movie Page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz - over 140
new and old films reviewed in depth, not just blind ratings and capsules.
Also, check out The FIRST Shay Astar Web Page @
http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz/ShayAstar.html

Title
Review for Hollow Man (2000)
Don't you hate it when a movie has a great premise and looks like it could be 
something fresh and exciting it turns out to be just another [insert genre 
here] flick? 
That's what happens with "Hollow Man" - it's a story that involves the 
discovery of a chemical that turns living things invisible. This would 
seemingly be a good method to explore human psychology, especially of 
voyeurism and insecurity. It might also be a study of the basic human fear of 
that which we can't see scares us. But what do we actually get with this 
movie - a terribly generic sci-fi/horror thriller about a man who who's just 
a big baby and has to have his way all the time. 
Kevin Bacon stars as Dr. Sebastian Caine - a scientist working on the 
invisibility project for the pentagon in a secret underground lab. He is 
surrounded of course by his ex-girlfriend Linda McKay (Elizabeth Shue) who 
has dumped him for fellow scientist Matt Kensington (Josh Brolin). Caine 
never gets his way and when he does turn himself invisible he does explore, 
uh, his "inner perversions." But for some reason he goes nuts and starts 
killing everybody. 
What makes the film so flawed is not just the fact Caine snaps for no 
justifiable reason, it's that there's no backstory to the any of 
the characters so no one in the film has any real motivation. This is 
compounded by a screenplay which does nothing to further the story for the 
majority of the movie (it's mostly the scientists sitting around in the lab). 
The topper is the ending which is so over-the-top with one classic slasher 
horror cliche after another it's laughable. It's a movie about an invisible 
man and what do we end up with - fistfights and shootouts and explosions and 
elevators crashing?!?! If we wanted to see that we would have rented a "Die 
Hard" video. 
I think Paul Verhoeven just likes to use special effects at the expense of a 
workable screenplay. 
------------------------------------------------------------------------ 
You can also read this review at: 
http://www.epinions.com/mvie-review-216A-40E61F5-39D149B0-prod1 
And other reviews on the same topic at: http://www.epinions.com/mvie 
Check out my profile page at: http://www.epinions.com/user-chad9976 
*****
Chad'z Movie Page is back! 
In-depth reviews of nearly all mainstream films playing at your local 
cineplex. There's also reviews of a few classic films and some of your 
personal favorites.

Title
Review for American President, The (1995)
*** (out of 4 = good)
1995, PG-13, 115 minutes [1 hour, 55 minutes]
[romantic comedy]
starring: Michael Douglas (President Andrew Sheperd), Annette Bening (Sydney
Ellen Wade), Martin Sheen (A.J. MacInerey), Michael J. Fox (Lewis
Rothschild), written by Aaron Sorkin, produced and directed by Rob Reiner.
        They say royalty doesn't exist in the United States, but "The American
President" proves it does. This is a really enjoyable film that wonders what
would happen if the president was single. And the answer is a funny,
romantic, and sentimental story that really touches your heart and makes you
feel good for many reasons.
        Michael Douglas stars as President Andrew Sheperd, a democrat who was
elected as a widower. A lot of good characterization is portrayed by
Douglas's character due mostly to the fact he is the president but also a
single father. We see the relationship between him and his daughter who is a
nice and caring girl who loves her dad and understands his job.When he meets
a woman, she is not jealous, she is very supportive and tries to give him
hints on how to impress her. This is just one example of the film's charming
creativity.
        Annette Bening co-stars as Sydney Ellen Wade, a single, 30-something woman
who is one of the top executives of an environmental lobbying group. When she
visits the White House she tells the President's aides his environmental
policy "sucks" and bashes him, not knowing he was standing behind her the
entire time. That's a typical joke-making device, but nevertheless, it works
really well here and thus our two main characters finally meet. 
        One of the best scenes takes place soon thereafter, as Sheperd and his
friend, Chief-of-Staff A.J. MacInerey (Sheen), are playing pool and discuss
whether or not they think Sydney likes him. It sounds like something kids in
high school would say. Sheperd: "She didn't say anything about me?"
MacInerey: "Well, I'll pass her a note in study hall."
        The president gets Sydney's phone number and calls her, at first she thinks
it's a prank call, but finally realizes it is him and he asks her out. Sydney
and her sister act like real people and not movie characters - they discuss
what to wear and all the little idiosyncrasies of dating and whether or not
he's cute. It's everyday girl talk, the guy just happens to be the president.
        The chemistry between Douglas and Bening is excellent, and they make one of
the cutest couples. The original screenplay drives this film, but Reiner's
direction and the acting make it even better.
        Both Sheperd and Sydney are trying to get bills passed, and they make a
"deal" to help each other out. Most of the movie is spent showing the
relationship between the two and their independent efforts to pass their
bills. What it all comes down to is the fact the president's relationship is
affecting his status and if he passes the crime bill without passing the
environmental bill first he will regain some of his popularity but will also
cross Sydney. Which is more important - his job or his love life? It's a tough
 decision and he ultimately makes the right one for him, but he can't forgive
himself.
        I really liked this film. It was creative, witty, funny, and romantic. It
shows no matter how high up on a pedestal we put people, they are still human
and still have the same problems as everyone else. (3/10/96) (2/11/97)
(5/21/97) [also by Reiner: "Stand By Me"]
visit Chad'z Movie Page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz/index.html

Title
Review for Woman on Top (1999)
The first that strikes you about "Woman On Top" is how non-sophisticated it 
is. It tells a rather simple, easy-to-follow story that includes only a 
handful of characters instead of a whole ensemble. There's nothing wrong with 
this technique and it's something I haven't seen used well in a long time. 
This is a movie that shows you all you need is some heart to tell a good 
story. 
When you think of a "simple" movie what comes to mind? If you're having 
trouble with that question it's probably because you've been so conditioned 
by Hollywood to think everything has to be complex, intricate, fast-paced and 
sometimes confusing to be fun to watch. "Woman On Top" is the antithesis of 
this mindset - there's no complicated plotlines or torrid love affairs or 
even a stupid subplot that could turn the tables. It just tells the story of 
"girl leaves boy, boy tries to get girl back." 
"This is the story of love, motion sickness and cooking," explains the 
narrator over the opening sequences in which our heroine, Isabella, is 
introduced. She's a beautiful Brazilian woman with a gift for cooking but 
suffers from the worst case of motion sickness. We're told that Isabella must 
control her motions and movement so she won't get sick. She has to be behind 
the wheel when in a car, she has to lead while dancing and she has to be on 
top during sex. She's the chef at a thriving restaurant owned and managed by 
her husband Toninho. He understands her motion sickness problem but it 
humiliates him so he tries to be with another woman to "prove his manhood" 
but is caught in the act. Isabella flees to San Francisco to be with her 
transvestite friend Monica (a former resident of her village) and look for a 
job where she can use her uncanny culinary skills. 
I never thought great cooking could be thought of or used as a "super power" 
like in comic books, but this movie is able to pull off that notion. There's 
a scene when Isabella arrives in the U.S. and cooks a spicy dish and the 
aroma is so powerful it knocks out a man in his apartment across the street. 
The man's name is Cliff, a local television producer looking for a show to 
fill the 7:30 time slot and asks Isabella if she'd like her own cooking show. 
This all comes about after a pretty lighthearted and silly routine where all 
the men in San Francisco follow her around because they're just so attached 
to her natural aroma ("aura aroma" if you will). She's so charming that when 
she walks by some wilting flowers they spring up and bloom instantly (a 
cartoony phallic symbol but it's cute). 
Meanwhile Toninho's restaurant is tanking without Isabella, plus the fact 
that he blasphemes the ocean goddess the village residents worships. This was 
one aspect of the film I wasn't sure how seriously we're expected to take it. 
It's hard to believe in this day people would still be part of a pantheist 
religion. The characters seem genuinely affirmed in their faith and there's 
even a few sequences in which they go through some rituals and pray to the 
sea goddess. I have a feeling American audiences are going to find this 
aspect silly, if not completely absurd and I can understand that. As a critic 
I find it at least a little interesting because of its originality, although 
I think the film could have been much better had the characters been more 
assured of themselves rather than leave everything up to the so-called 
goddess. 
But let's not dwell on this, it's actually a moot point. The majority if the 
story is concerned with both Cliff and Toninho's attempts to woo Isabella. 
What's so effective here is that you have a hard time deciding who she should 
be with. Cliff's a pretty nice guy who respects her and gives her a big 
break. Toninho is really sorry for what he did and when he says he'll change 
you believe him. I can't recall any other story in which the cheating guy 
wanted his woman back and was genuinely sincere in all the promises and 
romantic gestures he makes to get her back. 
The screenplay needs work though. Little happens in terms of plot and story 
for the second half of the film. Isabella's character isn't fleshed out 
enough, in fact, she comes off as being a little shallow and not as 
sympathetic as she should be for a woman in her situation. I smiled every 
time that mystique she possesses did something to the story or made for a 
cute joke or gag, but I wanted even more. 
What the film lacks in story it makes up with in style. It's a quiet, calm 
and relaxed film - there's no melodramatic/all-or-nothing scenes or 
storylines. Everything's taken slowly and passively, the characters mostly 
wait for things to happen to them, they don't take much action themselves. On 
the soundtrack is a constant rhythm of the soothing bossa nova music that 
gives the film an authentic, "organic," atmosphere. Despite the fact much of 
it takes place in the United States in the present day there's almost no pop 
culture references, nothing hip thrown in for marketing value. It's a 
pleasant change of pace. 
I'll admit "Woman On Top" is pretty minimal filmmaking, but it doesn't come 
off as half-assed or amateurish or whatever. If you can take its charming 
elements at face value it'll make you smile. If you want to be a cynic and 
point out the flaws then the only reason it'll fail is because you wouldn't 
allow it to. 
You can also read this review at: 
http://www.epinions.com/mvie-review-3EB8-A4651CB-39E13532-prod1 
And other reviews on the same topic at: http://www.epinions.com/mvie 
Check out my profile page at: http://www.epinions.com/user-chad9976 
Chad'z Movie Page is back! 
In-depth reviews of nearly all mainstream films playing at your local 
cineplex. There's also reviews of a few classic films and some of your 
personal favorites.

Title
Review for Office Space (1999)
Chad'z rating: **1/2 (out of 4 = okay/average)
1999, R, 90 minutes [1 hour, 30 minutes]
starring: Ron Livingston (Peter Gibbons), David Herman (Michael Bolton), Gary
Cole (Bill Lumbergh), Jennifer Aniston (Joanne); produced by Daniel Rappaport,
Michael Rotenberg; written and directed by Mike Judge; based on the animated
`Office Space' and `Milton' serials created by Mike Judge.
Seen Feb. 26, 1999 at 7:40 p.m. at the Hoyts Crossgates Cinema 18
(Guilderland, NY), theater #18, with my brother John for free using my Hoyts
critic's pass. [Theater rating: ****: excellent seats, sound and picture]
        Making a biting satire of the real working world shouldn't be too difficult
of a task. Most people can relate to the subtle politics of the modern office
environment and how going to work is like stepping into a whole other world.
But trying to sum it all up is a job itself, which might explain why `Office
Space' only scratches the surface.
        You don't see too many movies or television shows where people actually work
regular jobs (most of us aren't cops, FBI agents or criminals). That's
probably because Hollywood figures 1) people don't want to be reminded of
their work in their leisure time and 2) what could be so interesting about an
office?
        The truth is the working world is probably the most complex and grittiest
reality possible. Not even the most gut-wrenching human drama, fictional or
non-fictional, could stack up to it. That's the biggest obstacle standing in
the way of this film's success and it could have overcome it by simply
sticking to its guns.
        The film shows a lot of promise throughout its first act, especially the
first few scenes alone. The setting seems to be L.A. in the present day where
we're introduced to a gang of working stiffs at some type of corporation whose
jobs involve working with computers, fax machines, memos, meetings, overtime,
staplers, cubicles, constantly-ringing telephones and of course intimidating
bosses. 
        Right from the get-go there's a tasty sense of satire here. Our hero, Peter
Gibbons (Livingston), finds trying to maneuver through traffic with the
thousands of other nine-to-fivers is a tedious, painful chore. He does
everything he can to move just that extra 1 mph faster but he never seems to
move any faster than an old man using a walker on the sidewalk. It's the fable
of `The Tortoise and the Hare' for the 1990s!
        Then there's the office itself where Peter's daily exercise in futility
begins. His co-workers aren't exactly his best friends since each has their
own personality problems. There's Michael Bolton (Herman), whose shared name
with the adult contemporary singer is played for laughs but soon becomes
annoying (maybe it's so we can emphasize with him?). There's also Samir (Ajay
), who probably emigrated to the U.S. from India thinking his smarts would
lead him to success, but he's just another schlob. 
        The other characters include an annoying fat secretary who worships the boss,
a paranoid veteran worker afraid of downsizing, and a mentally-challenged man
named Milton (an under-used Stephen Root playing the character who starred in
Judge's animated shorts upon which the film is based) whose life revolves
around his love for staplers and secret yearning to burn the building down if
he's pushed around by the boss one more time.
        Speaking of whom, the boss here, under-sub-assistant V.P. Bill Lumbergh
(Cole), does make for a good catalyst of the story and enemy of the
characters. He's very soft-spoken but in a menacing way (he seems to start out
every sentence with, `yeaaaah... we're going to need you to... greaaaat').
Everyone can relate to that.
        Considering all this, it's clear the film definitely has potential. The first
act is very funny as it utilizes a lot of character interaction to get the
ball rolling and establish the satirical, often cartoony setting. For example,
Peter forgets to put a cover sheet on a memo and he is constantly subtlety
scolded for not doing something so routine.
        But where the film begins to weaken is when an actual plot begins to form and
the focus shifts from the office space to Peter's personal life. There's a
lame joke involving Peter having an epiphany and having a constant good
feeling. Then the company brings in two specialists to interview the workers
to see who's really needed and who's not. By this time Peter has become so
disgruntled with everything he simply tells them the truth and in the process
is recommended for a promotion for his `potential.' This just didn't seem
realistic to me.
        There's also a sub-plot involving Peter's crush on a waitress named Joanne
(Aniston, who basically rips off her performance from the first few seasons of
`Friends') who loathes her job too and endures the same type of work B.S. as
Peter. She isn't cheery enough, her boss says, and she certainly can't compete
with the dorky waiter who seems to think waiting on customers is the best
thing that ever happened to him. Needless to say Peter and Joanne hit it off,
but their relationship is used mostly as reserve for hit-and-miss jokes and a
poor attempt at a cute romance.
        The film takes an even bigger turn for the worse by the time the third reel
rolls in which Peter, Michael and Samir seek vengeance on their company. It's
basically the same as `going postal,' but with computers. Their plan never
really makes sense to begin with and quickly blows up in their faces. 
        The ending proves that Judge just couldn't write his way out of the hole the
film dug for itself and is just another example of what happens when
television guys try to do movies.
        So much more could have been done with `Office Space' had it just lived up to
its title. Its spoof of office politicking really works, so why get so wrapped
up in a plot?
---------------------------------
Please visit Chad'z Movie Page @ 
http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz - Over 200 new and old films reviewed in
depth, not just blind ratings and quick capsules.
Member of The Online Film Critics Society
(www.ofcs.org)

Title
Review for L.A. Confidential (1997)
Chad'z rating: ***1/2 (out of 4 = very good)
1997, R, 136 minutes [2 hours, 16 minutes]
starring: Russell Crowe (Sgt. Bud White), Guy Pearce (Lt. Ed Exley), Kevin
Spacey (Det. Jack Vincennes), James Cromwell (Cpt. Dudley Smith); written by
Curtis Hanson, Brian Helgeland; produced by Curtis Hanson, Arnon Milchan,
Michael G. Nathanson; directed by Curtis Hanson; based on the novel by James
Ellroy.
Seen by myself at the Glenwood Movieplex Cinemas in Oneida, NY at 7 p.m., Oct.
7, 1997 for free (free pass).
There's nothing more satisfying than a good, old-fashioned mystery story done
right. The last few years have seen a slew of Hollywood thrillers that are
nice to look at, but don't always stimulate your mind because of their
confusing storylines and plots. "L.A. Confidential" may be just as complex and
confusing as other mass-market thrillers, but what makes this film superior is
the sense of depth it has to all its elements.
All filmmakers should know that a hierarchy exists in storytelling. The most
general elements must be defined in order for specifics (i.e. plot detail,
characterization, etc.) to work. This film starts off well by defining its
setting - early 1950s Los Angeles. As Sid Hudgeons (Danny DeVito), the editor
for a Hollywood tabloid, narrates, we get a real sense of the time and
location, where Hollywood is  booming  but so is organized crime. This might
seem like a cliche setup, but the storytelling is very intriguing and
authentic. 
The story focuses on the men of the L.A.P.D. and their struggle to fight
crime as individuals, but not necessarily as a team. Why there's such a
division in the force we don't know, but it's almost irrelevant because of the
great characterization and how it works with the plot.
First there's Sgt. Bud White (Crowe), a Dirty Harry-like cop who doesn't play
by the rules, but is likable. There's also Lt. Ed Exley (Pearce), who looks
and acts like Clark Kent, and it's no surprise he's the only cop that believes
in following procedure. Then there's Det. Jack Vincennes (Spacey), a primma
dona  who serves as a technical advisor to a "Dragnet"-like TV show and only
likes to handle cases which give him publicity. Finally there's the old Irish
captain, Dudley Smith (Cromwell), who has that stern, wise look and runs his
force with cold authority. All four deliver powerful performances, especially
considering how different the characters are, and still manage to keep
everything in synch.
An incident involving a jailhouse rumble between the cops and inmates causes
the division among the precinct to split further. And just when it seems like
the force will tear itself apart, a multiple homicide involving a recently
discharged officer brings everyone together in their efforts to solve the
case. From this point on, the film becomes a fascinating, multi-layered
mystery and still manages to be a gripping drama between a handful of
characters.
It would be difficult to explain the numerous, overlapping storylines that
occur throughout the picture. In fact, I couldn't follow all of them, yet I
was never frustrated at the confusion. It is the way in which the characters
go about solving the case that is so interesting. Here we get actual, manual
detective work which is fascinating. You don't see these kind of details in
modern police films because everything is done by computer. These characters
are sympathetic, and as they try to put pieces together, it's as if we're
their invisible partners. One step leads to another and just as the case is
solved (or seems to be solved), it's broken wide open.
It's clear the film was based on a novel, but the screenplay adaptation
doesn't have the rigid storytelling a film based on such a complex novel would
usually have. Most Hollywood screenwriters just drop in random clues, facts,
and details, but here you can tell the writers have kept everything relative.
There are so many shortcuts the film could have taken, but it never does and
that's why it works so well.
The only problem with the film is that it becomes slightly melodramatic
regarding the character's personal lives. I also feel there's too many double
crosses, but they do keep with the story. The ending is probably more violent
than necessary but it does give a sense of justice.
I'm not usually a fan of complicated movies, but "L.A. Confidential" has such
a great sense of charm you can't help but get caught up in the excitement and
mystery of it all. The ending is certainly surprising, but it makes complete
sense and proves how intelligent the film is. It's nice to watch a movie
without feeling as if you're being talked down to.
Please visit Chad'z Movie Page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz - over 160
new and old films reviewed in depth, not just blind ratings and quick
capsules. Also, check out The FIRST Shay Astar Web Page @
http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz.

Title
Review for Frequency (2000)
A cross between "Quantum Leap" and "Field of Dreams" this sci-fi drama tells 
the story of a grown up son
who is able to talk to his dead father with his old hamm radio 30 years in 
the past. The son (James
Caviezial) saves the father (Dennis Quaid) from dying by telling him the 
future, but somehow they change
history and the mother dies at the hands of a serial killer. 
There's a lot of time travel paradoxes that twist the story in knots but it 
doesn't matter much because at the
center of it all is a lot of heart and pure goodness. It's quite amazing the 
film is able to string together a
story about tracking down the same killer both in the past and the future. 
Maybe it's a little too Hollywood
at times but nevertheless it's enjoyable. 
Chad'z Movie Page is back! 
New reviews of the latest movies in easy-to-swallow capsule form with the 
trendy, Entertainment Weekly-style of letter grades instead of the old star 
system. Have I sold out? Visit my page and decide for yourself ;-)

Title
Review for Ed Wood (1994)
*** (out of 4 = good)
1994,, R, 124 minutes [2 hours, 4 minutes]
[satire]
starring: Johnny Depp (Ed Wood), Martin Landou (Bela Lugosi), Sarah Jessica
Parker (Delores Wood), written by Scott Alexander, Larry Karaszewski,
produced by Denise Di Novi, Tim Burton, directed by Tim Burton.
Did you ever wonder who made those bad sci-fi/horror movies they show at 2
a.m. that also end up being ridiculed on "Mystery Science Theater 3000"? Well
Edward D. Wood Jr. is the man responsible for starting an entire industry of
bad movies, unfortunately he never really saw it that way, and "Ed Wood" is a
good satirical portrait of his life.
Ed Wood was a man so in love with the filmmaking process itself he didn't
care if things went wrong, the script was terrible, or the props were fake.
To him, it's not about scrutiny, it's about the joy of the movies and as long
as people are having fun nothing else matters. Johnny Depp is excellent as
the quite neurotic, obsessive, cross-dressing Ed Wood. He starts his
showbusiness career by taking on projects no one else will touch, with
stories so terrible it's a wonder they're even thought up. He writes his own
scripts, does all the casting, and even manages to raise the money to make
the movies himself. 
But Ed has a heart, he knows who the respected people in the business are
like Orson Wells, and feels the need to succeed as his role models have done.
One day, he stumbles upon Bela Lugosi (Landou), a symbolic character in films
of these types. He's a morphine addict, and thinks he's still a huge star but
can't accept the fact he's a wash-up. Lugosi is going broke, but much like
Ed, he is so in love with film he'll take any job just to work. It's obvious
we are meant to feel for the pathetic old man, but the attitude of the film
isn't some type of sappy melodrama, it is a satire through and through. 
Even Ed's home life is portrayed in a very satirical and funny manner, as a
parody of 50s sit-coms. The dialogue is so over-the-top it's hard to tell
what's scripted and what's improvised.
There is a fair amount of events and actions going on in this movie, yet
there is no specific plot, just the adventures of Ed Wood. We see him pitch
his ideas and not understand how anyone couldn't like anything shown to them
on a screen. He actually believes the audience is scared by his monsters and
aliens, and he is going to win an Oscar for his work. Ed and his crew aren't
even discouraged when they are attacked by an angry mob of frustrated
movie-goers!
Finally Ed embarks on the infamous "Plan 9 From Outer Space," a film so bad
and so stupid it's almost brilliant. One of the final scenes depicts the
opening night of "Plan 9" and we can see the excitement bristling in Ed's
eyes. His face is so lit up with joy he is in ecstasy just watching the
picture... it's both pathetic and funny.
I liked "Ed Wood" even though there wasn't much to it. It has a great sense
of mood and is very clever overall. Why did he make all those bad movies
anyway? The good thing about this film is that it doesn't try to answer that
question (6/4/96) (1/18/97) (6/11/97) [see also: "Barton Fink," also by
Burton: "Batman"]
please visit Chad'z Movie Page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz/index.html

Title
Review for Lucky Numbers (2000)
There's some movies I enjoy even though I know I probably shouldn't and have 
a difficult time trying to explain why I did. "Lucky Numbers" is a perfect 
example of this because it's such a blatant rip-off of "Fargo" and every 
movie based on an Elmore Leonard novel and yet it somehow still works for me. 
I know I'm in the minority here but let me explain. 
The film takes place in Harrisburg, PA in 1988 during an unseasonably warm 
winter. John Travolta plays the local big-shot TV weatherman who is idolized 
by the townsfolk as if he were John Travolta himself and not the bumbling 
Russ Richards. 
Russ is married to Crystal (Lisa Kudrow), a blonde bimbo if ever there was 
one in the history of cinema. She's a selfish, nasty bitch full of lust and 
desire but somehow she got the job of the lottery ball girl - not exactly the 
most intellectually taxing job on the market. Crystal's cheating on Russ with 
their collective boss Dick (Ed O'Neil), the TV station manager. She doesn't 
seem to genuinely like either of them, but it's all she can do in this 
one-horse town. 
Much like "Fargo," this movie tells the story of a man who's going broke and 
has to pull off a huge scam to get rich quick. He enlists the help of his 
English friend Gig (Tim Roth), the local stripclub owner who tells him how to 
fix the lottery. Along the way a subplot involving a two-bit thug named, 
accurately, "Dale the Thug" (Michael Rappaport) gets mixed up in the process. 
There's also a bookie that somehow gets thrown in the mix once the deal goes 
down. 
I'm not going to elaborate much further on the plot and story because it 
continues to unwind and take twists and turns you're not expecting. This is a 
farce, which is basically a straightforward, adult-oriented comedy but 
doesn't go as far as a classic black comedy should. Where as "Fargo" was 
sometimes shocking and disturbing while being funny, "Lucky Numbers" is just 
funny because you can't take these characters in these outrageous situations 
seriously. It's all a big cartoon basically, but it's funny and I can respect 
that. 
Travolta is great in his role and even though he's not a really likable 
character, he's trying to be a nice guy despite the fact he's a creep. He's 
like a gangster with morals who genuinely feels sorry for the guys he has to 
kill. Crystal is just the opposite, she's constantly arguing and using 
whatever brain cells she has left to look out for herself. Kudrow is perfect 
in this role since she's spent 8 years on TV as the dim-witted Phoebe on 
"Friends." Here is character is basically a very evil incarnation of Phoebe. 
I have to admit I was honestly surprised and pleased by how the plot 
unraveled and the methods each of the main characters use to try to get their 
share of the money. Like "Jackie Brown," (an Elmore Leonard adaption), the 
story is about a circle of 10 characters all after the lottery money that has 
been won illegally. The screenplay does a fine job in balancing the 
characters and slowly revealing their motivations and hidden agendas while at 
the same time keep Russ Richards the main focus. More and more characters are 
introduced and since the film has such an iconic, cartoony atmosphere you can 
take on faith just what makes the minor characters do what they do. 
The ending itself is great. It's surprising and funny and makes you feel 
good. You realize this film has packed in about 10 different movies' worth of 
stories into two hours' time and didn't fall apart (although many other 
critics might beg to differ). I liked it, and I could see it again - isn't 
that what makes a movie good? 

*****
Chad'z Movie Page is back! 
In-depth reviews of nearly all mainstream films playing at your local 
cineplex. There's also reviews of a few classic films and some of your 
personal favorites.

Title
Review for Blair Witch Project, The (1999)
The Blair Witch Project
Chad'z rating: ***1/2 (out of 4 = very good)
1999, R, 88 minutes [1 hour, 28 minutes]
[horror]
Starring: Heather Donahue (Heather), Michael C. Williams (Mike), Joshua 
Leonard (Josh); produced by Robin Cowie, Gregg Hale; written and directed by 
Daniel Myrick and Eduardo Sanchez.
Seen July 31, 1999 at 6:10 p.m. at Crossgates Cinema 18 (Guilderland, NY), 
theater #10, with Reneé Gentile for free using my Hoyts season pass. [Theater 
rating: ***: very good picture and seats, average sound]
    Is there really anything scarier than the unseen? Don't you get scared to 
death when you come across one of those science shows on PBS about the 
millions of bacteria crawling all over you? Don't you freak out when you wake 
up in the middle of the night and hear a loud noise coming from within your 
house? Have you ever been told an urban legend while sitting around a 
campfire or walking down a dark alley?
    That paranoia associated with the little voids that exist within our own, 
supposedly secure and advanced world is what `The Blair Witch Project' 
attempts to deal with through a unique style of filmmaking almost never 
utilized by the movies.
    The film puts itself forward as a collection of `real' footage shot by 
three film students who were never seen from again after they set out into 
some supposedly haunted woods in October 1994 to make a documentary on the 
local legend of `The Blair Witch.' There is no narration or outside footage 
except what was shot by the students (the actors) themselves. 
    In case you don't know, the directors/creators Daniel Myrick and Eduardo 
Sanchez conceived the film as being the most realistic work of fiction an 
audience could see. They didn't write a script, all they did was come up with 
the major plot points and character traits and then sent the three actors out 
into the woods to make the movie themselves. Myrick and Sanchez and a few of 
their crew members kept tabs on the actors through global positioning units 
and had `booby traps' set and waiting so that everything the three 
experienced would be real. This technique certainly works for the film's many 
emotional points, although the lack of interesting dialogue and 
characterization serve as noticeable flaws.
    I'm not sure which is the most innovative concept at work here: the way 
the film was made; the fact a distributor decided to take a chance on it; or 
the fact that mainstream audiences seem to be just as excited and anxious to 
see something of the tiniest scale as they were for a few other summer flicks 
of the largest scales.
    Anyway, the film starts out with a lot of interviews with the local 
townsfolk and their interpretation, stories and alleged personal experiences 
with the Blair Witch. Some blow it off as nonsense, but others take it 
seriously. This lays the foundation for the bulk of the film and the actual 
climax itself which probably would have worked as well as it does whether or 
not this attempt at a backstory had been included. In fact, this is the 
film's weakest aspect because the interviews are a bit too short and informal 
and the characters don't think much of it either.
    Oh yes, the characters are: Heather (Donahue), the director who shoots 
almost everything she and her crew say on home video (which gives the film a 
realistic feeling because almost everyone has seen themselves on their 
parents' or their friends' home videos); Mike (Williams), the sound guy who 
doesn't say much at first except for a few snide remarks and one-liners, but 
who will later become full of emotion; and Josh (Leonard), the 
cinematographer who uses a grainy 16mm black-and-white camera.
    The three set out into the woods to hike to some specific landmarks 
associated with the legend which includes your common tall tale stories and 
places such as `Coffin Rock' and an old hermit's home and stories of children 
and hunters who were abducted and slaughtered by the witch. What ensues is 
not the three students' serious study of the legend, but of the psychological 
terror they will endure when they get lost, run out of food, fight with each 
other and then panic when they all fear they are being hunted.
    It's obvious to us why the three begin to break down and lash out at each 
other and what the strange sounds are that they hear at night. The most 
chilling and enduring scenes last only a few minutes when the three set up 
camp for a night and are awakened by noises and movement in the dark they 
attribute to either backwoods survivalists, animals or just the wind, but 
they never say what's clearly on their minds (and ours) - it's the witch. One 
of the single, most frightening moments I can recall occurs during one of 
these scenes where the crew is awakened by a presence outside their tent and 
the three flee into the woods, cameras rolling, and in the distance we see 
Heather running away and she screams, `My God, what the hell is that!?' 
    This is what makes `The Blair Witch Project' so superior to the countless 
Hollywood gorefests about monsters, serial killers and vicious animals. It 
relies on our own imagination to determine just how horific the elements at 
play might be. Throughout the film the three encounter signs of an 
intelligence such as piles of rocks and stick figures hanging from trees that 
weren't there before. These things are so simple yet they are frightening 
because of their nature alone. We want to believe that we can logically 
explain any occurrence in this day and age, but the atmosphere of paranoia is 
too thick and overbearing and thus it's all pure fear.
    The final scene is the culmination of everything the film is. It's 
disturbing, scary and realistic and when the climax ensues and there hasn't 
been a drop of blood shed or a villain in a costume or a CGI, it's a powerful 
moment.
    However, I take issue with the fact so much more backstory about the 
Blair Witch legend and the students' film expedition has been covered on the 
movie's web page and other media sources than what was included in the film 
itself. To have the film be entirely a string of Heather, Mike and Josh's 
footage is a great idea and works well, but what if the film had been a 
fictional documentary about the students' documentary? It could have been 
complete with a vast historical background of the Blair Witch legend and the 
rescue efforts that supposedly took place in the days after the students were 
declared missing. That might contradict the theory Myrick and Sanchez were 
going for, but I doubt it would have hurt (especially considering the film's 
running time is less than 90 minutes and seems to fly by).
    Still, as my friend and fellow film critic Dustin Putman said, to see 
`The Blair Witch Project' is not just to sit in a theater and watch a movie, 
it's to really experience something. It works on an emotional and intelligent 
level I've not seen since `2001: A Space Odyssey,' in that an invisible 
powerful force has outsmarted us in a day and age where we think we know 
everything there is to know.
---------------------------------
Please visit Chad'z 
Movie Page - over 230 new and old movies reviewed in-depth, not just 
blind ratings and blather capsules.
Associate member of The O.F.C.S. (Online 
Film Critics Society)

Title
Review for Natural Born Killers (1994)
**1/2 (out of 4 = OK)
1994, R, 117 minutes [1 hour, 47 minutes]
[drama/satire]
starring: Woody Harrelson (Mickey Knox), Juliette Lewis (Mallory Knox),
Robert Downey Jr. (Wayne Gale), Tom Sizemore (Jack Scagnetti), Tommy Lee
Jones (Warden Dwight Muclusky), written by Quentin Tarantino, David Veloz,
Richard Rutowski, Oliver Stone, produced by Jane Hamsher, Don Murphy, Clayton
Townsend, directed by Oliver Stone.
I should have expected more (or maybe less in this case) from Oliver Stone.
"Natural Born Killers" tries to combat the evils of society by portraying
them in a very bizarre manner. It is an orgy of hyper editing and surrealism,
like a music video acted out. Unfortunately, it tries a little too hard to be
too many things at the same time. 
Like many other films, this is an attempt to go inside the mind of a maniac
and try to understand how it works. In this case the mindset is shared by
Mickey and Mallory Knox (Harrelson, Lewis), who are two crazed mass
murderers, but because of the unusual reality the story takes place in, they
don't seem much different from everyone else, which the film's essential
theme.         
The story of these two psychotic lovebirds is a strange one. Most of the
viciousness and insanity are implied. We can't comprehend why Mickey and
Mallory love each other or why they do what they do, it's all just mood. The
problem is the surrealism becomes a hindrance after a while, almost causing
for a state of vertigo.
Perhaps it is Mickey and Mallory's attitude that is so disturbing. They
aren't insane, they can tell right from wrong, but the fact they blatantly
choose to do evil deeds is shocking. People say we have become desensitized
to violence and obscenity, yet there has to be at least one thing in this
film that will disturb every viewer in some way. 
At one point the two are in need of help and are taken in by an Indian
family. Unfortunately, Mickey ends up destroying his only chance for
salvation. This is the only time the two feel any remorse, but the scene is
so short and shallow it doesn't nearly have the impact it intends to have.
The "normal" people of this reality are represented by Wayne Gale (Downey),
a tabloid journalist who is obsessed with the two, and like to exploit them.
He chronicles their actions and makes his living by sensationalizing them.
He does it so well, the media and the entire country fall in love with their
nihilism. Kids wave banners that say, "Kill me next Mickey!" and other
strange things. Eventually, Scagnetti (Sizemore), a tough cop who seems just
as corrupt and wicked as the murderers, corners them and sends them to jail.
Here is where the real exploitation begins and where the film takes a turn
for the worse.
Gale gets an exclusive interview with Mickey in jail, live, and right after
the Superbowl. Up until this point the film had been original in its
surrealistic storytelling style and bizarre reality. By the end it becomes a
standard action movie as the two escape and hold Gale hostage. The ending
itself is a little too allegorical and not exactly true to the nature of the
film.
Some of the last scenes show some clips of the Menedez brothers and O.J.
Simpson trials. I felt this was completely unnecessary and pretty much killed
the entire point of the film. Most films are about drawing your own
conclusions, but this swoops down with an actual "answer."
Still, for all its strangeness, "Natural Born Killers" is an interesting
film to watch. The direction and editing are second to none, but the actual
script itself needed improvement. 
Please visit Chad'z Movie page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz

Title
Review for Show, The (1995)
Rap has become a musical force to be reckoned with in the last 15 years.
Fans, and those in the industry know it is unlike any other form of music and
has unlimited potential. "The Show" is a documentary that doesn't try to
explain the history of rap music, instead, it is a deluge into the modern rap
world, showing how the artists behind the music, and environment behind the
artists. 
This film is basically geared towards GenXers, as it takes us on a
behind-the-scenes tour of many popular rap acts such as Warren G., Snoop
Doggy Dogg, The Notorious B.I.G., Naughty By Nature, Wu-Tang Clan, and even
legendary rappers Run-D.M.C. One of the opening sequences revolves around
Slick Rick's imprisonment, as we see producer Russell Simmons visit him at
Riker's Island Prison. Immediately, the dark tone of the documentary is set,
as it shows a worst case scenario. 
Throughout the film many of the rappers talk about their times in jail and
their involvement in gang activity. But they are able to show how the music
is a savior of sorts to them, because if they weren't making records they'd
be out on the streets, committing crime, and/or doing drugs. Their stories
are interesting, but at the same time disturbing when we realize they're
talking about America, not Bosnia.
Some attention is paid (although not nearly enough) to the "old school,"
such as Afrika Bambaata, Whodini, Run-D.M.C., and others who were making
records when the modern rappers were still children. They often vent their
frustration about the lack of respect they receive from both the press and
the "new school," and how phoney many rap acts of today are (i.e. Vanilla
Ice). 
My only real problem with this film is the lack of chronology. I was hoping
it would chronicle the history of rap, but instead, it just portrays it as it
is today. There are good and bad points to this: the good being that it stays
on top of things and makes us aware of what is happening today; the bad being
we don't get a sense of the true roots of rap, of the struggle for many years
to become as successful as it is today.
Documentaries are supposed to be educational material, and "The Show"
certainly does deliver. It is easier to follow and comprehend if you are
into, or have had exposure to rap, but if not, it's still entertaining. Rap
is an outlet for black youths to express themselves and it is an artform
worthy of exploration, hopefully "The Show" will be the first of many to take
that chance. 
Please visit Chad'z Movie Page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz
E-mail: ChadPolenz@aol.com
(C)1997 Chad Polenz

Title
Review for Breaking the Waves (1996)
Breaking The Waves
Chad'z rating: ** (out of 4 = fair)
1996, R, 159 minutes [2 hours, 39 minutes]
[drama]
starring: Emily Watson (Bess), Stellan Skarsgard (Jan), Katrin Cartlidge
(Dodo), Adrian Rawlins (Dr. Richardson), written by Peter Asmussen, David
Pirie, Lars von Trier, produced by Peter Aalbaek Jensen, Vibeke Windeloev,
directed by Lars von Trier.
        I like independent movies, but lately they have become such brutal
depictions of humanity they're too emotionally exhausting to appreciate.
"Breaking The Waves" is a good example of this. It certainly has an original
premise, but the elements that make up this premise and tell the story are so
strange it's hard to see as a thematic love story, but as an exploitation of
its characters.
        Basically, this is another story of true love, but it's forbidden love so
that automatically makes it good - right? Here our lovers are the
simple-minded Scottish girl Bess (Watson), and the huge-but-tender Danish oil
rigger Jan (Skarsgard). The first hour does a fine job in establishing the
passion they have for each other. But here is where the film's first and
biggest flaw becomes evident: it mistakes horniness for love. Yes, you can
tell Bess and Jan do love each other, but why not show how the two met and
fell in love rather than showing them as newlyweds? Communication is the key
to a good relationship but there are few scenes of interactive dialogue here,
so you really have to wonder what their relationship is based on.
        The first act also establishes the rigid religious society in which the
story takes place. Bess loves God and the church as much as she knows how to,
but she is somewhat mentally challenged, almost schizophrenic at times. She
seems to have a split personality when she engages in conversations between
herself and "God" (or what she thinks God would say). It's hard to tell just
how seriously this is supposed to be taken considering Bess's mindset and the
strict, orthodox community she has grown up in. The film should only use one
of these extremes or the other, using both is trying way too hard to depict
Bess as an innocent victim in a cruel, hypocritical world.
        Eventually something happens in terms of plot when Jan goes away to work but
is involved in a serious accident. Bess is devasted when she hears this, but
is relieved because now she can be with him again despite the fact he may be
paralyzed for life. Here is where the strange film starts to become rather
twisted: Jan knows he'll never be able to experience physical love with Bess
again, so he asks her to find someone else to do it with and pretend it's him
and then to tell him about it, that way they can remember what it's like to
love each other and that feeling of love is what will "save" Jan from dying.
        Most religions say the physical act of love is the closest two people can
get to each other and express their love, but the way it is symbolized here
seems almost perverted. Bess believes she will be "honoring thy husband" by
doing what he asked, and in turn, following God's word and sacrificing
herself as Christ did for her. Now maybe I'm way off, but isn't adultery a
sin? Considering the Amish-like society, I find it impossible to believe none
of the characters realize this (especially Bess!). When Bess's sister Dodo
(Cartlidge), and Jan's doctor, Dr. Richardson (Rawlins) learn of their plan
they say it is wrong but not why or what basis it's wrong. 
        I'm not sure what von Trier is trying to say with this film. The story is
told in such a way that the deal between Bess and Jan is neither condoned nor
condemmed. This is supposed to be a character study to see just how far and
how much a person would do if they really love someone. How can we appreciate
Bess's feelings and the things she does if she can't really be held
accountable for what she does? If there's any reason the film fails it's not
because of the premise but because of the slow, boring, uninteresting
storytelling. 
        What also kept me from enjoying the film was the production itself. The
entire film was shot using a hand-held camera which wouldn't have been a
problem if every shot hadn't been so close up. Every time the camera moves
suddenly and/or quickly I became disoriented, sometimes nauesous. The film is
also edited in a choppy manner with no smooth transition from shot to shot
and scene to scene, even individual shots themselves are assembled poorly.
        It's hard to see "Breaking The Waves" as a modern tale of "The Ultimate
Love." You have to give it credit for the chances it takes, as it is a fine,
offbeat character study if nothing else (the acting is superb - I'll have to
admit it). Still, it puts the wrong characters in the wrong situations to
attempt for a theme of grand proportions, and it really doesn't have the
right to.
Please visit Chad'z Movie Page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz - over 140
new and old films reviewed in depth, not just blind ratings and quick
capsules. Also, check out The FIRST Shay Astar Web Page @
http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz/ShayAstar.html

Title
Review for Sneakers (1992)
Sneakers
Chad'z rating: ***1/2 (out of 4 = very good)
1992, PG-13, 126 minutes [2 hours, 6 minutes]
[thriller]
starring: Robert Redford (Martin Bishop/Brice), Sidney Poitier (Donald
Crease), Dan Aykroyd ("Mother"), Mary McDonnell (Liz), Ben Kingsley (Cosmo),
produced by Walter F. Parkes, Lawrence Lasker, written by Phil Alden
Robinson, Lawrence Lasker, Walter F. Parkes, directed by Phil Alden Robinson.
Most high-tech thrillers make the mistake of taking themselves too
seriously, so when the movie machine kicks in and the cliches pile up, no one
can enjoy the ride because the flaws are distracting. "Sneakers" is another
one of those flicks in premise, with lots of cool gadgets, computer hacking,
and amazing break-ins. However, it's lighthearted with a good distribution of
comedy and important themes to make for the adventure the other films try
for, but usually don't achieve.
Like most stories about government-level crime, this film uses some cliches
to establish its complicated story, but it's interesting and suspenseful and
you have to respect that. Two college buddies break into the government (both
physically and via computer) to electronically transfer funds to "more worthy
causes." When one (Martin) goes out for pizza, the other (Cosmo) is arrested.
The story then jumps to the present day as an older Martin (Redford) leads a
team of thieves who break into a bank.  We later learn they are actually
super security sneaks (if they can break into your place then it's definitely
not safe). 
Martin's team is made up of five guys including: himself; Donald Crease
(Poitier), the stern ex-CIA guy; "Mother" (Aykroyd), a paranoid conspiracy
theorist; "Whistler" (David Strathairn), a blind man in tune to the sound of
electricity; and Carl (River Phoenix), a 19-year-old hacker who fits in
somewhere. These guys make for the generic spy team, but they have great
camaraderie, which is due to the clever, witty dialogue. Even when they argue
it's funny, which shows the film's humbleness - it knows it's a typical
thriller, but it doesn't knock you over the head trying to prove itself.
Although the mood is initially nice and light, the story becomes a bit more
complex than it needs to. National Security agents show up and tell Martin
they know about his past. They cut a deal, if he and his team perform a
slightly illegal operation for them (stealing a microchip which is supposedly
the ultimate code-breaker), his record will be erased and he can get his true
name back.
The second act is full of detail and typical thriller stuff with many
characters introduced and clues dropped about the story, as we eventually
realize there's something much bigger going on. Suddenly, we are just as
confused as the characters when everything we thought to be true turns out to
be wrong. 
You probably wouldn't expect a film like this to make such great use of
mood, but it does through James Horner's cubist/jazz score, which makes the
atmosphere so dark you can feel it. Not to mention many key scenes which
become horrifically frightening because of their basis in reality. 
Through a series of strange events Martin finds himself face to face with
his old friend Cosmo (Kingsley). Cosmo had orchestrated a massive conspiracy
in order to get the microchip (which explains the film's complexity), and
when he tells Martin the power it contains it is another example of the
film's ability to be moving even though it shouldn't be. 
The final act involves a fantastic effort on behalf of the gang to pull off
a conspiracy of their own and steal back the microchip from Cosmo's highly
secured headquarters (a modern "fortress" if you will). Accomplishing their
mission is a difficult and delicate task, and although few errors crop up,
the suspense is so exciting, it more than makes up any distractions. The
ending is pretty much what you'd except, but because of the charm the film
had throughout, I didn't doubt it for a minute.
"Sneakers" is a great adventure that could have been even better. It
incorporates computers in a realistic, believable manner and poses many
relevant theories regarding their use and importance. It's not often we get
commercial movies as well crafted and moving as this one. 
Please visit Chad'z Movie Page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz
E-mail: ChadPolenz@aol.com
(C)1997 Chad Polenz

Title
Review for Eraser (1996)
**1/2 (out of 4 = OK)
1996, R, 115 minutes [1 hour, 55 minutes]
[action]
starring: Arnold Schwarzenegger (John Kruger - "The Eraser"), James Caan
(Robert Deguerin), Vanessa Williams (Lee), Robert Pastorelli (Johnny C.),
produced by Arnold and Anne Kopelson, written by Tony Paryear, Waylon Green,
directed by Charles Russell.
"Eraser" may be the most generic Schwarzenegger flick yet, because it has a
little bit from every film he's ever done: super high-tech/sci-fi stuff;
double crosses; cartoony bad guys; amazing stunts; lots of explosions and
violence; a cute, innocent woman; and a sarcastic buddy to provide for one
liners and lightheartedness. This isn't one of Schwarzenegger's best movies,
but it's far from his worst.
Arnold Schwarzenegger stars as U.S. Marshall John Kruger - "The Eraser," who
protects people in the Witness Protection Program by "killing" them. He makes
clones of their bodies and makes it seem as if these clones are the people
that way the mob thinks they're dead. The way we learn about this is through
a standard gun shooting and fist fight scene somewhere in suburbia, which is
strange, clever, and silly all at the same time.
The story moves rather quickly, we get bits and pieces of some kind of a
plot, but clarity and storytelling is not the point of this movie. We meet
Lee (Williams), a sexy woman who is trying to turn in her company for selling
high-tech weapons to terrorists. Of course she is sort of caught and The
Eraser must protect her. But the plot and the characters are really just
excuses for lots of cool violence (maybe I shouldn't refer to violence as
"cool," but I can't think of any other way to describe it).
James Caan co-stars as the nemesis Robert Deguerin, a traitor who wants our
heroes dead. Caan is not convincing here, mostly because it's difficult to
tell what's going on, so we can't tell what his motives are.
Throughout this picture I kept asking myself where I'd seen it all before,
and it hit me: Bugs Bunny cartoons! There are individual scenes that are suppo
sed to be serious but are just so unbelievable and cliche there's no way this
could have any plausibility. Even the characters are cartoons, like Johnny C.
(Pastorelli), who was "erased" only to find himself teaming up with The
Eraser. Of course, he just happens to have Mafia ties who help them blow away
the even badder bad guys. 
"Eraser" doesn't quite know what it wants to be: a suspenseful, intense
movie about government espionage, or a typical action flick, or maybe even
sci-fi? Still, this film is interesting to watch even though you know it's
fake. If this is the direction the action genre is headed I won't mind...
that much. (8/31/96) (1/18/97) (6/11/97) [see also: "Bulletproof," "The
Rock," "True Lies"]
please visit Chad'z Movie Page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz/index.html

Title
Review for Armageddon (1998)
Chad'z rating: **1/2 (out of 4 = okay/average)
1998, PG-13, 150 minutes [2 hours, 30 minutes]
starring: Bruce Willis (Harry Stamper), Ben Affleck (A.J. Frost), Billy Bob
Thorton (Dan Truman), Liv Tyler (Grace Stamper); written by Jonathan
Hensleigh, Robert Roy Pool, Tony Gilroy, Shane Salerno, J.J. Abrams; produced
by Michael Bay, Jerry Bruckheimer, Gale Anne Hurd; directed by Michael Bay.
Seen July 4, 1998 at 8:15 p.m. at Crossgates Cinema 18 (Albany, NY), theater
#1, by myself using Hoyt's cinema cash. [Theater rating: ****: excellent,
sound, picture, and seats]
        The "event movie" industry is quickly becoming one of the most ruthless forms
of competition in the world, rivaling even the Cold War at its peak. Every
major Hollywood studio is out to one-up the other by spending as much money as
possible with as little effort at intelligence as possible. It's practically a
mathematical formula and "Armageddon" culminates this philosophy in nearly
every frame of film. It's everything a mega blockbuster should be - full of
action, adventure, cliffhangers, romance, comedy, and outstanding special
effects, as to cram in everything possible and yet still turns out to be
hollow.
        Getting an audience's attention right from the beginning plays a major role
in how today's films work. We want to have something exciting to watch, not a
slow build-up of a story (God forbid!), and this film plays right into the
mainstream's hands. The opening sequence uses mystery, comedy, and action
simultaneously to give a sneak preview of the level of the in-your-face energy
the film has. Technically, it serves no purpose other than to showcase the
special effects and lay the basic structure for the film's simple plot, but
it's also symbolic of the way in which the film works. We're introduced to
some generic characters who are quickly thrown into a fantastic situation that
could only happen in a movie, and somehow comedy and suspense come into play.
Sure it's fun to watch at the time, but in retrospect, it's almost insulting
to realize how little thought was put into something so extraordinary.
        After a sensational teaser, the film switches gears a bit to concentrate on
an attempt at backstory. The entire first act flies by as all the major
characters and plot devices are unfolded. An asteroid the size of Texas is
headed for Earth, and its fragments alone have done more damage than most wars
might. This is a simple  conflict and surprisingly enough, allows for many
sub-plots to push and pull the characters and the story in general. Lots of
scientific and military jargon is spat out at a lightning-fast pace to create
for a shroud of plausibility. Hollywood doesn't know the meaning of "science
fiction" and the way in which the fantastic is justified is more interesting
than the justification itself. For example, the imagery of the government's
space and military programs is captivating because it's so advanced in a
modern way (the barrage of TV screens, the Internet, cellular phones, and
every other form of hip, instant communication).
        In fact, the film deserves credit for its initial sense of realism, had it
stuck with it throughout, it might have worked as a believable account of
man's greatest victory over nature. But this isn't a philosophical picture by
any means, it's supposed to be a thrill ride and it does deliver on that
promise. The film's hook is truly its biggest flaw, but if the Armageddon is
truly impending, we're going to have to make sure it's countered by the most
fun-to-watch characters, not ones that might actually be qualified. 
        Dan Truman (Thorton), one of the execs at NASA and advisor to the president
realizes in order to stop the asteroid it must be blown up from within, which
would require the best drillers in the world. Of course those people would
also have to be the most interesting, diverse group of characters in the
world, whom we meet early on. Bruce Willis stars as Harry Stamper, a third
generation oil driller with just the right amount of muscle, charm, and wit a
character like this would have. He's just fired his right-hand man A.J.
(Affleck) for sleeping with his daughter Grace (Tyler), and is approached by
the Pentagon to lead a team to the asteroid to drill it and blow it up. Of
course, with as much money, power, and intellect the government has, they've
stolen Stamper's idea for a revolutionary drill and can't figure out how to
make it work. Long story short, Stamper agrees to help them out, but only if
his crew come along to help. Guess what kind of people make up Stamper's crew?
        This movie comes to us by some of the people behind "Aliens," "The Rock," and
"Con Air," and considering those films, it's no surprise the characters are of
the intelligence-light, brawn and rowdiness-heavy sort. They're the last
people that should be in charge of saving the world, but that makes them
perfect characters for a film like this. They exist for comic relief and an
attempt at humanism, and for the most part it works, but the reasoning behind
it is still clear as day. They're cardboard cut-outs, which most films like
this use, but why there's not enough satire and sense of lightheartedness to
not take them seriously. The romantic sub-plot between A.J. and Grace is
milked for all its worth and serves mostly as an excuse to photograph Tyler's
face at every dramatic angle (and situation) possible, while the dialogue
between her and Affleck is quite melodramatic. I'm not even going to get into
the supporting characters' personal lives.
        The first hour of the film has a breezy, but shifty tone to it. One minute
the impending doom is played for intensity, the next minute the interaction
between Stamper and his crew is played for laughs, and then the romance
between A.J. and Grace is played for sap. All of it is watchable and the
intense aspects succeed for the most part, but the pacing a bit slow. Once the
crew begins training and finally embarks upon their mission is when things
really begin to heat up, which is the primary reason the film exists.
        Action done correctly can be one of the most sensational experiences, and the
filmmakers know how to manipulate the audience in this respect. The direction
balances the special effects with the events taking place, making for genuine
suspense and excitement. The art and production design give the settings a
real sense of depth, space, and detail which helps counter some of the wacky
plotlines. The hyper editing works with the direction to give the film a raw
intensity, but often induces vertigo and seems like a cop-out for lack of
script ideas. 
        There's no lack of action at all here, but what prevents the film from taking
advantage of its energy is the screenplay itself. Cliffhangers and other major
conflicts  constantly crop up and compound upon each other, but once they
start happening back-to-back (about every two minutes), the level of
predictably skyrockets. At nine screenwriters (five credited, four
uncredited), the film is clearly over-written which might have been saved had
20 or 30 minutes of the middle and last acts been cut. There's just too much
action without reaction here. As the film nears its end it's easy to forgot
what the point of the original mission was.
        Still, "Armageddon" is not without its accolades. The non-stop action is
never boring and the effects are mind-blowing, which makes it work at least as
eye candy, but as tasty as candy is, it's not very good for you.


Title
Review for Cast Away (2000)
There's been a lot of movies, books and TV shows about people being stranded 
on a desert island. In most cases the formula is used for comedy or 
adventure, rarely drama. That's what separates "Cast Away" from all the other 
stories of the genre, because this is the probably the most realistic 
depiction of what a human would go through under the circumstances. The 
result is definitely interesting but not nearly as powerful as it could have 
been. 
This is a movie that's every bit generic as lowbrow action movies and teenage 
slasher flicks. If you think about it, this is a really easy script to write: 
man loves wife shown in opening act; man gets on plane and says "I'll be 
right back;" man's plane crashes into the ocean with man being the only 
survivor; man ends up on desert island; man must survive - will man ever get 
back home? And if man does get back home what will have changed? 
Yup, that pretty much sums up "Cast Away," the only other details you really 
need to know is that Tom Hanks stars in the "man" role as Chuck Noland, an 
employee for Federal Express whose job it is to make sure packages get 
delivered all over the world on time. Helen Hunt plays the "wife" role, 
Kelly. There's virtually no other supporting characters, just minor 
characters plugged in to fill out the story a little. 
There's little point in discussing the first act of the film because it works 
EXACTLY how you'd expect a movie like this to. Hanks is a hard-assed boss who 
takes his job just a tad too seriously. It's Christmas time and at home he 
and his wife host a big family gathering and it's implied that the two have a 
pretty good marriage but it could be a lot better if they weren't so busy. 
Kelly tries to convince Chuck to take some time off work but he can't, at 
least not immediately. She even gives him a family heirloom with her picture 
in it and when Chuck's plane goes down and he escapes to the island it's the 
only personal possession he retains. Awwww..... 
But all sappiness aside, this film still works well as a story of man's basic 
instinct to survive, to fend off the elements and to overcome loneliness. The 
Pacific Ocean is a huge, vast place just like outer space and being stuck in 
the middle of it -hundreds or thousands of miles away from civilization is a 
very scary situation. 
There was a shot in "Titanic" that stands out in my mind as one of the most 
powerful images I've ever seen. As the ship is sinking in the middle of the 
night and all hell breaks loose, crew members fire flares in the air hoping 
another ship will see it and come to their rescue. Then the camera cuts back 
to about a mile in the air where we see the ocean is as black as oil and that 
flare is a small speck of light - so tiny it's pathetic. It's a shot that 
conveys the utter hopelessness and bleakness of the situation, and "Cast 
Away" is kind of like that idea made into an entire movie. 
If you were stuck on a desert island all by yourself would you be able to 
survive? Would you be willing to become a cro-magnon man, having to kill your 
food with your bare hands, make your own tools, and build your own shelter 
just from the things around you? Chuck Noland doesn't have a lot of choice 
and we watch as his learns how to adapt. 
Zemeckis never really gives you clues about what's going to happen next. 
There's no story at all, just our observations of how this man survives. He's 
not a Navy SEAL or anything, he's pretty clueless what to do and that gives 
us a tremendous amount of sympathy for him. When coconuts fall off the trees 
he knows they can be a source of food but trying to get one open is the tough 
part. We watch as he throws them against a rock, the bashes it with a smaller 
rock until the rock in his hand crumbles! He must also learn to make fire 
without any matches, to make rope out of palms, to eat fish and crabs raw and 
to maintain his sanity without anyone else to talk to, without anything to 
read and much of anything remotely recreational to do. 
And this is pretty much all that happens for a good 80 or 90 minutes - the 
bulk of the film. Hanks doesn't have a lot of lines since the only one he can 
talk to is himself or his "friend" - a volleyball named Wilson. But it's his 
raw emotions that drive the film. If you were in the same position  and 
didn't know what you were doing wouldn't you make a lot of mistakes? The best 
moments of the film occur when something bad happens to Chuck. He slashes his 
hand trying to use a rock as a knife; he nearly impales himself on the coral 
reef trying to sail out past the breakers; he realizes the area rescuers will 
have to cover to find both the plane and him add up to a search area of about 
500,000 miles. 
Realizing this Chuck says, "That's twice the size of Texas," with a look on 
his face as if he knew all hope was lost. It's a subtle but profound moment, 
something reminiscent of a Stanley Kubrick device. 
How to describe the rest of the film though? If you haven't seen it do you 
want to know how long he's stuck there for? Do you want to know if he ever 
tries to get off the island, and if so how? Do you want to know if he'll ever 
get back home? 
Watching this film from a critic's point of view I wasn't so much concerned 
with whether Chuck would get home or not, I was more interested in the 
process of him doing so. The film had already done a good job in showing the 
loneliness of the situation, of the human instinct to survive and the last 
act just takes both of these ideas one step further. The island in the middle 
of the ocean is a pretty frightening idea, but being out in the ocean on a 
raft is even more so. On the island Chuck was at least a cork in the ocean, 
out of the raft he's just a teardrop (actually, more like teardrop molecule). 
Thankfully this picture spares us any gratuitous shark attack scenes or huge 
tidal waves and hurricanes, etc. 
It ends how you'd expect it to end - that's neither a good nor bad thing. 
So "Cast Away" is a pretty good movie, but it's nothing profound. It does 
have some originality for a desert island story but the backstory about 
Chuck's personal life is quite sappy and the ending doesn't have the dramatic 
bite it's going for. I'm sure there's some way this could have been an 
all-out excellent film, but what we get is good enough for me. 

*****
Chad'z Movie Page is back! 
In-depth reviews of nearly all mainstream films playing at your local 
cineplex. There's also reviews of a few classic films and some of your 
personal favorites.

Title
Review for Happy Gilmore (1996)
** (out of 4 = fair)
1996, PG-13, 91 minutes [1 hour, 31 minutes]
[comedy]
starring; Adam Sandler (Happy Gilmore), Carl Weathers (Chubbs) Christopher
McDonald (Shooter McGavin), Julie Bowen (Virgina), Frances Bay (Grandma),
written by Tim Herlihy, Adam Sandler, produced by Robert Simonds, directed by
Dennis Ducan.
Adam Sandler is a young man full of energy and comic wit. His first film,
"Billy Madison," was wild and unpredictable, but "Happy Gilmore," his
follow-up is trite and cliche. I kept thinking "I know I've seen this
before," and kept predicting all the jokes because of that feeling. This is
another typical screwball sports comedy with a stupid villain and a deadline
for a huge amount of cash.
Happy Gilmore (Sandler) is spoiled idiot manchild (wonder where I've seen
this before?) who lives with his grandmother (Bay) who he actually cares for.
He loves hockey but really stinks at it and can't comprehend his failure at th
e game. One day the I.R.S. comes to his grandmother's house and repossess all
of her property because she hasn't paid her taxes in ten years. This is told,
blatantly, quickly, and so dumbed down it's almost a children's story, and a
bad one at that. 
There is a quick, token sports comedy scene in which we discover Happy has a
hidden talent of hitting golf balls very far. When he goes to the local
driving range he is seen by a retired golf pro named Chubbs (Weathers), who
of course tells him he's gifted, and tries to convince him to go pro, but of
course Happy doesn't listen until Chubbs mentions he could make money playing
golf... could this get any more predictable?
Most of the movie depicts Happy's struggle to make it to the top. Along the
way we watch him beat up other players, hecklers, his caddy, even Bob Barker.
And then there is Shooter McGavin (McDonald), the arrogant pro who feels
threatened by Happy and wants him kicked out of the sport. Let's not forget
the sexy-woman-who-won't-give-the-main-character-the-time-of-day, Virgina
(Bowen), the PGA publicist who both of the men try to impress. 
Cliche after cliche after cliche is not a good formula for a movie, truly
good movies always do something different. Yes, "Billy Madison" was cliche,
but it was much funnier because of it's total wackiness and craziness. This
isn't wacky, this is just plain dumb.
Do I have to reveal the ending? I don't think so. 
"Happy Gilmore" was a fair movie, but it was just too predictable. Some
parts were quite funny, I'll have to admit it, but not enough to make up for
the overall simpleton attitude. 
[Note: What really annoyed me the most was the blatant plugs throughout this
film. Never have I seen a movie that was so blatant in these plugs as this
one was. Example: shots opening on Pepsi and Subway billboards, Happy's
constant snacking at Subway, Happy even does a Subway commercial!]
please visit Chad'z Movie Page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz

Title
Review for Replacements, The (2000)
It's pretty amazing that we, the movie-going public, will still plunk down 
good money to watch a movie use the same story and the same jokes we've seen 
countless times before. There isn't many original ideas to "The Replacements" 
- a sports comedy about screwball amateur football players who get a chance 
to play in the big leagues - but at least it doesn't crash and burn because 
it does have its moments. 
How they got Keanu Reeves and Gene Hackman to star in a blatant rip-off of 
the "Major League" movies I'll never know. Those films were borderline 
B-movies and here we have two huge movie stars going through the motions of a 
run-of-the-mill zany comedy. But that's where the movie gets its charm - that 
it's so by-the-book in such an obvious way you can't help but laugh at 
predictable jokes and gags. 
Not that the film is the funniest movie ever made or anything like that. The 
fact remains it is unoriginal for the most part and actually tries to get 
away with a generic, totally unbelievable story with all the cliches plugged 
into the right places. 
What the movie does have going for it is that for every cliche there's a 
chance for a joke to work. The screenwriters apparently realized this and 
didn't bother to sketch out the characters and instead just give us 
caricatures. Reeves is the token aw-shucks hero, Hackman is the "We gotta 
win, you can do it"-coach. Then there's a large ensemble of supporting guys: 
a beserker cop who is uncontrollable; a pair of fat gangsters who take that 
mentality to the sport; a sumo wrestler; a prisoner on work release; a Welsh 
chain-smoking gambler; and a egotistical clown (played very well by Orlando 
Jones - the guy from those 7-Up commercials). 
It's a funny premise with quite a few jokes that pay off, but the screenplay 
takes itself too seriously. With sports movies you have to feel like you're 
watching your favorite team from real life going for the championship - 
that's something you really can't do here. 

*****
Chad'z Movie Page is back! 
In-depth reviews of nearly all mainstream films playing at your local 
cineplex. There's also reviews of a few classic films and some of your 
personal favorites.

Title
Review for Charlie's Angels (2000)
In effort to describe and analyze "Charlie's Angels" you'll probably see me 
make comparisons to a lot of trashy subjects from a Jerry Bruckheimer movie 
to "Weekend At Bernie's" and I'm sure the phrase "Did a bunch of kids make 
this movie?" will be used. Yes, "Charlie's Angels" the fall 2000 action flick 
starring three hot chicks and promising a lot of action is exactly what you'd 
expect it to be - mindless as it could be but it's as much fun as you can 
have at the movies. 
Recently, my friend and fellow film critic Ian Waldron-Mantagi pointed out 
something to me that I should have known for years: what makes bad movies bad 
is that they're inconsistent. Roger Ebert's basic philosophy of film 
criticism (known as "Ebert's Law") is: a film is not what it's about, but how 
it is about it. "Charlie's Angels" is the first big budget blockbuster movie 
I can think of that plays by these rules and succeeds without even trying. 
Yes, the premise is pretty stupid and there's a lot of stuff you could rip it 
to shreds over, BUT it is consistent in everything it does. It's a movie that 
realizes the only way to pull off this material is to be as campy, 
lighthearted and tongue-in-cheek as possible and does just that. You don't 
honestly believe FOR A SECOND that we're supposed to take this seriously do 
you? 
Drew Barrymore, Cameron Diaz and Lucy Liu star as Dylan, Natalie and Alex 
(respectively) - the sexy private eyes who work for Charles Townsend, a 
multi-millionaire who communicates only via speakerphone and has never 
actually met his employees. They've got all the cool gadgets just like James 
Bond and have "normal" lives outside of work as if they were comic book 
superheroes (which they pretty much believe they are). Bill Murray plays 
Bosley, their pimp of sorts who mostly just tells them to hurry up while the 
Angels do most of the work. 
The plot, if you're interested, involves the Angels being hired by a 
communications magnate to first rescue the kidnapped CEO, then break into the 
rival company's uber-secure headquarters and then to have the tables turned 
on them. Ok, if you're mad I spoiled the story don't be, it's really 
irrelevant. "Charlie's Angels" the movie is not about story, it's not about 
the characters and it's certainly not about theme or anything of any real 
artistic value. It's about being wild and crazy and funny without 
limitations. 
There's no point for me to breakdown how the screenplay works. You want an 
exciting story with chases, fights and explosions and you get those. This is 
a PG-13 movie made for the sake of being a PG-13 movie, one might even call 
it a family movie. Yes, there's a lot of cleavage and sexiness but it's not 
lurid or sleazy. These butt-kicking chicks aren't total bimbos, and they 
aren't symbols for feminism either. It's as if they're little kids playing 
pretend in the backyard and that's the attitude the screenplay has throughout 
the entire movie so that even with the Angels walk into a house and it 
explodes or have a thousand bullets shot at them they're able to just pick 
themselves up, dust themselves off and continue on as if nothing happened. 
This is a chance for Barrymore, Diaz and Liu to try their hand at being 
Jackie Chan (without doing their own stunts though). It's a chance for the 
producers and director to take a crack at the latest technology and see what 
kind of eye candy they can come up with so that even the blatant 
copyright-infringement-lawsuit-inspiring rip-offs of "The Matrix" are in such 
good humor you just keep laughing instead of rolling your eyes. 
Critics who hate this movie say the stars look bored, I say they're just 
deadpanning lines which are so unbelievable silly the best actor in the world 
couldn't make them seem remotely serious. There's a scene near the end 
where's there's a WWF-style orgy of violence going on and in one scene 
Barrymore's character is tied to a chair about to get beaten up by about six 
guys. She tells them to stop and retreat and tells them what she's going to 
do to them. They laugh that such an impossible task could be pulled off in 
such in an impossible situation but it does happen. That's when you realize 
the movie's a success - so far-fetched, so over-the-top and so cheesy it's 
not stupid, it's hilarious. 
When "Charlie's Angels" arrives on video I hope they put it with the comedies 
not the action movies. 

*****
Chad'z Movie Page is back! 
In-depth reviews of nearly all mainstream films playing at your local 
cineplex. There's also reviews of a few classic films and some of your 
personal favorites.

Title
Review for Bait (2000)
Here I sit at my computer about to write my review of the recent action 
comedy "Bait" starring Jamie Foxx and David Morse. This is a review I don't 
even want to write because I'd just be laying the same criticisms on it that 
I would with any other so-generic-and-predictable-it's-beyond-ridiculous 
piece of Hollywood fluff. If they're not going to give us, the audience, just 
a little credit and put something together with half a brain, why should I 
waste my time and mental energy criticising it?
Last summer I took this same approach with my review of "The Mummy," in that 
review I just quoted phrases my reviews of other sub-par movies. I think I 
shall do the same thing here but with a few less quotes (not all are 
applicable). I hope this goes to show you what I think of "Bait" and why you 
can find out all you need to know about it without having to take a wild 
guess. It's genuinely unfunny (I, and the other audience members only laughed 
ONCE during the entire two hours), unoriginal and unthrilling. It's not so 
bad to the point where it's fun to watch because of its badness and it's no 
so bad you absolute loathe it and are pained by watching it, it's just such a 
cliche in and of itself, that, uhh... lost my train of thought. Anyways, 
here's those quotes, enjoy!
"Getting an audience's attention right from the beginning plays a major role 
in how today's films work. We want to have something exciting to watch, not a 
slow build-up of a story (God forbid!), and this film plays right into the 
mainstream's hands..." - review of "Armageddon."
"It's clear the film doesn't want to waste time on reality and thus the 
attempt to establish plausability (the most minimal amount necessary) comes 
across as a half-assed effort. Supporting characters and shady sup-plots are 
introduced, but as is the case with films made up of a large cast of 
characters, only a handful have any real significance... There's a fine line 
separating homage from plagiarism...," - review of "Godzilla" (1998)
"Unfortunately, as is the case with most modern thrillers, once the film 
showed potential for authenticity and intelligence, the cliches and action 
sequences take over," - review of "The Jackal."
Chad'z Movie Page is back 
after heavy renovation. Reviews of nearly all mainstream movies playing 
today! Get my reviews of everything playing at your local cineplex so you can 
better make an informed decision on what to see. Don't forget to vote on my 
poll and sign the guestbook!

Title
Review for Exorcist, The (1973)
** (out of 4 = fair)
1973, R, 122 minutes [2 hours, 2 minutes]
[horror/drama]
starring: Jason Miller (Father Damon Karras), Ellen Burstyn (Christine
MacNeil), Linda Blair (Regan MacNeil), Max von Sydow (Father Merrin), written
and produced by William Peter Blatty (based on his novel), directed by
William Friedkin.
"The Exorcist" puts itself forward as a completely logical story that just
happens to be about demonic possession. Unfortunately, the harder it tries
not to be a mindless horror flick, the more it becomes one.
The story is simple; an innocent 12-year-old girl,  Regan MacNeil (Blair),
becomes possessed by a demonic spirit. At first, her mother Christine
(Burstyn), along with some medical doctors think she has a lesion in her
brain which is causing her to act so strange, but when no physical evidence
is found, they assume it's a psychological disorder. Then the possibility of
spiritual possession is brought up. At first Christine scoffs the idea, but
then believes it after finding no other explanation. 
Now, this story is fine and the film does a good job in creating a
suspenseful mood since we seem to be the only ones who can see the obvious.
Horror stories thrive on this kind of element, so when the evil things happen
we can say to the naysayers, "Told you so." However, the manner in which the
film actually breaks down the plot and uses this element is quite
exploitative.
The entire first act moves very slowly. There are scenes intended to
establish the setting as everyday normality, but don't add up to anything.
Since this is a horror movie there are also short scenes intended to scare us
but don't. For example, Christine hears constant rumblings in the attic and
believes it to be rats, but when she checks to see if the traps the butler
set are working, they turn out to be empty. Another scene shows the lights in
the house flickering for no reason, but no one seems to notice.
There is also a sketchy scene in which Regan shows her mother a Ouija board
and says something about communicating with a being of another existence.
When Regan ultimately becomes possessed, is it because the Ouija board is
actually a demonic game? Whatever the reason is, it doesn't seem believable
she would become possessed at all.
Although the film tells its story seriously and presents the horrific as
plausible, the way it comes across is too transparent. I found it impossible
to believe no one thought Regan might be possessed after she speaks with a
demonic voice that is straight from the horror cliches, or when she flops
around her bed uncontrollably, or when her face and body start to mutate and
her eyes glaze over (there's medical evidence for all of this!?). Even her
own mother nor a priest is convinced when the furniture starts moving on its
own (nah, that happens all the time!).
Where there is evil there must be good to counter it, and the film's good
force is represented by Father Damon Karras (Miller). Unfortunately, Karras
is having self doubts, and when his mother dies he feels guilty and weak.
Christine goes to Karras for help, but he warns her he could end up causing
more harm than good. The doubting religious servant in the midst of trouble
is such a cliche and the film placates to the audience by using him as a weak
good force to combat the powerful evil. Even Karras' first name is obviously
symbolic.
The demon inside Regan could have been a much more interesting "character."
When it overpowers Regan's body and attacks people, it screams obscenities
which sound like the demon learned from watching horror movies. Father Karras
even engages in dialogue with the demon, and I think it would have been
interesting if he had asked it about the specifics of Hell. Or more
importantly, why, out of the people in the world did it choose to posses
Regan? If the devil is supposed to be so smart, why not posses someone more
important and powerful? These questions aren't even asked, let alone
answered. Instead, the demon blatantly tries to get under Karras' skin by
reading his mind. 
The last few scenes aren't nearly as intense as they should be. A world
renown exorcist, Father Merrin (von Sydow), is called in to help Father
Karras exorcise the demon. The actual ending itself could be seen as a great
poetic victory, but because everything seems so cheesy it doesn't work well.
The true horror to "The Exorcist" is supposed to be derived from the film's
basis in reality. Compared to most horror films, it is realistic, but there
are simply too many unbelievable aspects and other flaws to take it
seriously, and thus it isn't scary. (4/23/97) (6/11/97)
please visit Chad'z Movie Page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz/index.html

Title
Review for PCU (1994)
Chad'z rating: ** (out of 4 = fair/below average)
1994, PG-13, 80 minutes [1 hour, 20 minutes]
starring: Jeremy Piven (Droz), Chris Young (Tom), Megan Ward (Katy), Jon
Favreau (Gutter); written by Adam Leff, Zak Penn; produced by Paul Schiff;
directed by Hart Bochner.
Seen December 21, 1997 on home video (borrowed from Shane Rogers).
The screwball college comedy is a long-dead genre, and it's no wonder -
there's only so many ways you can tell the same story about hazing and
partying. Today, college life isn't so much about being popular as it is being
politically correct (PC), and from the title alone, "PCU" invokes the stinging
satirical commentary the genre was missing. Unfortunately, that's also where
the film's wit ends, as it turns out to be just an updated screwball flick
that substitutes PC for fraternity wars and panty raids.
Right from the get-go it's clear how clueless the film is about college as it
presents us with two cartoony extremes: Tom (Young), the clean-cut, jacket-
and-tie-wearing, geeky pre-frosh who's visiting Port Chester University for
the weekend; and Droz (Piven), the seventh-year senior/slacker who's stuck
with having to show him around. When the two meet, Droz tells Tom to get the
1950s college images out of his head, which is amazing, since I would tell the
filmmakers to get the 1990s college images out of their heads! It's as if
they've watched way too much MTV and think all GenXers must be either
outrageously liberal or lazy, and have combined it with the campiness of
"National Lampoon's Animal House."
Case-in-point: Droz leads Tom through a courtyard where all the different PC
groups are camped out such as the "Womynists," the black militants, the pot-
heads, and the people who fight for a different cause each week (this week
it's anti-meat). Within minutes, Droz and his fellow slackers get geeky little
Tom to join in on their prank as they hurl meat at the protesters, and a chase
scene ensues. 
Now, the PC-obsessed nature of the student groups has obviously been
exaggerated as a parody, and does make for some funny jokes, but the problem
is there's no sense of moderation. Had the film been about a longer period of
time instead of just two days (and just plain longer for that matter - 80
minutes is much too short for such a mainstream film), that would have
provided for opportunities for sharp satire instead of just throwing it all at
us at the same time.
About the only thing the film does correctly is establish a conflict for the
protagonists to overcome, and in this case it's Droz's house's efforts to
raise over $7,000 in 24 hours to pay their damages fee or else they'll be
evicted. And what better way to raise money than by throwing a party and
charging admission? Unfortunately, the campus is split into such rigid sects,
is there really any way to get everyone together? Droz believes there is and
explains why with the kind of logic that would work fine in a sitcom, but
seems ridiculous here. 
The ball finally gets rolling as each member of the house goes out to get
someone or something and/or keep others away. This gives the film a good
reason to be all over the map and to constantly switch from character to
character. The wild antics pour in and although some of them are funny (at
first), the film makes the same mistake of packing them too close together. We
get scenes of Tom being chased all over campus by different PC groups which he
has managed to offend (accidentally of course). Meanwhile Droz and company go
looking for kegs and sabotage a party in which the all the school's
administrator's are attending. After a while you have to wonder what's so
funny about watching a bunch of pathetic, unlikable characters go nuts.
It should be noted that the film is not nearly as bad as it could have been.
It does occasionally show signs of promise with its scenes of dialogue, but
those are often trite and contrived. Special mention should be made to Jon
Favreau as Gutter, who, although he is a generic character, is at least
interesting and likable.
There's so much more that could have been done with "PCU," most notably,
focusing more on the PC and less on the U.
Please visit Chad'z Movie Page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz - over 180
new and old films reviewed in depth, not just blind ratings and quick
capsules. Also, check out The FIRST Shay Astar Web Page @
http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz/ShayAstar.html
To receive Chad'z movie reviews directly, send e-mail to ChadPolenz@aol.com
with "subscribe plan#_" in the header (plan 1 - new releases, plan 2 - all
movies reviewed).

Title
Review for Nurse Betty (2000)
Critics like me tend to complain about comedies when they use humor and 
situations similar to those of a sitcom. I've always wondered what would 
happen if someone made an entire movie in that style of comedy and "Nurse 
Betty" appears to be the answer. It's a story that isn't really believable 
but takes place in such a seemingly innocent world with characters who are 
always in the right (or wrong) places at the right time.
Renee Zellweger stars as Betty, a simple-minded (but not ditzy) Kansas 
waitress whose husband is a crooked used car dealer who does something to get 
him in trouble with the local drug pipeline and is offed by two hitmen. Betty 
witnesses the murder and is so shocked she goes into a state of denial so far 
removed from reality it borders on insanity. She believes she is a nurse on 
her favorite soap opera and decides to trek from Kansas to Los Angeles to 
find her "long lost love" - the dashing heart surgeon "Dr. David Rivell."
If this story sounds familiar don't be surprised, it's been used many times 
over the years in sitcoms and usually doesn't work well. However, "Friends" 
was able to pull it off the season Joey became a regular on "Days Of Our 
Lives." He played a brain surgeon and Brooke Shields was his obsessed admirer 
who doesn't know it's just a TV show (instead of running from the nutty 
stalker Joey dates her but it turns out to be more than he can handle). 
That's a good premise for a half-hour show but somehow the makers of this 
movie are able to expand it to nearly two hours without filling up the 
running time with mindless guffaws, one-liners and slapstick. It's actually 
quite witty and satirical and seems to show even more promise than what it 
actually delivers.
As Betty makes her way to L.A. she meets strangers along the way and quickly 
befriends them with her story of her hope to reunite with her old flame. 
Zellweger is so darn cute and charming you almost get a cavity watching her! 
She practically a 5-year-old girl  trapped in the body of a full grown woman. 
It's a cartoony characteristic and it works well because Zellweger acts so 
well. I can't really picture anyone else pulling off this character.
Little does Betty know she's being tailed by the same two hitmen who killed 
her husband. They didn't realize she witnessed the event and need to silence 
her, plus the fact the car she's driving is carrying their drug booty in the 
trunk. Morgan Freeman and Chris Rock co-star as the father and son hired 
guns. Both actors are fantastic in their respective roles because their 
characters have most of the same qualities and mannerisms as those they've 
played in their previous films. To say they've been typecast is an 
understatement. Freeman is the wise father trying to give his hyperactive, 
loud-mouth son a lesson in manners, patience, history and even ethics. Rock 
is often hysterical with his constant wise-cracks and quips about his 
father's behavior and  old fashioned beliefs. There's a scene where the two 
stop at the Grand Canyon at night that totally defines them. Freeman marvels 
at the beauty and significance of the Canyon while Rock chides him for 
wanting to see a big hole in the ground at night ("You can't even see it!" he 
exclaims). It's a rare scene of perfect comic timing and chemistry.
Most of the screenplay involves Betty's search for her dream man and the 
unexpected encounters she runs into once she reaches L.A. It's told in a 
lighthearted manner, so much so that at some points it's just silly. Betty 
runs into one strange coincidence and unexplainable situation after another 
that you rarely see in feature films because they work better on the small 
screen. For example, she runs to the aid of a gunshot victim and tries to 
save his life using a technique she's seen on her hospital soap opera. She 
really believes she's a nurse and just acts on instinct. This leads to a 
domino effect of lucky chances in which she gets a nursing job and a roommate 
in the same day.
Where I have to take issue with "Nurse Betty" is with its storyline from here 
on out. It's clear to us Betty needs help but when the supporting characters 
realize she's not of sound mind they don't really do anything about it. This 
comes to a boiling point when she actually meets the actor in person who 
plays the doctor she's in love with from television and talks to him as if he 
were the character. The actor (played by Greg Kinnear with good use of 
vanity) thinks she's just an actress trying to get a spot on his show and 
plays along, almost mesmerised by how great her "performance" is. It's a 
sub-plot difficult to buy despite the great acting. As adorable as Betty is, 
it's difficult to believe how long they wait to tell her to "quit fooling 
around and be serious."
I didn't like the ending, it's a little too bleak for what had been such an 
enjoyable, fluffy, feel-good movie. It could have been handled better without 
the attempt at seriousness. The film's not a black comedy, it's a cute satire 
and the extremities are unnecessary. In fact, the film might have been even 
better had it spread the lightness of it all on even thicker. There's a PG 
movie in here, the R movie it turned out to be is fine, but it's just the 
slightest bit forced.
Despite the flaws to "Nurse Betty" there's still a lot to like. The 
performances by Zellweger, Rock and Freeman are excellent and might be 
Oscar-worthy come winter. The story is so enjoyable to follow you feel like 
you're a kid watching a Disney movie.
Chad'z Movie Page is back 
after heavy renovation. Reviews of nearly all mainstream movies playing 
today! Get my reviews of everything playing at your local cineplex so you can 
better make an informed decision on what to see. Don't forget to vote on my 
poll and sign the guestbook!
Get paid to surf the web! More than $25,000,000 
Already Paid to Members -- Join AllAdvantage today! 

Title
Review for As Good As It Gets (1997)
Chad'z rating: **1/2 (out of 4 = OK/average)
1997, PG-13, 138 minutes [2 hours, 18 minutes]
starring: Jack Nicholson (Melvin Udall), Helen Hunt (Carol Connelly), Greg
Kinnear (Simon Bishop), Cuba Gooding, Jr. (Frank Sachs); written by Mark
Andrus, James L. Brooks; produced by James L. Brooks, Bridget Johnson, Kristi
Zea; directed by James L. Brooks
Seen March 17, 1998 at 9:15 p.m. at Rotterdam Square Mall (Rotterdam, NY),
theater #4, by myself using my Sony/Loews critic's pass. [Theater rating:
**1/2: good picture and sound, poor seats]
        Stories and the process of telling stories are two completely different
things, and it a problem with modern drama is not lack of original ideas, but
original ways to tell stories. "As Good As It Gets" is a perfect example of
this, as it is a film with fresh ideas, but fails to assemble its pieces in a
suitable order. What we end up with is what should be an old fashioned feel-
good movie, but perhaps that's where the problem lies.
        What seems to be an on-going trend with major motion pictures is telling
stories of a protagonist whose mentality is different from the rest of the
world and thus we see things from a completely different perspective (i.e.
"Forrest Gump"). This film also uses that method, but does so in a daring way
by centering the story around an obsessive-compulsive cranky old man. 
        One of the basic rules of fiction is to make the main character likable, but
Melvin Udall (Nicholson) is as far from likable as one can get. He's
prejudice, paranoid, selfish, and mean-spirited, and yet he makes for an
original character due mostly to Nicholson's excellent performance. The
opening scenes quickly establish these traits as we watch him throw his
neighbor's irritating dog down his apartment building's trash shoot, and then
proceed to blame and verbally abuse the neighbor, a gay artist named Simon
(Kinnear), for the situation.
        The first act does a fine job in establishing the basic story elements and
plot lines that will crop up later when conflicts occur and thus provide for
theme. Many films follow this procedure, but here it seems just a little too
standard. Melvin's conflict with Simon is played more for comedy than drama,
and his confrontations with Simon's boyfriend Frank work in the same way, but
not only will these elements become more subtractive than additive, the use of
foreshadowing is a bit too blatant.
        In fact, the use of foreshadowing throughout the picture is one of the
biggest problems. Most dramas involve a romance in one way or another, and the
movies tell us that the more polarized the lead male and female characters
are, the more likely they are to get together. Of course this does happen
here, but the film seems to be in denial that this will happen. 
        Helen Hunt co-stars as Carol Connelly, a single mom living in a cramped
apartment with her mother and her son who suffers from a serious asthma and
allergy problem. She waits tables at Melvin's favorite restaurant and is
forced to put up with his constant bitching and snide remarks on a daily
basis. Since Melvin is so locked into a routine he can't stand to have anyone
else wait on him besides Carol, and when he learns she may have to quit her
job to take care of his son, he pays to have a specialized doctor take care of
him.
        It takes a while for this plot aspect to come into play, but the process is
at least entertaining and interesting, even if the thematic elements are
slightly sappy. Once Melvin pays for Carol's son's doctor they immediately go
from being just more than strangers to integral parts of each other's lives.
The tension between the two continues to build and it's hard to tell if they
genuinely like or hate each other. Meanwhile, a sub-plot crops up as Simon is
attacked, hospitalized, and loses all of his money. The dog who Melvin had
thrown in the trash is somehow placed in his care which will provide for some
development on behalf of his character, but not enough in the long run.
        A major portion of the film is spent building up separate plots and themes
which are only related through their connection to Melvin. The story is
slowly-paced and many individual scenes provide little more than gratuitous
comic relief (if it's possible for comedy to be gratuitous). This kind of
storytelling should provide ample room for character development, but only
scratches the surface. Nicholson's performance is terrific, but his delivery
still can't make up for the fact his character isn't given much definition
beyond the surface. We never learn what has made him become such a bitter old
man, or why he acts the way he does, especially since he isn't really happy (I
guess it's a chicken-and-the-egg scenario).
        Not until the final act does everything form a sense of cohesion, and
although it does give the film a definite sense of focus, it's not enough to
make up for two acts of a wandering script. Melvin, Carol, and Simon decide to
take a road trip together in an effort to save Simon's career. This in turn
makes for many scenes of interaction and discussion, but the scenes still fall
short of greatness. The tensions between the characters constantly build and
melodrama often dominates as they are either arguing or making amends. All the
subtleties that had come before suddenly aren't so subtle anymore, such as
when Melvin and Carol finally get together (and then break-up, and then get
together....) and Simon finds his artistic roots literally overnight. 
        The best way to sum up "As Good As It Gets" is by stating the obvious:
there's quality in the individual aspects, but by the end, nothing has
happened that could not have been predicted at the beginning from the way the
story was told.


Title
Review for Devil in a Blue Dress (1995)
**1/2 (out of 4 = OK)
1995, R, 101 minutes [1 hour, 41 minutes]
[mystery/crime]
starring: Denzel Washington (Easy Rawlins), Tom Sizemore (Dewitt Albright),
Jennifer Beals (Daphne Monet), Dan Cheadle (Mouse), produced by Jesse Beaton,
Gary Goetzman, written and directed by Carl Franklin, based on the book by
Walter Mosley.
>From the title alone, "Devil In A Blue Dress" sounds like it is another
retread to the mystery and crime movies of the 1930s and 40s "film noir," and
it is. Anyone can make a film that looks and acts like film noir with Gothic
stories of deception, intrigue, and organized crime, but this film doesn't
offer anything new. 
Denzel Washington stars as Easy Rawlins, a young black man living in Los
Angeles in the late 1940s, who isn't poor but manages to get by with bare
essentials. When he is laid off from his job he suddenly finds himself
playing the role of a detective and informant for some type of mob boss, but
neither he, nor the viewer really understands what he is doing, for whom, and
why. 
Easy is hired by a Albright (Sizemore), a typical goon, to find a mayoral
candidate's fiancee, but for what purpose? We never get much of an answer,
and by the time we do, the story becomes so confusing it doesn't seem
relevant. As soon as we meet Easy he becomes a P.I. of sorts, but how do we
know he can do it? And why would these people hire him to do this? Again,
many questions like these are never answered, because we aren't supposed to
think about them.
As if the search for the woman wasn't already enough, Easy has a passionate
affair with a woman who later ends up dead and of course the police suspect
him. So it becomes a "prove your innocence" story while still trying to solve
the case of the missing dame. But the film doesn't tell this story in any
kind of unique or creative manner, all we get is a rather "novel" story of
the young man on the run from the mob while trying to clear his name. There
is a lot of narration and cliche dialogue, but it doesn't add up to anything.
The standard formula for any mystery story is to make it as complex as
possible between as few characters as possible, that way when the killer is
finally caught we realize they were under our nose all along. This film takes
that principal and rides it all the way, bringing in cops, mobsters,
politicians, and close friends and family. This wouldn't be so bad if the
story didn't have a generic mystery tone to it. Just in the way the
characters speak (like Bogey), their costumes, and the basic premise is so
formulated it almost seems like a satire film of sorts. 
The story is confusing, the actual scenes themselves are somewhat
interesting, and certainly watchable. "Devil In A Blue Dress" is not a bad
movie, but  it's not very good either. We don't have enough information about
the characters to make us care. It's difficult to make a good mystery movie
anymore, maybe they just shouldn't try so hard. 
please visit Chad'z Movie Page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz/index.html

Title
Review for Batman (1989)
*** (out of 4 = good)
1989, PG-13, 126 minutes [2 hours, 6 minutes]
[adventure/crime]
starring: Michael Keaton (Bruce Wayne/Batman), Jack Nicholson (Joker/Jack
Napier), Kim Basinger (Vicky Vale), Robert Wuhl (Alexander Knox), produced by
Jon Peters, Peter Guber, written by Sam Hamm, Warren Skaaren, directed by Tim
Burton, based on characters appearing in DC comics, Batman created by Bob
Kane.
>From the premise alone, "Batman" should be one of the greatest adventure
films of all time, but it is not. It tends to trade substance for style and
its storytelling is choppy. Despite all these flaws, there is a sense of
exciting adventure, even if it exists for the superficial qualities.
The opening establishes one of the most vivid and powerful moods I've ever
seen. The Gothic design by Anton Furst provides for an almost horrific
atmosphere as it works with the script to create an entirely different
reality quickly. We see an ordinary family take a wrong turn through a
typical dark alley and become another statistic of street crime. The thieves
are more pathetic than vile and when we see Batman (Keaton) confront and
disarm them (mostly through fear), it shows how mighty the sheer presence of
Batman can be.
I wish that attitude of fighting real crime had been the theme of the film
as it gives everyone a sense of pride. But this is a major Hollywood picture
and it must portray (read: "cash in on") all the marketable aspects of the
Batman persona to make it appealing. Everyone knows the basics of Batman: he
is really billionaire Bruce Wayne by day and his arch nemesis is The Joker.
Unfortunately, Batman is assimilated with cartoon-like qualities with all the
characters and plotlines plugged in at all the right places.
The basic story involves mob warfare and betrayal between the two heads of
the biggest gang; "Boss" Grisham (Jack Palance) and Jack Napier (Nicholson).
The first act is very jumbled, it tries to establish a complex criminal
organization and a rivalry. Although the details are very sketchy, it serves
its purpose; to lead up to Napier's transformation to The Joker and his
psychotic rampage on Gotham City.
The middle act is slowly paced but works fine for character and plot
development. Nicholson is often hilarious as The Joker, but his zaniness is
countered by a supposedly serious relationship between Bruce Wayne and
investigative photographer Vicky Vale (Basinger). Of all the cliche elements,
this one does not synchronize smoothly. They seem to fall for each other
extremely fast, but Keaton and Basinger have little chemistry. However, the
storytelling is interesting enough as to never become dull. We become
curious, but not as involved as the film would like us to be.
And since this is supposed to be a grand Hollywood adventure we must have an
ultimate showdown between the two forces of good and evil. The ending itself
seemed a little dry to me. We get some fight scenes between Batman and
Joker's goons, but in a very cheesy manner. In fact, The Joker almost wins in
the end!
This film had so much potential it could have been a work of genius. On one
hand it does establish a mood chisled with detail which is interesting; but
on the other hand the blatantly evil and cartoony nature of The Joker doesn't
seem to keep to with the film. The Joker's cars, helicopters, and badges on
the gang members is too lighthearted compared to the dark, Gothic mood of
Gotham and Batman.
Still, "Batman" isn't bad at all. It's disposable adventure, but at least
it's original and enjoyable.
Visit Chad'z Movie Page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz/index.html

Title
Review for Jackie Brown (1997)
Chad'z rating: **** (out of 4 = excellent)
1997, R, 155 minutes [2 hours, 35 minutes]
starring: Pam Grier (Jackie Brown), Samuel L. Jackson (Ordell Robbie), Robert
Forster (Max Cherry), Robert De Niro (Louis Gara); produced by Lawrence
Bender; written and directed by Quentin Tarantino; based on the novel "Rum
Punch" by Elmore Leonard.
Seen January 3, 1997 at 3:40 p.m. at The Latham Circle Mall Cinema 9 (Latham,
NY), theater #3, with Matt Perreault and Chris Wessell for $5. [Theater
rating: **1/2: fuzzy picture, good sound, average seats]
        It's funny how basic truths can be misleading. The promotions for "Jackie
Brown" mention something about six players after a half million dollars in
cash, while at the same time playing each other, and for the most part this is
true. However, the hook to the film is not so much the conflict involving the
money, but the way each character relates to and uses the other, and the
detailed specifics of how they interact. 
        Pam Grier stars as Jackie Brown, a black airline stewardess in her 40s who is
doing the best she can to get by. When she is taken into custody by ATF agent
Ray Nicolet (Michael Keaton) for supposedly smuggling in a large amount of
cash, we begin to learn more about her and a shady past (and present) she is
trying to put behind her. We are also introduced to gun-runner Ordell Robbie
(Jackson), a clever, talkative thug who has just been reacquainted with Louis
Gara (De Niro), a quiet, slightly dim-witted ex-con. There's also Ordell's
sexy, but lazy, lady-friend Melanie (Bridget Fonda) whose attraction to Louis
makes for great, unspoken tension. And last, but certainly not least, Robert
Forster as seasoned bail bondsman Max Cherry, who gives an ordinary character
an overwhelming sense of being.
        In "Pulp Fiction" Tarantino was able to tell several over-lapping stories
that served as a both a great anthology and complete story, all strung
together by excellent characterization. Here we get just the opposite - a
chiseled character study which pushes and pulls the plot from all directions.
Where other directors and/or screenwriters might rush to establish and develop
a story as complicated as the one we get here, Tarantino takes his time, which
allows us to enjoy the ride even longer. For example, the basic story concerns
Ordell's efforts to use Jackie to smuggle in 1990S from Mexico, but everyone
else wants (and needs) a part of the scam in one way or another. Jackie wants
the money to buy a better life, but Agent Nicolet needs her to help him catch
Ordell. Max has been smitten by Jackie's charm and wants to help her, but not
put himself at risk in the process. Meanwhile, Melanie distracts Louis which
somewhat botches Ordell's plan, but not enough to further her own agenda.
        This premise may or may not sound complicated, but simply watching how the
film breaks down the plot from story arc to individual scenes and even
intricate shots themselves gives one the sense of awe. This isn't just a story
about people after money, it's a great exercise in character interaction and
what they are capable of. All of the characters may be typical, but their
characterization is not. It's fascinating to watch how a seemingly everyday
person like Jackie can almost single-handedly outsmart the vileness of Ordell
and the valor of Nicolet. Everything she says and does makes complete sense
and seems realistic, while at the same time utilizing Tarantino's pulp-esque
appeal.
        It's remarkable how fluidly the story to "Jackie Brown" flows, especially
considering how it uses violence, double-crosses, and vulgarity to its
advantage without becoming remotely gratuitous. Every character is so
authentic they practically radiate auras, as the witty dialogue and
outstanding performances perfectly enhance each other. At no point is there
any way to tell which direction the story will go next - why can't all movies
be like that?
Please visit Chad'z Movie Page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz - over 180
new and old films reviewed in depth, not just blind ratings and quick
capsules. Also, check out The FIRST Shay Astar Web Page @
http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz/ShayAstar.html
To receive Chad'z movie reviews directly, send e-mail to ChadPolenz@aol.com
with "subscribe plan#_" in the header (plan 1 - new releases, plan 2 - all
movies reviewed).

Title
Review for Shawshank Redemption, The (1994)
Chad'z rating: **** (out of 4 = excellent)
1994, R, 142 minutes [2 hours, 22 minutes]
[drama]
Starring; Tim Robbins (Andy Dufresne), Morgan Freeman (Red), Bob Gunton
(Warden Norton), William Sadler (Captain Hadley), produced by Niki Marvin,
written and directed by Frank Darabount, based on the novella "Rita Hayworth
And The Shawshank Redemption" by Stephen King.
"The Shawshank Redemption" is unlike anything I've ever seen before. It's
not about a hero trying to overcome a struggle, as the entire film is blatant
in telling us this will never happen. Instead, what makes it great is its
characters and all its many individual events. 
The story revolves around Andy Dufresne (Robbins) and his wrongful sentence
to Shawshank Prison. Of course we meet many other characters and see events
typical of prison films, but this one is scripted, filmed, and acted much
better than any other prison film. Most prison settings depend on violence
and profanity to make for a dark, rough atmosphere, but this film tells a
much grimmer story without using this elements gratuitously.
If prison breeds criminality, than its administrators are no exception.
There is Captain Hadley (Sadler), the stern head guard who takes pleasure in
beating prisoners, and Warden Norton (Gunton) who seems nice on the outside
but turns out to be just as corrupt as the men he incarcerates. 
The prisoners themselves seem to be some of the nicer characters, especially
Red (Freeman) -"the guy who can get stuff." Red is a nice guy, he admits he
was stupid and wrong to have committed his crime, but can never seem to
convince the parole board of this.
Not much happens here in terms of plot, it is mostly just character and
environment study. A subplot begins to form as Andy helps Norton and Hadley
extort and embezzle thousands of dollars. Andy also tries to get the prison
more funding for a library, and an interesting mystery concerning Andy's
chance at freedom crops up, but all of this is just a backdrop for the film's
many philosophies about humanism, freedom, justice, and love.
The evil, oppressive establish in George Orwell's "1984" said "freedom is
slavery" and we see just how true that is through the eyes of these men.
Granted, they would rather not be in prison, but when their friend Brooks is
finally released, he realizes how easy he had it inside. Although they must
work within the prison, all their basic needs are provided. Brooks can't
handle the responsibility and this makes for a powerful theme of prison being
an alternate reality.
Another interesting and thematic philosophy occurs when Andy and Red have a
discussion about hope. Red says hope is the one thing that truly imprisons
him. Once one gives up hope he is free from its grasp. Andy counters by
saying just the opposite - hope is the one thing that will give them a sense
of freedom. The guards can beat them all they want, they can be rejected for
parole, but they can't take away one's sense of hope and dignity.
"The Shawshank Redemption" does have many scenes and events that might be
depressing because of the harshness of reality, but the film has a happy
ending that really makes you think. Andy and Red never give up hope and this
ultimately leads to their freedom. 
Please visit Chad'z Movie Page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz
E-mail: ChadPolenz@aol.com

Title
Review for Tommy Boy (1995)
Tommy Boy
Chad'z rating: ** (out of 4 = fair)
1995, PG-13, 98 minutes [1 hour, 38 minutes]
[comedy]
starring: Chris Farley (Tommy), David Spade (Richard), Julie Warner
(Michelle), Rob Lowe (Paul), written by Bonnie and Terry Turner, Fred Wolf,
produced by Lorne Michaels, directed by Peter Segal.
"Tommy Boy" may be the most generic comedy I've ever seen. It's not really a
movie, but more of a 98 minute-long sit-com. Sometimes it's funny, but in a
dumbed-down way.
Chris Farley stars as Tommy Callahan, an idiot manchild who is about to
inherit the family  auto parts manufacturing company (idiot child heir -
generic comedy plot #1). His dad is the president of the company and wants
Tommy to take over when he retires, but he's doubts Tommy's smart enough to
handle the job. Mr. Callahan is also marrying a beautiful woman who has a
suspicious son (the mysterious fiancee - generic comedy plot #2). 
We also meet Richard (Spade), the smartass young manager who handles
everything and doesn't want to be bothered with having to work with idiotic
Tommy (the smartass assistant - generic comedy plot #3). Of course Tommy's
father does marry the beautiful mistress, but he also dies on the same day.
Due to his death the company starts to crumble financially. If they can't
sell a half million brake pads within three weeks they'll be forced to sell
to an out-of-town distributor (the monetary deadline - generic comedy plot
#4). So Tommy and Richard set off on a cross-country trip to sell the brake
pads themselves and single-handedly save the company (the road trip - generic
comedy plot #5). 
Slapstick comedy was invented and perfected by Charlie Chaplin, but that was
because he was making silent movies without dialogue. Modern films [should]
depend on dialogue for humor, not people getting hit in the groin with and
walking into walls, etc. And that is what we get with this film, which seems
like nothing more than a live action version of "The Roadrunner and Wile E.
Coyote." After a while the slapstick and total stupidity become predictable
and repetitive. Even the one-liners are only a little funny.
Even though the slapstick element is stupid, it's still kinda fun to watch
Farley who relishes in his silliness. To show a customer how important his
brake pads are he uses expensive model cars and acts like a 5-year-old,
screaming and yelling and smashes the cars and sets them on fire. In another
scene he runs from the police screaming, "Killer bees are stinging my flesh
off!" Stuff like this is funny at the time, but in retrospect, that's not
intelligent comedy.
It's not that "Tommy Boy" is or isn't funny, it's just not a good film to
begin with. Had it been more original it would have been OK, but what we get
is at least watchable. 
Please visit Chad'z Movie Page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz - over 140
films reviewed in depth, not just blind ratings or quick capsules.

Title
Review for Nobody's Fool (1994)
*** (out of 4 = good)
1994, R, 110 minutes [1 hour, 40 minutes]
[drama]
starring: Paul Newman (Donald "Sully" Sullivan), Dylan Walsh (Peter
Sullivan), Bruce Willis (Carl Roebuck), Jessica Tandy (Miss Beryl), Melanie
Griffith (Toby Roebuck), produced by Scott Rudin, Arlene Donovan, written and
directed by Robert Benton, based on the novel by Richard Russo.
The problem with making films based on novels is that the films tend to have
a "novel" mood to them. They often seem more like actors reading straight
from the book and not feature films. "Nobody's Hero" does an excellent job in
capturing the essence of a "Great American Novel," but does this necessarily
make for a great film?
The story opens just before Thanksgiving in North Bath, N.Y., a small town
in the mountains covered in snow. We meet Donald "Sully" Sullivan (Newman),
and old-timer who is the town wiseass and the local mooch. He lives with Miss
Beryl (Tandy), an elderly woman, and is trying to sue his (former) employer,
Carl Roebuck (Willis) and his Tip Top Construction company, for injuries he
sustained from "work-related duties."
Sully seems to be desperate for cash in any way he can get it. He vows he
will never work  again, yet he can't help but go back and ask for something
to do.  Roebuck is a no-nonsense guy and knows  Sully is a good worker, but
also a slacker. Roebuck cheats on his wife but doesn't try too hard to keep
it a secret. Whenever Sully and Toby Roebuck (Griffith) see each other they
talk about how they should get back at Carl by having an affair of their own.
Right away the film has that "novel" atmosphere to it, where all the
characters are representations of classic personalities and themes. The
problem is they are portrayed in such a way the film almost assumes we can
understand and relate to the characters and the events, especially when it
comes to the relationship between Sully and Toby.
Sully meets his adult son Peter (Walsh), whom he hasn't seen since he left
his family when Peter was a child. Sully can't explain why he did it, and he
doesn't expect Peter to forgive him either. A pretty interesting relationship
begins to unfold between the two as they start to get to know each other.
They actually become close friends, which is quite interesting to watch. 
Peter and his wife have a fight which causes her to leave and take one of
the kids with her. So Peter and Sully start to work together, scavenging
pieces of an old house in which Sully grew up in. The chemistry between Walsh
and Newman is great, they really do seem like father and son even though they
are just getting to know each other. We also see Sully taking care of his
grandchild, and Peter asks why he cares, to which Sully replies, "Well, I
gotta start somewhere."
Not much else happens in terms of plot. There is a subplot about a
prospective amusement park to be built near the town, but it has little to do
with the relationships between the characters. In the end Sully has grown and
matured, but he is still basically the same (the more things change the more
they stay the same).
So a typical novel has been made into a rather typical movie, but a pretty
good movie nevertheless. It certainly is interesting to see how these small
towns operate and to watch these characters interact with each other.
"Nobody's Fool" is a good movie about American life in a manner we don't see
that much. 
please visit Chad'z Movie Page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz

Title
Review for Private Parts (1997)
**1/2 (out of 4 = OK)
1997, R, 109 minutes [1 hour, 49 minutes]
[comedy]
starring: Howard Stern (Himself), Mary McCormack (Alison Stern), Robin
Quivers (Herself), Paul Giamatti (Kenny - "Pig Vomit"), written by Len Blum,
Michael Kalesniko, produced by Ivan Reitman, directed by Betty Thomas, based
on the novel by Howard Stern.
Howard Stern has declared himself the "King of All Media" because he knows
how to get our attention - by making us wonder what he'll do next. He
constantly says he is misunderstood and "Private Parts" is an attempt to show
us the man behind the sunglasses.
The film works in three ways: as a satirical biography; as an extremely
lighthearted drama of free speech and romance; and as a wild, sexual comedy
farce. The only problem is trying to force these elements to work with each
other when they really do not. 
The first act plays like a lowbrow "Forrest Gump," but it becomes a bit more
serious through Howard's college years. Stern (played by himself) is a geeky
nerd with few friends, but has a quiet passion for radio. He meets his future
wife, Alison (McCormack), and the two connect instantly. Then we get the
standard opposites-attract romantic comedy gags, such as when Stern plays
Frisbee with the his wife's group of mentally challenged adults (this joke
sets up itself). There are a few sight gags like these throughout the film,
but this is not a film about stupidity (a la "Dumb And Dumber") and thus they
seem out of place.
They don't call Howard Stern a shock jock for nothing. Sex sells and he
knows this, but because of the medium of radio he must be careful with what
he says and does on the air. Stern often talks about his own sexual conquests
with his wife, which she doesn't mind at first, but when he jokes about her
miscarriage the semi-serious breakup/makeup routine comes into play. I know
this is based on a true story and this probably did happen, but it doesn't
seem to keep with the rest of the film.
The storytelling throughout the second and third acts is quite choppy: one
minute the movie is a wild comedy with Stern's shocking sexual antics (some
that are nearly pornographic); the next minute he is looking for loopholes in
his battle for free speech; and the next minute he is either arguing or being
romantic Alison. 
The second half of the film essentially becomes a filmed version of "The
Best of the Howard Stern Show." And it's not that Stern is an idiot, just the
opposite in fact. Unlike Beavis and Butt-Head, he seems too smart to be
making such lowbrow humor. When the story eventually returns to its
supposedly lighthearted romantic comedy roots, I had almost forgotten about
the Alison character because she disappears for almost 30 minutes.
Although there are some flaws, "Private Parts" is not a bad movie at all. It
simply tries too hard to be too many things. Stern's claims of being a
regular guy are vindicated, but through a somewhat mediocre manner.  
Please visit Chad'z Movie Page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz

Title
Review for Trainspotting (1996)
*** (out of 4 = good)
1996, R, 94 minutes [1 hour, 34 minutes]
[crime/drama]
starring: Ewan McGregor (Mark Renton), Robert Carlyle (Begbie), Johnny Lee
Miller (Sick Boy), Kevin McKidd (Tommy), Ewen Bremner (Spud), produced by
Andrew Macdonald, written by John Hodge, directed by Danny Boyle, based on
the novel by Irvine Welsh.
Films about the destructive power of drugs all have the same message, but
none of them dare to show how good drugs can make their user feel.
"Trainspotting" dares to play up that angle, as it gets inside modern junkies
and examines their mindsets. It allows us to share in the rush and escapism,
but also the harsh consequences of it all.
The film starts out with tremendous energy with a fast-paced chase sequence
and a narrator describing his escapist lifestyle. His name is Mark Renton
(McGregor), a 20-something Scottish "wanker" who says he "chose not to choose
life, instead... heroin." 
Renton and his friends Sick Boy (Miller), and Spud (Bremner) are all
addicted to heroin and describe the high in such a glamorous, detailed manner
it is easy to understand the appeal. Renton's other friend Tommy (McKidd)
doesn't touch the stuff (at first), but can't help being curious. Then
there's Begbie (Carlyle), the nearly psychotic bully of the gang who gets his
kicks from drifting and fighting. We don't know how these guys came together,
but it's not relevant.
Boyle's direction is fantastic, much like Oliver Stone, he uses hyper
editing techniques to define mood. No scene lasts longer than two minutes, in
fact, most of them last less than 30 seconds. The story, just like the
characters' lifestyle, is constantly shifting and never dwells on the
obvious. There are scenes of moody drug parties, surrealistic clubs, quick,
cheap sex, etc., all of which add up to a mood of pure nihilism. 
Because everything happens so quickly, it would seem as if characterization
would be sacrificed, but just the opposite is true. The erratic storytelling
tells us all we need to know about the characters, showing how great their
highs are, but how horrible their lows can be. There is one scene involving
Renton and "The filthiest toilet in Scotland" that perfectly illustrates how
pathetic drug addiction can be. It is so disguisting it's impossible not to
squirm, but at the same time, the satire of it all is quite funny.
The film uses satire in a very surrealistic manner, much like Kubrick's "A
Clockwork Orange." However, the reality here is more brutal than "Orange"
because the narcotics are stronger and more addictive. When Renton tries to
quit cold turkey there is a surrealistic montage so powerful it will probably
be as close as a film ever comes in showing the devastating pain drugs can
wreck on the mind.
Although there isn't much of a story to the film, the final act does try to
set up what will probably be Renton and the gang's final scam. Not
surprisingly, when Renton tries to go straight and clean, he has trouble
doing so, and the same is true for the film's effort to tell a normal crime
story. It doesn't make any major mistakes per se, it's just a bit too jumbled
and overwhelming to take seriously.
The anti-drug message in "Trainspotting" is powerful, and its surrealistic
style is impressive. Perhaps it could have been even more moving had it not
been so strange, but it's still a good film for what it is.
visit Chad'z Movie Page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz/index.html

Title
Review for Ladies Man, The (2000)
In describing a lot of this year's movies to my friends and family I've been 
using the phrase "It wasn't as bad as it could've been" quite a lot. It might 
be a cliche but that's probably the best way to describe the latest Saturday 
Night Live-sketch-turned-movie "The Ladies Man." Like most of the other films 
it has a funny premise but watching it you get the feeling it's just another 
cash cow flick no one put much effort in to. 
Tim Meadows stars as Leon Phelps, a talk radio personality known as "The 
Ladies Man" because he has supposedly scored with a lot of women (we're 
talking Wilt Chamberlain numbers here). There's a sequence towards the 
beginning of the movie that explains how he came to be the man he is. It's 
kind of a cheesy spoof that seems like an idea Mike Myers might have used 
with his zany "Austin Powers" character, but here it's just too cartoony for 
the setting. It involves Leon being raised by the most famous ladies man of 
the 20th century (hint: his initials are H.H.) and somehow getting stuck in 
the mindset of the 1970s for rest of his life. 
On SNL this character is good for a 5-minute sketch because the writers 
manage to pack in a lot of outrageous jokes and mini-stories in such a small 
space. Phelps is a buffoon and doesn't realize what a clown he is with his 
huge afro and leisure suits and annoying lisp and bottles of cheap wine at 
his side. On the big screen he's still a buffoon but he takes himself so 
seriously he's not a funny character - just a complete idiot who induces 
eye-rolling. He hosts a late-night call-in radio show where he attempts to 
help people out with their sex lives but ends up mostly bragging about his 
own romps. Considering the subject matter you could certainly draw a parallel 
between Phelps and Howard Stern. If only Phelps were more like Stern, at 
least he'd be a bit more real and true to himself instead of one-note 
caricature. 
And just as one-dimensional a character as Leon Phelps is, so are all the 
other characters in the equally-flat plot. These people include Leon's modest 
producer Julie (Karyn Parsons) who doesn't have much ambition. Then there's 
Will Ferrell and Lee Evans as two of the husbands out to get revenge on 
Phelps because their respective wives both slept with him. They don't come 
across as real men at all, but cartoon characters. For antagonists they're 
not truly threatening and they're almost more likable the protagonist. Billy 
Dee Williams also has a small role as a smooth-talking bartender who narrates 
the film as if it were the original "Shaft" or something. 
The story itself concerns Leon and Julie's hunt for work after they're fired 
for being fined yet again by the FCC. There's also a secondary plot wherein 
Farrell and Evans' characters form a support group of men scored by Phelps 
and want to track him down. For some reason the filmmakers use this plot 
point as an excuse for some "South Park"-esque musical routines but it has no 
satirical bite whatsoever. 
Meanwhile, Leon gets an anonymous letter from an ex-flame inviting him to be 
with her and all the money she has. This leads up to a fine sequence of jokes 
as he goes through his black book trying to track  down the mysterious woman. 
In the process there's a lot of sex jokes about how many times he's done what 
position with whom in some strange place at some strange time. Think of it as 
a mockery of "Dear Penthouse," but without the horniness. Phelps is a sex 
machine but the film's perception of sex devoids it of all eroticism, 
sensuality and intimacy. It's not even superficial in a pornographic way, 
it's equivalent to drinking a glass of water. 
I'm going to spare you the detailed spoilers of how the film actually 
executes its story. It's about a ladies man who doesn't realize he's maturing 
and wants something more than just sex. You can take a wild guess what's 
going to happen with the pack of men out to get him. 
As a comedy "The Ladies Man" hits and misses. Most of the jokes are from the 
sitcom school of one-liners and the SNL alumni school of pushing limits. 
There's one scene in which Leon and Julie's ex-fiance square off in a contest 
to see who can eat the nastiest bar food and ends on a disgusting note. Maybe 
it's an homage to the Farrelly brothers and Mike Myers but they know how to 
be gross and funny, this scene is just gross. 
What it all comes down to is that there's really no characterization to any 
of the roles. They all come off as shallow and they have no motive for 
anything they do other than to make sure the story goes in the proper 
direction. The Julie character annoyed me the most. She's seemingly 
intelligent and a shy person, but she sticks with Leon through it all. She's 
like a wife that stays with the drunkard husband that beats him and all you 
do is keep wondering why. The screenplay is so weak and full of holes it's 
sad to think what the earlier drafts might have been like. 
There's even more I could mention but I'll stop and just honestly tell you 
"The Ladies Man" isn't as bad as it could've been. 

*****
Chad'z Movie Page is back! 
In-depth reviews of nearly all mainstream films playing at your local 
cineplex. There's also reviews of a few classic films and some of your 
personal favorites.

Title
Review for Jurassic Park (1993)
**1/2 (out of 4 = OK)
1993, PG-13, 127 minutes [2 hours, 7 minutes]
[science fiction/thriller]
starring: Sam Neill (Dr. Alan Grant), Laura Dern (Dr. Ellie Sattler), Jeff
Goldblum (Dr. Ian Malcolm), Richard Attenborough (Dr. John Hammond), produced
by Kathleen Kennedy, Gerald R. Molen, written by David Koepp, Michael
Crichton, Malia Scotch Marmo, directed by Steven Spielberg, based on the
novel by Michael Crichton.
Modern storytellers, especially those in Hollywood, are fascinated with
dinosaurs. They have always wanted to tell a plausible story where modern man
somehow co-exists and/or comes into contact with dinosaurs, and "Jurassic
Park" is a film of grand designs that fulfils that wish. The film is
extremely impressive visually, but the story and the way it is told is not.
We meet Dr. Alan Grant (Neill) and Dr. Ellie Sattler (Dern), two
paleontologists whose dig in the Badlands of Montana is interrupted when a
Scottish scientist named Dr. John Hammond (Attenborough) tells them their
expertise is needed for his new theme park in South America. Hammond
describes his "Jurassic Park" in a vague but exciting manner and convinces
them to come with him.
At the same time, an overly complicated sub-plot of espionage begins to
develop. Dennis Nedry (a funny Wayne Knight), a computer programmer at
Hammond's park plans to sabotage it through a complex process of tricks that
only could happen in such a Hollywood movie. 
When the doctors arrive we finally learn what Hammond's park is about as we
get our first glimpse of a realistic, life-size dinosaur. The dinosaurs were
cloned from blood from mosquitoes that had been petrified and preserved for
millions of years in amber. The way this explanation is given is surprisingly
believable because it is kept relatively simple. 
The first half makes for an interesting sci-fi story, as we learn the
dinosaurs are genetically bred to be female, and we see a few up close in
fine detail. Then a matter of scientific and philosophical theory comes into
play as Grant and Sattler, along with mathematician Dr. Ian Malcolm
(Goldblum), start to question the ethics of the park, saying nature selected
dinosaurs to become extinct and Hammond is tampering with uncontrollable
forces. Since we are dealing with fantastic beasts in a major Hollywood
picture, it is clear something big is going to happen from all the scientific
jargon. 
The second half is even more impressive visually, but the story and overall
genre seem to turn on a dime into a dressed up (but thrilling) horror flick.
Nedry's scheme and a tropical storm cause for the park to go into a state of
chaos. Grant and Malcolm, along with a lawyer and Hammond's two young
grandchildren, find themselves on the run from a Tyrannosaurus Rex! This
encounter is fantastic, but goes overboard quickly. We get scenes involving
the dodging of a falling truck, climbing a 50-foot tree and climbing back
down to dodge the same truck, only to have the characters become trapped in
the truck again!
The film's attempt at thrilling us wouldn't have been half as blatant if the
two children stuck with Dr. Grant hadn't been such annoying characters. These
kids overact at every given opportunity and seem more like living cartoons
than any kind of plausible characters. The fact the boy's name is Timmy says
it all. 
The final act involves lots of running from dinosaurs and trying to fix a
huge computer system crash. But the film keeps snowballing and becomes
tiresome. Some individual scenes are even more corny than some slasher
flicks, and if it had been done in the spirit of satire it would have been
forgivable.
To say "Jurassic Park" is a bit over-the-top would be pointless - that's
premise of the film. Over-the-top films work if they are done in a sense of
innocent adventure, not as something to be taken as seriously as this film
would like to be. 
Please visit Chad'z Movie Page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz

Title
Review for Boot, Das (1981)
**1/2 (out of 4 = OK)
1981, R, 150 minutes [2 hours, 30 minutes]
[drama/war]
starring: Jurgen Prochnow (The captain), Herbert Gronemeyer (Lieutenant
Werner), Klaus Wennemann (Chief Engineer), Erwin Leder (Johann), produced by
Gunter Rohrback, Michael Bittins, written and directed by Wolfgang Petersen,
based on the novel by Lothar-Guenther Buchheim.
"Das Boot" is both excellent and mediocre at the same time. It works as a
triumph in production design and superb cinematography. However, the premise
is rooted in our interest in the characters and their mission. But we don't
get good characterization nor an interesting plot, and this is why the film
falls short of greatness.
In the tradition of the war genre, the story is of a single military troop,
their mission, daily activities, and struggle to survive. The setting is
World War II, but what is so unique about this situation is its perspective.
Instead of a glamorous, romantic story of the righteous Allies, here we get a
realistic and somewhat sympathetic story that just happens to be about the
crew of a German U-Boat (submarine).
Most of the film takes place inside a 10-foot by 150-foot submarine. The
cinematography and intricate detail and design  of the vessel work together
to make for a sense of claustrophobia. The actual camera work is impressive
considering the small space with which to work.
The first hour goes through the necessary steps to lay down the basics for
the more important elements. We see soldiers having a great time at a going
away party and then their fears of not coming back. When they are inside the
sub, attempts to make for comradery and humanism are only hinted at. For
example, a seaman has a picture of his fiancee and tells of the problems they
will face when (or if) he comes home. There are also card games, discussions
about sex, and shots of everyone working together. The problem is they are
told in a blatantly plugged-in manner. 
The officers are only a bit more sympathetic. The captain (Prochnow) is
smart but he doesn't seem to care much about anything. Lieutenant Werner
(Gronemeyer) doesn't seem to have a purpose other than listening to the
others and missing home. There is also the chief engineer (Wennemann), and
another officer named Johann (Leder), who are somewhat interesting, but not
as much as they could be.
 Little happens in terms of plot and conflict. The first act makes an
attempt at characterization, but the middle act suddenly becomes a series of
confusing naval battles. The battle scenes are, at first, told with detail
and are visually impressive. The submarine is bombarded with depth charges
and seems to be slowly falling apart. After a while, it doesn't seem
believable that such a crude ship could survive the amount of damage it
takes.
The final act is a bit much. The submarine is nearly destroyed and the
officers and crew become deathly afraid for their lives. The ending itself
should be classic, poetic irony, but I didn't see it that way.
The main reason "Das Boot" is not the grim, realistic portrayal of war it
aims to be is because it is too technical and frigid. Perhaps it works this
way to keep with its theme, but the story is basically about the characters.
They obviously represent the pawns of war, but don't necessarily seem
innocent because we never get to know them that well.
[Note: the subtitles were not done well. I often found myself missing pieces
of dialogue because they disappeared very quickly. Also, there were many
spelling, capitalization, and usage errors.]
please visit Chad'z Movie page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz/index.html

Title
Review for Lone Star (1996)
Lone Star
Chad'z rating: **1/2 (out of 4 = OK)
1996, R, 135 minutes [2 hours, 15 minutes]
[drama/western]
starring: Chris Cooper (Sheriff Sam Deeds), Elizabeth Pena (Pilar Cruz), Kris
Kristofferson (Sherrif Charlie Wade), Joe Morton (Col. Delmore Payne),
produced by R. Paul Miller, Maggie Renzi, written and directed by John
Sayles.
Independent films have been gaining respect in recent years because they're
totally different from the mainstream, commercial films. What's so surprising
about John Sayles' "Lone Star" is that it's really a glamorous Hollywood
movie in dirty clothes. We get a 40-year-old mystery, a multi-layered story
involving 100 important characters, forbidden romances, and messages about
racism and family. The fact it tries to incorporate all of these things at
the same time and equally emphasize their importance makes you feel like
you've seen everything somewhere else.
The film starts off in a generic western manner as two men find a buried
human skeleton, a badge, and a ring (shouldn't the clothes still be in tact
too?). The good ol' Sheriff Sam Deeds (Cooper) is called in to check it out,
and since he's the sheriff-in-a-small-Texas-town-in-a-w he's capable of
solving mysteries almost immediately. He suspects the skeleton is that of the
infamous Sheriff Charlie Deeds (Kristofferson), who, we learn through a
series of multiple, inter-woven flashbacks, was a bully no one had the
courage to stand up to. Wade is easily hateable, but that's the problem -
it's so easy to hate him no other details are provided because Sayles assumes
you don't need them, and this is how the film works as a whole.
Much of the film involves Sam's efforts to learn more about Wade by
interviewing a lot of supposedly important characters like Wade's old whimpy
sidekick who is now the mayor, or the town's most prominent black man who
runs the place where all the blacks gather (there's a lot of ethnic
stereotyping here). He also runs into his high school sweetheart, Pilar Cruz
(Pena), who is now a school teacher.
You'd expect to see some detective work considering the elements, but this
does not happen. Sam is supposed to be a sheriff? He seems more like a guy in
beer commercial. All he does is wander aimlessly making for lots of
flashbacks and sub-plots, which become drawn out after a while. When Pilar
asks him why he "came back," he says, "for you" (gee, I wonder what they do
after that?).
The sub-plots are probably supposed to be the point of the film as a classic
literary theme of humanity is developed using racism and family conflict to
establish this. Some of individual scenes themselves are interesting, but as
whole they seem rather trite. A good example of this is a sub-plot involving
Colonel Delmore Payne (Morton) and his inability to communicate with his
troops and especially his own son - the same as what happened between him and
his father. It's this kind of cyclical irony the film uses to be poetic, but
it seems too generic to absorb.
What prevented me from really enjoying the film was the script itself. The
dialogue here seems like something from a book or a play (surprisingly, this
is an original screenplay), and the pacing often becomes tedious and boring.
The many overlapping sub-plots aren't organized well enough to appreciate and
follow them all. We follow Sam around for a large block of time, and then
suddenly come back to a sub-plot we had almost forgotten about, then the
pattern repeats itself.
"Lone Star" does not work as a mystery, especially considering how simple
the ending is. However, it does work as a good character study, only in that
many individual scenes are interesting. This film could have been great had
it chosen one of its many elements and stuck with it. Unfortunately, it tries
too hard to be too many things and it only seems to scratch the surface of
its potential.
Please visit Chad'z Movie Page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz - over 140
new and old films reviewed in depth, not just blind ratings and quick
capsules. Also, check out The FIRST Shay Astar Web Page @ http://members.aol.c
om/ChadPolenz/ShayAstar.html

Title
Review for Face/Off (1997)
Face/Off
Chad'z rating: **1/2 (out of 4 = OK)
1997, R, 138 minutes [2 hours, 18 minutes]
[action]
starring: John Travolta (Sean Archer/Castor Troy), Nicholas Cage (Castor
Troy/Sean Archer), Joan Allen (Eve Archer), Alessandro Nivola (Pollux Tory),
produced by written by Mike Werb, Michael Coleary, Terence Chang, Christopher
Godsick, Barrie M. Osborne, David Permut, directed by John Woo.
I never thought the "switcheroo" premise that was big back in the 80s would
be used again, especially in a 1997 action film. So you have to give
"Face/Off" credit for using something so played out in an original manner.
But this is also where the biggest problem lies, as the film mistakes
originality for a license to go ballistic.
The film's premise is a simple one: "What if a top cop and his
most-sought-after prey switched places?" John Travolta stars as Sean Archer,
an L.A.-based Fed obsessed with catching the notorious Castor Troy (Cage) who
killed his son six years prior. The opening sequence paints a vague,
dream-like description of that incident, but we never really learn why Troy
wanted Archer dead.
Within a few minutes the film's adrenalin starts to rush and we get a
fantastic action sequence involving Archer and his team's effort to capture
Troy at an airport. It's your typical Hollywood action stuff, reminiscent of
every major action film of the last few years: explosions; high-speed chases;
guns-to-the-head; a firestorm of bullets; and just all-out carnage. It's
interesting to watch mostly because of the rivalry between Travolta and Cage
and the fact these two are probably the last people you'd expect to see in a
film like this. 
Soon the plot thickens as we learn the only way Archer can get Troy's
brother and partner in crime, Pollux, to reveal the location of a secret bomb
is to have Troy's face surgically removed and switched with his own as to
trick him into talking. I'm sure modern science and medicine have come a long
way, and the movies are usually good at making the semi-plausible seem
plausible (what with computers, lasers, etc.), but this seems a bit silly to
me. Is this really the only way to get Pollux to talk? With all the high
technology in this film, you'd think some kind of duplication of Troy's face
could be made to use as a mask (it's been done before). 
Cutting to the chase: Archer becomes Troy and is sent to a secret maximum
security prison to find Pollux, hoping he talks. Meanwhile, Troy wakes up
(from a coma!), calls in his associates, forces the doctors to give him
Archer's face, then destroys all the evidence (including people). 
A fairly large amount of time is spent showing Archer (now Troy) in prison
and his attempt to survive when he realizes Troy has escaped with his face.
We know somehow Archer will escape and this does happen through another
over-the-top action sequence which never seems to be resolved (one of the
film's many plot holes). 
Most of the film involves each man's struggle to blend in with completely
opposite atmospheres. We get a few comedic scenes no fish-out-of-water
premise could pass up. Many sub-plots also start to form, especially one
involving Archer's wife, Eve (Allen), and her suspiscion of Archer's new
personality. The script works in a very comic book-like manner, as everything
is portrayed realistically but it's too far-fetched to let it sink in.
What also disappointed me was how little advantage the film took of its
premise. I was expecting (or at least hoping) for something along the lines
of "The Fugitive," or "Heat," with characterization, detective work, and just
an overall sense of an intelligent, intricate crime story, but this doesn't
happen. Woo is an action director and he delivers an action sequence here at
least once every 20 minutes, but you can sense his frustration when the story
slows down a little to add some details. 
The last act is the clincher you'd expect it to be and is symbolic of the
film's inability to be anything more than another action movie. I really got
sick of seeing all the deaths that occur, both of the supporting characters
and people in the background. I counted at least four explosions within the
course of three minutes - what does that tell you? 
Although "Face/Off" can be interesting at times, it's not nearly the
exciting thrill ride it wants to be. It's just another case of a good premise
ruined by cliches, plot holes, and script a few drafts shy of greatness.
Please visit Chad'z Movie Page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz - over 150
new and old films reviewed in depth, not just blind ratings and quick
capsules. Also, check out The FIRST Shay Astar Web Page @
http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz/ShayAstar.html

Title
Review for Filth and the Fury, The (2000)
Rock 'n Roll is a musical canvas artists have used to express themselves for 
over half a century now. Since its inception it's always been considered a 
threat to the establishment and many musicians have come along and made good 
on that threat while others are just fronts for big-business record 
companies. In this age of glamor boy bands, sultry teenage girl singers and 
bubblegum pop that rivals the 1950s for sheer cheese value there's never been 
a more appropriate time for "The Filth And The Fury." This is a documentary 
about The Sex Pistols, one of the most controversial and shocking bands due 
to the fact they were absolutely 100 percent authentic in their rage against 
the machine. 
Most bands you hear today are just watered-down versions of a better artist 
that isn't in the limelight anymore. I've read about The Sex Pistols and 
heard of their outrageous behavior but I've never truly understood or 
appreciated how influential they've been on rock music for the past quarter 
century. If their story were told as fiction today it would probably be the 
most trite thing you could imagine. 
"The Filth And The Fury" lives up to its name right from the get-go. There's 
a considerable amount of time spent in depicting England in the mid-1970s 
which apparently was on the verge of a revolution, a civil war or just pure 
anarchy. We're shown real footage of news broadcasts of the time - of garbage 
piling up all over London due to a labor strike, of people rioting as if it 
were their full-time job and of the punk scene where the youth did everything 
and anything outrageous and rebellious to lash out against the system. Then 
along came The Sex Pistols, a rock band born and raised in these deplorable 
conditions that utterly symbolized the people's outrage. They weren't trying 
to be evil and shocking for kicks, this is really how they lived their life. 
The band consisted of four members; lead singer Johnny Rotten; bassist Glen 
Matlock; drummer Paul Cook and guitarist Steve Jones. Matlock later quit the 
band and was replaced by Sid Vicious. They dressed in ripped t-shirts, 
ripped leather held together by safetypins with dyed hair and sometimes 
adorned themselves with Swastikas. Their fans had even more outrageous hair 
designs and clothing, often looking like monster out of an Ed Wood movie. The 
music was probably the "hardest" rock of the day although by today's 
standards it's almost run-of-the-mill. What put it overboard was Rotten's 
lyrics and vocals - an all-out assault of outlandish behavior and 
anti-establishment messages that added up to a big middle finger to world (of 
course that gesture was employed a lot too). Their first gigs took place in 
the back of strip clubs and S&M shops, attracting the kind of people we'd 
think of as the most twisted and perverse. But it's not like they were out to 
make radio-friendly unit shifters and sell records. The band was each of the 
members' reason for living, otherwise they could just wallow their lives away 
like so many other people of the time. 
What's most interesting about this film is that it's the story of The Sex 
Pistols in pretty much their own words. There's present-day interviews with 
the band members individually (they still hold grudges against each other and 
their former managment). Each has his own chance to tell his perspective of a 
story or of an event - there's no neutral narrator. There's no interviews 
with musicians of today discussing the influence they had. About 95% of what 
appears on screen is original footage shot before, during and after their 
rise to fame. It's almost unbelievable how much was captured on film, so much 
so that you wonder if a lot of it is re-enactments because there's so much 
footage of such significance. 
Director Julien Temple and company keep the motif of the dark and dreary 70s 
rich and consistent. This is the REALLY ugly side of the 70s you never read 
about in history books or see in mainstream rock documentaries. The mood is 
so wholly "underground" that when stuff like the occasional S&M scene is 
throw in, or when psychedelic animation shows the band in a dream-like state, 
or we see real documentary footage of The Sex Pistols live shows and how 
insance their fans were it never seems out of the ordinary. This whole movie 
is practically one step away from being hardcore pornography or even an snuff 
film, the only difference is those vices come in the form of the Pistols' 
existence  - of being the most dangerous thing to the English empowerment at 
the time. 
I do have a few bones to pick, though. Firstly, the editing style is a bit 
strange, with constant cuts from footage of the Pistols performing live to 
backstage footage to newsreels to bizarre S&M and punk footage that has 
little to do with the band themselves. If Oliver Stone had this made this 
movie then I could understand it. Also, the modern-day interviews with the 
band are shot in shadows - why? Are they ashamed of themselves? It's probably 
meant to keep with the overall darkness of the film, but it seemed out of 
place to me. I didn't even enjoy the music that much, I find their sound 
bland and repetitive and Rotten's singing is grating and unmelodic. That's 
why these guys aren't recoginized so much as musicians as they are performers 
and revolutionaries (they only have one studio album). 
For the most part this is a pretty enjoyable film, certainly an educational 
one at the very least. "The Filth And The Fury" is a must-see to anyone whose 
ever thought ANY form of mainstream entertainment could be a public enemy. 
The Sex Pistols might not have changed the world for the better, or in any 
way at all, but the fact they shocked the establishment as much as they did 
and were persecuted for simply being themselves is scary. 

*****
Chad'z Movie Page is back! 
In-depth reviews of nearly all mainstream films playing at your local 
cineplex. There's also reviews of a few classic films and some of your 
personal favorites.

Title
Review for She's the One (1996)

She's The One
Chad'z rating: *** (out of 4 = good)
1996, R, 97 minutes [1 hour, 37 minutes]
[romantic comedy]
starring: Edward Burns (Mickey Fitzpatrick), Mike McGlone (Francis
Fitzpatrick), Maxine Bahns (Hope), John Mahoney (Mr. Fitzpatrick), produced
by Edward Burns, Ted Hope, James Schamus, written and directed by Edward
Burns.
        If I had known "She's The One" is about a love triangle between two brothers
and their [estranged] lovers I probably would have seen it as just another
soap opera disguised as a movie. But then again, that's probably why I found
the film to be enjoyable. It knows it's essentially a soap opera but because
it's told realistically with a fair amount of charm and humor it works.
        This is the second film by GenXer Edward Burns who also writes, produces,
and stars here the same as his first feature "The Brothers McMullen." In the
spirit of "Brothers," this film works in the same manner by starting out
simple but gradually becoming more complex by developing characters and
multiple, overlapping storylines which all make for interesting, offbeat
themes. 
        First we meet the brothers (and father) Fitzpatrick. Mickey (Burns) is the
older brother who drives a cab for a living but doesn't care about his income
because he's happy. Francis (McGlone) is the younger brother who makes lots
of money but isn't exactly happy because he's cheating on his wife and
doesn't know what to do. Mr. Fitzpatrick (Mahoney) is the old Irish dad who
tells his sons to do whatever makes them happy but make sure they stay close
to the family. Basically, these guys make up a "close-knit" movie family. 
        One day Mickey picks up a woman named Hope (Bahns) in his cab. She has to
take a plane from New York City to New Orleans but she's afraid of flying and
asks if Mickey would drive her instead. Now this is your generic Meet Cute
scene, but there isn't much chemistry between Burns and Bahns, which is
surprising since the two are a couple in reality. A few scenes later we find
they were married on the road (kind of a crash-course version of "Before
Sunrise" I guess).
        Meanwhile, we've gotten to know Francis who's a real Scrooge-like character.
He's having an affair with a sexy blonde named Heather (Cameron Diaz), who,
not coincidentally, used to be engaged to Mickey (and who is also fooling
around with others besides Francis and has a torrid past). Back home,
Francis's wife Carol (Jennifer Aniston) complains about their lack of a sex
life, and threatens to use alternative measures for pleasure (in one of the
funniest, wittiest discussions about masturbation I've ever seen).
        Most of the film is a rather complicated story of romance between all the
characters, both past and present. Certain things happened in the past that
eventually affect the continuing plot, and it's interesting to watch the
manner in which Burns is able to make everything stay in synch and seem so
breezy. We get subplots of secrets and lies of affairs and passion between
just a few characters, but you never doubt the plausibility of it all. 
        Maybe the instant romance between Mickey and Hope was hard to swallow, but
at least we get some good scenes of interaction and believable dialogue which
in turn push the plot along. Unlike other independent filmmakers like Kevin
Smith and Richard Linklater, Burns is not a master of dialogue, but his
character never talk and act like movie characters. The film doesn't try to
become an overly dramatic love story either, it just puts very down-to-Earth
characters in situations you'd only see in the movies. Sometimes it seems
strange but that's pretty much the point.
        In retrospect, I realize "She's The One" doesn't have the charm of "The
Brothers McMullen," but it does deliver a good theme about how serious and
important modern relationships (especially marriage) really are. It works for
me because it manages to be at least entertaining despite all the things it
has going against it.
Please visit Chad'z Movie Page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz - over 140
new and old movies reviewed in depth, not just blind ratings and quick
capsules. Also, check out The FIRST Shay Astar Web Page @
http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz/ShayAstar.html

Title
Review for Space Cowboys (2000)
There really isn't a thing in "Space Cowboys" that isn't totally predictable 
and familiar, and yet it's a really
fun, feel-good movie that doesn't make you feel like you're being pandered 
to. 
Maybe that's because it's got four great actors or that it's got a good 
producer/director at the helm or that
it offers an original take on an otherwise paint-by-numbers summer popcorn 
flick. It's kind of a military
thriller, it's almost a sci-fi flick but not one of those movies aimed at a 
sci-fi audiences. It's a grown-up
adventure movie that knows how to execute its story. 
Clint Eastwood stars as a retired Air Force pilot and engineer who is called 
upon by his old boss at NASA
because a satellite is about to crash into the Earth and the technology is so 
obsolete even today's rocket
scientists can't figure it out. Yadda yadda yadda, Eastwood and his three 
old* military buddies are the only
ones who can fix it and must adapt to the new technology rapidly while at the 
same time showing up the
young hotshots who think they're geniuses. 
It's pretty easy to tell what's going to happen here right? Fish-out-of-water 
stuff, "Let me do it my way
junior"-lines and attitudes, an executive commander who's obviously a weasel 
and a really fantastic ending
involving "we'll just barely make it if our calculations are 
correct"-climaxes. But as much as it sounds like
"Apollo 13," "Space Cowboys" really has a lot going for it. Sending four old 
men into space doesn't seem
like all that far-fetched of an idea (not after John Glenn), and Eastwood and 
company seem to be having a
great time here. The screenplay is thorough with its characters and doesn't 
waste our time trying to explain
the details of the "real" conflict going on. It doesn't matter, everyone here 
is doing such a good job it's
actually, uh what's that word - enjoyable. 
Chad'z Movie Page is back! 
New reviews of the latest movies in easy-to-swallow capsule form with the 
trendy, Entertainment Weekly-style of letter grades instead of the old star 
system. Have I sold out? Visit my page and decide for yourself ;-)

Title
Review for Empire Strikes Back, The (1980)
**** (out of 4 = excellent)
1997, PG, 130 minutes [2 hours, 10 minutes]
[fantasy]
Starring: Mark Hamill (Luke Skywalker), Harrison Ford (Han Solo), Carrie
Fisher (Princess Leia), Billy Dee Williams (Lando Calrissian), James Earl
Jones (voice of Darth Vader), written by George Lucas, Leigh Brackett,
Lawrence Kasdan, produced by Gary Kurtz, directed by Irvin Kershner.
"The Empire Strikes Back" will always be considered the best or the worst of
the "Star Wars" trilogy. Unlike the other two films, there is no major
victory here and bad things happen to the heroes. On the other hand, this
film contains the greatest amount of detail, continues the definition of The
Force and the universe, and establishes a vivid mood, all of which can be
just as moving as the swashbuckling adventure.
Truly the most notable improvement for the special edition re-releases of
these films is their images on a big screen and digital surround sound. I
don't remember seeing this movie in theaters back in 1980, so I have
essentially become four years old again as I am able to view this film as it
was meant to be seen. 
I noticed many things happening around the perimeters and in the background
that had either been cut or unfocused before. Also, the sound and sound
effects editing are greatly improved with this edition; you can hear pieces
of debris hitting the ground; people talking in the background; and every
footstep on the metal floors.
Unlike the special edition of "Star Wars," this print does not contain as
many additions. The first major enhancement occurs early in the film as Luke
Skywalker is held captive by the snow monster. In the original version the
monster scene seemed like a bit of a cop-out, but now it actually has some
meaning to it. When Luke uses his lightsaber to defeat the monster, it
doesn't seem so "implied" anymore because of the detail.
One of the best aspects to this film is its mood and atmosphere, especially
that of Yoda's swamp planet Degobah and Lando Calrissian's Cloud City. Cloud
City was already a beautiful, blissful place and although only a few
enhancements are added here, they are profound on a subconscious level. When
the Millennium Falcon arrives, it is shown flying throughout the entire city,
and we can see people and buildings in the background; it no longer looks
like a studio set at all. When characters walk by windows, we can see
activity happening outside, instead of just still pictures. In fact, of the
greatest enhancements only lasts a few seconds - as Lando uses a public
address system to warn the population to flee the city, we see hundreds of
people stop in the streets, in the halls, and in their homes to listen.
Luke's Jedi training is one of the most important elements in all of the
films, and the words of Yoda are so simple and yet so profound at the same
time. I have heard The Force is a Hollywood disguise for New Age philosophy,
but I doubt it. This is a completely different universe and its ability to
define such a complex place through relatively simple methods is nothing
short of genius.
"The Empire Strikes Back" could be seen as the best of the trilogy for its
definition of its reality and great designs. Or it could be seen as the worst
of the series because of its sad tone and choppy storytelling (I always
wondered how Luke knew where to find Han and Leia out of the entire galaxy
and how Darth Vader knew Luke was coming). But it's the fascinating story
that makes this a great film. (2/24/97) (6/11/97) [see "The Empire Strikes
Back" for critique of original film, see also: "Star Wars: The Special
Edition," "Return Of The Jedi: The Special Edition"] 
please visit Chad'z Movie Page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz/index.html

Title
Review for Homicide (1991)
Homicide
Chad'z rating: **1/2 (out of 4 = OK)
1991, R, 100 minutes [1 hour, 40 minutes]
[crime/drama]
starring: Joe Mantegna (Detective Bobby Gold), William H. Macy (Detective Tim
Sullivan), Natalija Nogulich (Chava), Rebecca Pidgeon (Miss Klein), produced
by Michael Hausman, Edward R. Pressman, directed by David Mamet.
        "Homicide" suffers from one of the worst cases of cinematic schizophrenia
I've ever seen. First it's a crime film, then it's a mystery, then it's a
drama, then it's a thriller, etc. What's really the topper is the fact the
film often seems as if it's going to lead to some kind of terrific payoff...
and then it doesn't happen.
        Joe Mantegna stars as Detective Bobby Gold, your typical New York
City-crime/mystery-movie 'tect who, along with his partner Detective Tim
Sullivan (Macy), is about to bring down a man on the FBI's 10 Most Wanted
list if only the feds would back off. The first few scenes are typical of
such mainstream cop films - there's the raid, the shootouts, then the
arguments between the cops and the feds over jurisdiction and the like which
almost turn into small race riots and we have no idea why!
        Initially I was intrigued, even though the generic cop atmosphere got old
quick, Gold and Sullivan seem like interesting enough people to care about.
There's a good sense of camaraderie here without (thankfully) one-liners and
slapstick. It seems as if this is going to be a straight crime film, but
suddenly everything changes due mostly to coincidence. 
        Gold finds himself helping out some rookies at the scene of a homicide of an
old Jewish shopkeeper. Gold is a Jew and doesn't think much of the case until
he finds himself forced into solving it. When the family of the woman
approaches Gold about the case and tells him it was an act of hate, Gold
starts to pity both the family for being so jumpy and religious, and himself
for the apathy he can't help feeling, especially since he knows it's
self-destructive.
        Here is where the film radically changes course. What had just been an intere
sting mystery story suddenly turns into a novel-like melodrama as Gold argues
with his fellow Jews over the honor he is supposed to have for both his
people and the badge. We get scenes of soul searching disguised as detective
work, but nothing seems to be adding up to anything. A sub-plot of another
possible hate crime begins to form, and although some attempt is made to
resolve it, nothing seems to exist for a reason.
        Gold does some investigation into the homicide of the old woman and it
appears she used to be a gun runner during WWII, but why would anyone want
her dead now? When he stumbles upon a secret Jewish militia, they don't
provide many answers, only more conflicts. And if the film had not already
descended on a major tangent, it continues to skew as Gold seems to drop
everything to get some kind of revenge, and even this act doesn't make much
sense.
        It's a shame the last act turns the film into another Hollywood thriller,
and a lame one at that. It's complete with shootouts, explosions, cliffhangers
, dead supporting characters, and last-minute confessions, and yet the film
still fails to provide any sense of closure for Gold nor any sense of
resolution for the plot.
        "Homicide" is one of the few films whose title alone provides for a major
flaw. Not only does it sound generic and boring, it's as misleading as the
film - you think it's going to be an intricate crime story and it turns into
a standard drama (and then some). It's as if everything is a big prelude to
nothing.
Please visit Chad'z Movie Page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz - over 150
new and old movies reviewed in depth, not just blind ratings and quick
capsules. Also, check out The FIRST Shay Astar Web Page @
http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz/ShayAstar.html

Title
Review for Midnight Cowboy (1969)
** (out of 4 = fair)
1969, R, 113 minutes [1 hour, 53 minutes]
[drama]
starring: Jon Voight (Joe Buck), Dustin Hoffman (Enrico "Ratso" Rizzo),
produced by Jerome Hellman, written by Waldo Salt, directed by John
Schlesinger, based on the novel by James Leo Herlihy.
"Midnight Cowboy" is a story of a strange attempt at the American Dream gone
wrong, which is exactly how the film works. It could have been a great
character study, and/or a detailed depiction of  the cruelness of reality,
but it tells its story in such a bizarre manner it's difficult to follow,
much less be moved by.
The film starts off seemingly normal as we meet Joe Buck (Voight), a young,
handsome cowboy who is on his way to New York City to make it big. But Joe is
arrogant fellow, he fantasizes about women and convinces himself he's every
woman's dream. However, the fantasy sequences are inter-cut with strange
flashbacks, and they work well to portray the surrealism of the mind. These
scenes are scattered throughout the film, but eventually start to become
redundant and lose their impact.
Joe arrives in NYC and checks into a hotel and then hits the streets and
tries to pick up women. But he's a tall cowboy roaming the streets of New
York, and we get typical fish-out-of-water scenes that are supposed to show
how cruel people can be, but instead seem more like quick comic relief. When
Joe meets a woman and seduces her, we finally learn his reason for coming to
New York: to become a "hustler" to rich women. Unfortunately, he doesn't know
what he's doing and his plan seems to fail.
Right away, the film's biggest flaw is obvious - why would Joe leave home to
pursue such an unattainable goal? Also, how could he have seduced a woman so
fast? I found myself asking questions like these throughout the film, and
thus became distracted because they were never answered.
One day Joe meets Enrico "Ratso" Rizzo (Hoffman), a small time con man,
thief, and all around unsuccessful criminal. Ratso learns of Joe's plan and
tries to hook him up with a "pimp," but that plan falls through. Joe becomes
furious with Ratso, but when he bumps into him again he doesn't take revenge.
Instead, the two move in together in an abandoned building!
Although many events take place throughout the first half, virtually nothing
happens in terms of story and plot. Most of the second half is a series of
extremely strange events that are only mildly interesting and not nearly as
thematic as they intend to be. Up until the encounter with the strange old
pimp the film had been relatively normal. From that point on it becomes very
strange with scenes that make little or no sense and an overall feeling of
vertigo.
For example, Joe, who is the epitome of staunch heterosexuality, has a
homosexual encounter with a young man who does not pay him afterwards, yet he
hardly seems to mind. Why this happens is beyond me. Does he do it just for
the money, or is he possibly bi-sexual? Perhaps the flashbacks were subtle,
Freudian hints, but the story is told so choppy nothing makes sense.
The final act starts to become a modernized version of "Of Mice And Men" as
we learn the two plan to move to Florida to escape the New York winter
because Ratso is dying from it. But unlike Lenny and George, where one was
stupid and the other smart but both cared for each other, these men are both
stupid and neither seems to care for the other, and why would they? They have
nothing in common, Voight and Hoffman have no chemistry, and the atmosphere
is too gritty to be believed. The two are self-made victims - it's hard to
feel sorry for them.
There is a scene at a psychedelic party where the film itself becomes an
acid trip where reality is there, it's just not realistic. This is symbolic
of "Midnight Cowboy" - there is reality to it, but because it's bizarre it
cannot be taken seriously
Please visit Chad'z Movie Page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz

Title
Review for Austin Powers: International Man of Mystery (1997)
Austin Powers: International Man Of Mystery
Chad'z rating: *** (out of 4 = good)
1997, PG-13, 87 minutes [1 hour, 27 minutes]
[comedy]
starring: Mike Meyers (Austin Powers, Dr. Evil), Elizabeth Hurley (Vanessa
Kensington), Robert Wagner (Number Two), Fabiano Udenio (Alotta Fagina),
produced by Demi Moore, Mike Meyers, Jennifer and Suzanne Todd, written by
Mike Meyers, directed by M. Jay Roach.
It's hard to make a good spoof movie these days, probably because anything
can only be parodied once, if at all. Is it any surprise films like "Spy
Hard," and "High School High" have bombed? "Austin Powers" isn't just a bunch
of cliche parodies, but a strange, funny outlook and offbeat comedic style of
its writer and star Mike Meyers.
The film starts out in the campy tradition of any spoof movie by setting up
its premise quickly but doing so in a satirical manner. The setting is 1967
London where we meet Austin Powers (Meyers), an English spy who is just as
popular as the Beatles but seems more like Benny Hill. As women chase him he
starts to dance and everyone joins in, then he runs away while everyone else
must finish the song (once a crowd of people start to dance in synch they
can't stop - that would be against the rules of a musical!). At the same time
we meet Powers' arch nemesis Dr. Evil (Meyers again). Evil is your typical
cartoony villain: he sits at a round table with his cat and associates whom
he gets rid of just because he can. The fact his name is Dr. Evil shows you
how blatant the film is in its satirical nature. To cut to the chase, Evil
escapes by freezing and hiding himself to return 30 years later.
Okay, it's obvious the basic premise of the film is going to be a cartoony
60s-style spy movie set in the present day and therefore all the jokes will
be simply fish-out-of-water right? Technically, this is true, but the film
uses its typical elements an exploitative manner. We get the verbal and sight
gags you'd expect from a film like this, but what's different here is the
fact they don't just exist to make for quick, convenient jokes, instead, they
often become integral parts of scenes, dialogue, and even the general plot. 
Many things in movies like this exist only to provide for one joke, for
example, Dr. Evil's number two man is named Number Two (Wagner), but what's
so clever here is the use of this gag doesn't stop there, nor does it repeat
itself. The film makes full use of every possible gag, such as a hilarious
scene in a restroom which I cannot describe, but I will say one of Powers'
lines is, "Who does Number Two work for!?"
Of course what's a comedy and a spy movie without a standoffish female
sidekick who will later fall for the hero? Elizabeth Hurley co-stars as
Vanessa Kensington, Powers' partner who epitomizes that character. Between
scenes in which Austin tries to seduce Vanessa (always failing but always
making for jokes), the two try to find Dr. Evil as he holds the world
hostage.
There's so much comedy and so many jokes in this film it really would be an
injustice to list only a few examples. It's difficult to describe how all the
jokes connect and why they do so. There are times when certain gags start to
wear thin (the carefully choreographed nude scenes for example), but what
keeps them and the entire film from becoming a lowest-common-denominator/live
action cartoon is the witty layer of satire throughout. 
What gives "Austin Powers" its edge, originality and enjoyability is Meyers'
witty screenplay. It's nice to watch a comedy and not feel like you're being
pandered to.
Please visit Chad'z Movie Page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz - over 140
new and old films reviewed in depth, not just blind ratings and quick
capsules. Also, check out The FIRST Shay Astar Web Page @
http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz/ShayAstar.html

Title
Review for Eyes Wide Shut (1999)
Eyes Wide Shut
Chad'z rating: *** (out of 4 = good)
1999, R, 159 minutes [2 hours, 39 minutes]
[drama/thriller]
Starring: Tom Cruise (Dr. William Harford), Nicole Kidman (Alice Harford), 
Sydney Pollack (Victor Ziegler), Todd Field (Nick Nightingale); written by 
Stanley Kubrick, Frederic Raphael; produced and directed by Stanley Kubrick; 
inspired by the novella `Traumnovelle' by Arthur Schnitzler.
Seen July 24, 1999 at 8:45 p.m. at Crossgates Cinema 18 (Guilderland, NY), 
theater #12, by myself for free using my Hoyts season pass. [Theater rating: 
***: very good sound, good seats, average picture]
        I was just on the Internet chatting with a friend of mine and fellow 
film critic Ian Waldron-Mantgani who's usually anxious to hear my verdict on 
most newly-released films since I get to see them before he does (he lives in 
England and most films don't open overseas until a few months after their 
American premiere). I told him `Eyes Wide Shut' is a lot like every other 
Stanley Kubrick film - weird. But when he asked me if it was `good weird' or 
`bad weird' I couldn't think of an honest answer, so I guess I would just 
have to say yes.
        How could a film that had undergone super-ultra-mega-secretive 
production for 18 months not have some kind of stigma attached to it? I, and 
the entire world for that matter, really didn't know what to expect from 
`Eyes Wide Shut.' All we'd been told officially is that it's a story of 
sexual jealously and obsession, but everyone (myself included) suspected it 
was going to be a twisted, surreal drama that would push sexuality in movies 
to another level (a la `Crash' or `The Cook, The Thief, His Wife And Her 
Lover' - two films which disgusted and offended me). 
        And now that the film is finally released as its auteur intended it 
to be (well... there is that controversy over 65 seconds of 
digitally-superimposed figures - more on this later), is the final product as 
extreme as the hype said or is it just the way Kubrick makes movies?
        Yes.
        It's hard to think of any other movie where I could tell you that 
probably everything you've heard about it is true and false at the same time. 
Yes, it is a surreal, sexual drama pushing the boundaries of mainstream 
movies. Yes, it does have outrageous sex scenes and innuendo. Yes, Cruise and 
Kidman endure a helluva lot to get through this picture. But it's not 
softcore porn for the masses and it really isn't that `sexy' per se. 
        Every Kubrick film is different from every other film in terms of 
genres and storylines, but the theme and mood to `Eyes Wide Shut' are in the 
same spirit of style of his complete filmography. It's weird, surreal, 
shocking, intriguing and bizarre - but it's up to the individual viewer to 
determine whether these elements work for them or not. The story is basically 
realistic and believable on some levels, but I don't think it expects us to 
believe it could take place in the reality we know (it better not).
        The first half of the film is told in classic Kubrick fashion - it 
slowly lays the foundation of the story and emphasizes the characteristics of 
the main players. It is also tricky in its delivery so that when the plot 
begins to boil, slowly at first but then very rapidly, we realize we've 
mistaken the obvious for the subtle and vice versa.
        We meet Dr. William Harford (Cruise) and his wife Alice (Kidman), an 
upscale Manhattan couple who may or may not be part of the higher social 
order among New York's wealthy and important people. They attend a huge party 
hosted by their friend Victor Ziegler (Pollack) and after separating we're 
led to believe they are either an unhappy couple or swingers. This scene is 
one of the most important parts of the film and also one of the strangest. 
Alice has a bit too much to drink and finds herself swept off her feet by an 
extremely dapper South American man who speaks in the kind of eloquent 
phrases you only hear in soap operas but with all the suaveness of James 
Bond. Meanwhile, William is charming two beautiful models  in the same 
overly-eloquent small talk which has kept his wife at bay. But just when you 
think you know where this is about to go a small emergency crops up and 
suddenly the tone is serious.
        The film then spends a long duration exploring the Harford's martial 
bliss and fidelity. They find themselves arguing over the other's actions at 
the party which then leads to even more exploration of their sexual 
curiosity. They do seem to be compatible and a few romance scenes back that 
up, but there seems to be something missing. During an argument Alice tells 
William, in explicit detail, about a fantasy she had about another man which 
she's convinced she could have followed through on and it would have been 
worth the repercussions at home.
        I'm not sure if married people ever have to deal with these kinds of 
problems, but the atmosphere here is so tight and so chiseled with the finest 
details that the drama definitely seems believable and goes a long way 
towards establishing William's character and what happens to him after the 
turning point in the story.
        And what that point is could be one of the strangest and most 
perverse in film history. Because William is so subconsciously outraged that 
his wife could possibly have such strong sexual desires he finds himself 
sucked into the New York underworld. First, he comes close to patronizing a 
prostitute and then visits his friend from medical school, Nick Nightingale 
(Field) who is now a piano player in a jazz bar, and amazingly (and 
coinincidentally) enough has connections to a secret society.
        This is the part `Eyes Wide Shut' will be remembered for. It involves 
a twisted, unsettling plot element which is also photographed in such a way 
to `set a new record' for a commercial motion picture. Considering that 
almost everything about the film has been about sex, sexuality and the 
various taboos associated with it, and the fact that Harford is about to 
crash a secret society's meeting, it's clear what's going to happen here. 
It's also wherein a controversy lies over the digital altering of 65 seconds 
of the film. Suffice to say that if you don't know what has been superimposed 
you probably won't be able to tell. 
        I really don't have a problem with this digital imagery, even if it 
was done against Kubrick's wishes (most say he would never approve of this 
form of censorship, but others argue he would have to get an R rating), what 
bothered me the most is just the idea of it all. The tone and the attitude of 
the society is scary because it seems to be a religion about sex, yet at the 
same time, once the ceremony is over it's not much different from a porno 
movie. Kubrick can be weird at times, but when he dabbles with sex it almost 
always comes off as gratuitous and completely unnecessary (one of the major 
reasons `A Clockwork Orange' falls short of true greatness). What's more, 
it's not what the society does that accounts for the turning point in the 
story, it's just their sheer existence. Since this is the case, why not stick 
with the secret religious cult aspect?
        From here the film takes a sharp turn towards a different mood, plot 
and storytelling form. It becomes an intense psychological thriller and an 
interesting mystery as Harford realizes he has been part of something so 
unbelievable he can't comprehend it and refuses to believe it. Especially 
after his life and safety and that of his family are threated by these 
strangers who somehow know everything about him. Like the viewer, he starts 
to look for logical answers but the more he uncovers the more paranoid he 
becomes. 
        The second half of the film is just the continuation of Kubrick's 
elaborate mind game. In some ways it's just as surreal and bizarre as all the 
sexuality explored during the first half. Not unlike `The Game' and `The 
Spanish Prisoner' we're suddenly feeling for a common man trying to figure 
out why the entire world suddenly seems against him and how he can fight them 
without much power of his own.
        Slowly the story begins to unwind and many answers are provided, but 
not all of them and especially not the most important ones. Is it because the 
screenplay is lacking? Possibly, but I'd suspect it's just Kubrick toying 
with us as he does so well.
        Aside from the direction and use of theme, many other aspects of 
`Eyes Wide Shut' deserve kudos: Cruise's performance which proves once and 
for all he's not just a pretty-boy (do I hear another Oscar nod?); the 
cinematography which manages to blast each frame full of glowing, rich light 
but simultaneously gives a sense of darkness, fear, and mystery; the 
outstanding set and production design which completely captures the essence 
of modern New York City (the film was not shot on location, everything was 
constructed on a sound stage!); along with some other subtlties such as its 
sense of humor, the score and soundtrack, etc.
        To answer Ian's question, I'd have to honestly say that `Eyes Wide 
Shut' is that the good weird parts outweigh the bad weird parts, but there's 
so much more that could have been done. Kubrick leaves us wanting more, but I 
have a feeling if we look at this hard enough we'll be content with what we 
have.
---------------------------------
Please visit Chad'z 
Movie Page
 - over 230 new and old movies reviewed in-depth, not just blind ratings 
and blather capsules.
Associate member of The O.F.C.S. (Online 
Film Critics Society)

Title
Review for Shine (1996)
Shine
Chad'z rating: ***1/2 (out of 4 = very good)
1996, PG-13, 105 minutes [1 hour, 45 minutes]
[drama]
starring: Geoffrey Rush (adult David Helfgott), Noah Taylor (teenage David
Helfgott), Armin Mueller-Stahl (Mr. Peter Helfgott), Lynn Redgrave (Gillian),
written by Scott Hicks, Jan Sardi, produced by Jane Scott, directed by Scott
Hicks.
You don't have to be a musician to understand the power music can have. It's
something so forceful it rivals love. "Shine" proves this to be true as it is
a story of a gifted pianist torn between his loyalty and honor to his father
and his love for his music. The film's most moving element is not the drama,
but the music itself.
As the film opens we meet an eccentric man wandering in the rain, he is the
main character, David Helfgott as an adult (Rush). Through a series of
flashbacks we are told the story of how he came to be where he is now. As a
small child he displayed a great ability for playing the piano. He enters a
talent competition and although he amazes everyone, he does not win first
prize. Later, one of the judges stops by his house to give him a "special"
prize, but this insults his Orthodox Jewish father, Mr. Peter Helfgott
(Mueller-Stahl) because he is essentially given a prize for losing. Mr
Helfgott is a Holocaust survivor, he refuses handouts, and teaches his
children, "Only the strong survive."
Most of the first half is plotless, however, many events occur to create for
detailed characterization and atmosphere. Some of these things are short and
subtle, but really add up, such as a scene in which David (played by Noah
Taylor from age 14 - 20) flirts with a girl but his father purposely calls
him away. Other examples include: when David's sister crawls through a hole
in the fence to talk to a boy, Mr. Helfgott seals up the hole; and when David
tries to get back at his father by ruining his bath, he is beaten. I find
family conflict and domestic violence to be some of the most powerful,
dramatic elements in cinema, and this film makes perfect use of them. 
The love/hate relationship between David and his father reaches a boiling
point when he is offered a full scholarship to a musical college in London.
David decides to go even after his father threatens to completely disown him.
I never thought I'd see a parallel to "Star Wars" in a film such as this,
but a Luke Skywalker/Obi-Wan Kenobi type of relationship seems to form
between David and his new teacher at college. The teacher describes the power
of music in such a way it seems supernatural - music becomes to David what
The Force is to Luke Skywalker. 
There are many wonderful scenes in which David's musical ability speaks
volumes on its own, but could it be too much for him to handle? His entire
life has revolved around the piano, and it finally catches up with him as he
suffers a mental breakdown after performing his best concert ever.
The second half of the film is quite strange and jumbled. Geoffrey Rush
delivers an outstanding performance as a mentally challenged adult David, but
the film doesn't give much explanation to his condition. Then again, an
explanation nor a plot is really necessary from this point on, as it becomes
a simpler story about David's day-to-day struggle for happiness.
David starts playing the piano again and many things start to happen in his
life. He meets a woman named Gillian (Redgrave) and they get married. David's
father also makes an appearance in a typical coming of terms scene - but has
he finally forgiven him? It's difficult to tell, but I think that's the
point. In fact, most everything that happens during his adult life is open to
interpretation. The scenes themselves are easy to follow (and quite funny at
times), and it seems something monumental is going to happen.
The only thing I didn't like about "Shine" was the sudden ending and the
choppy storytelling throughout the second half. But despite these minor
flaws, the film works as a good and original drama that combines the power of
music with the human spirit. 
Please visit Chad'z Movie Page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz
E-mail: ChadPolenz@aol.com
(C)1997 Chad Polenz

Title
Review for Brothers McMullen, The (1995)
*** (out of 4 = good)
1995, R, 98 minutes [1 hour, 38 minutes]
[comedy/lighthearted drama]
starring: Mike McGlone (Patrick), Jack Mulcahy (Jack), Edward Burns (Barry),
Shari Albert (Susan), Jennifer Jostyn (Leslie), produced by Edward Burns,
Dick Fisher, written and directed by Edward Burns.
The problem with religion and tradition is they can really cramp your love
life. "The Brothers McMullen" is an original film that actually presents
characters with situations all other movies ignore - the problem of trying to
have a meaningful and passionate relationship but also have a set of
[religious] morals. Is there any way to have both?
This is the story of three 20-something Catholic brothers going through some
difficult times with women. Jack (Mulcahy) is the oldest of the GenXers, he
is married but without children. The middle child, Barry (Burns) likes the
single life, he's not a one-woman man and cannot understand the concept of
love and commitment. Patrick (McGlone), the youngest, tries to live by God's
words, but finds it very difficult as he is deeply involved with a Jewish
girl and they may soon get married. 
Burns really does an excellent job in defining the modern male: the man who
is scared to make a commitment, but when he does it somehow turns out worse
for him. Barry is a typical slacker, but he has a talent for writing,. When
he breaks up with his long-time girlfriend he is left without a home and must
crash at Jack's. As he tries to look for an apartment, it is "stolen" by a
young woman about his age. Somehow they manage to hook up with each other,
but Barry becomes scared of a commitment. 
Barry's life is contrasted through Jack, who falls for a single woman and
has an affair with her. Jack has been married for five years, but suddenly he
starts to question the whole idea.
All of the brothers are portrayed as partially devoted Catholics, but they
all have problems with their faith. They sometimes bend and change "the
rules" to suit their own needs.
Even Patrick, the most morally upright brother, often becomes scared by
love. His girlfriend wants him to move in with her, but he just can't do it.
He claims it goes against his religion, but she thinks he's just using it as
an excuse because he's really afraid of commitment.
Patrick and his girlfriend Susan (Albert) eventually split, and he is
attracted to his neighbor, Leslie (Jostyn). Leslie says that she has lost
faith in the church sighting its unrealistic expectations and rules, and that
by following those rules, it has only harmed her life. This is true. Sin is
much more tempting, and sometimes doing the "right" thing can make you
miserable. How can anyone follow God's laws and still live a normal life in
the 1990s? It seems like everyone has ignored moral issues like these a long
time ago.
Burns' excellent screenplay and directing are what really made "The Brothers
McMullen" good. We can really sympathize and relate to these characters. It
asks questions we all have had, but doesn't try to give a answers to them. I
don't know the answers either, but I'm thankful these characters are even
wondering at all.
visit Chad'z Movie Page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz/index.html

Title
Review for Bound (1996)
Bound
Chad'z rating: *** (out of 4 = good)
1996, R, 108 minutes [1 hour, 48 minutes]
[crime]
starring: Jennifer Tilly (Violet), Joe Pantoliano (Caeser), Gina Gershon
(Corky), John P. Ryan (Mickey), produced by Stuart Boros, Andrew Lazar,
written and directed by Andy and Larry Wachowski.
        I think all crime movies have one thing in common: things never go according
to plan. Some crime films use this to create for satire, others use it to
enhance the drama and suspense, but "Bound" is different because it does both
at the same time without contradicting itself.
        The film starts off with a real "crime movie" atmosphere - the type that
could only be created by lovers of the pulp books and cult favorites of the
genre. The setting is present day Chicago where we meet Corky (Gershon), a
lesbian ex-con who is fixing up an empty upscale apartment. When she meets
the next door neighbor Violet (Tilly) there is a clear, but unspoken
attraction between them. It's the kind you'd see in porno movies, so I'm not
sure if it really fits for such a mainstream film and its audience. We get
about 20 minutes of relatively plausible character development and flirting
between Corky and Violet, plus some very erotic sex scenes (at least to a
heterosexual male), but after a while it seems a bit gratuitous. 
        Violet's live-in partner, Caeser (Pantoliano), is your standard "Family
Man," especially the way Pantoliano depicts him - Brooklyn accent, curse
words galore, violent mood swings, etc. Caeser has just recovered $2 million
in cash that belongs to "The Business." But Violet doesn't like Caeser much,
so she and Corky hatch a plan to steal the money, frame Caeser, and screw
over the entire mob in the process.
        It's difficult to describe the scheme the women concoct without describing
it in full detail or giving away the entire film. It's not a complicated plan
really, just a clever one and it's interesting to watch how the events unfold
because just when you think everything is going to work out, something
unexpected happens and the characters must think quickly. There are scenes of
razor-sharp suspense, the kind you wouldn't expect in a film like this.
        The actual events themselves are portrayed just as seriously as Scorsese's
"GoodFellas," with lots of detail. But the offbeat dialogue and the specific
elements that move the plot make for a wholly original, yet satirical
atmosphere not unlike Tarantino's "Pulp Fiction." For example, the money
Violet and Corky try to steal from Caeser was originally covered in blood due
to something that could only happen in a crime movie like this. Nevertheless,
Caeser proceeds to wash, dry, and iron every single $100 bill as if they were
his favorite pair of pants.
        There isn't much else to say about "Bound." It's just another crime film at
the core, but it's told in an original, interesting manner and there's
nothing wrong with that.
Please visit Chad'z Movie Page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz - over 140
new and old films reviewed in depth, not just blind ratings and quick
capsules. Also, check out The FIRST Shay Astar Web Page @
http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz/ShayAstar.html

Title
Review for Deep Impact (1998)
Chad'z rating: ** (out of 4 = fair/below average)
Starring: Téa Leoni (Jenny Lerner), Morgan Freeman (President Beck), Robert
 Duvall (Spurgeon Turner), Elijah Wood (Leo Biederman); written by Bruce Joel
 Rubin, Michael Tolkin; produced by David Brown, Richard D. Zanuck; directed by
 Mimi Leder.
Seen May 17, 1998 at 11:45 a.m. at Rotterdam Square Mall Cinemas, theater #6,
 with my brother John, for free using my Sony/Lowes critic's pass. [Theater
 rating: ***: good picture and sound, average seats]
        Critics have been quick to judge the current trend of films about grand-scale
 disaster as pure eye candy, and for the most part they're right. However,
 "disaster" is somewhat of a misnomer as the type of films aren't so much about
 the cataclysmic events themselves as they are about people banding together
 because of a threat. This is a concept that could, in theory, combine action
 and drama perfectly, and "Deep Impact" is the latest mega-budget event movie
 of the sort which tries its hardest to be completely plausible, but in turn
 detracts from the fantasy of it all. 
        There's no denying we want to be excited and intrigued by movies right from
 the get-go, and this film realizes that notion and exploits it through one of
 the most pathetic excuses for tension ever produced. We start off with a high
 school astronomy club in Arizona where a boy named Leo Biederman (Wood) has
 unknowingly discovered a comet. When his pictures are sent to a professional
 observatory, the scientist there realizes the comet is on a collision course
 with Earth. Of course it takes a lot of high-tech computers to calculate this
 within seconds, but somehow the same computers can't log on to the Internet so
 the scientist can warn the world. If that had not already been a sign of the
 sheer cheesiness to the film, the script uses bottom-of-the-barrel cliches to
 "remove" the scientist and make for a sense of danger about as frightening as
 film is plausible.
        Incorporating the modern, massive news media is becoming an ever-increasing
 Hollywood trend and when used properly it can provide for a sense of reality.
 The film goes about establishing reality by using a popular broadcast
 journalist, Jenny Lerner (Leoni), as one of its main characters. Lerner is a
 typical character who plays an important role when she uncovers a news story
 involving the resignation of a Cabinet member which is secretly related to the
 government's discovery of the comet. Lerner seems to be the only reporter for
 MSNBC (which the film would have us believe is the only broadcast media), and
 is told she's stumbled onto something big. Meanwhile, she's having a personal
 crisis as her old divorced mother is depressed at her father's marriage to a
 much younger woman. All of this is generic to the extreme, especially as
 executed through Leoni's bland performance and scene after scene of pointless
 confrontations which would be right at home on "Melrose Place."
        Had the film begun at the second act it would not have been hindered at all.
 It takes at least 45 minutes for the aspect of the comet collision to come
 into play and thus create for some semblance of plot and conflict. The mid-
 section of the film suddenly becomes a series of interactions between
 supporting characters with an effort at tension thrown into the mix. Morgan
 Freeman co-stars as President Beck, who informs the world, and thus us the
 viewers, what the situation is and how it will be resolved. Freeman is great
 actor, but even he cannot create for the kind of suspense the film intends to
 build through philosophical lines and speeches and overly dramatic shots.
 Another great actor, Robert Duvall, co-stars as Spurgeon "Fish" Turner, the
 eldest member of a space crew sent to knock the comet off course, and yet he
 too seems silly trying to recite campy dialogue.
        Soon the focus shifts from any kind of a general plot to individual conflicts
 between the characters and the mission to save the world. Through both of
 these aspects it becomes more and more clear the attempts at intelligent
 storytelling have been exhausted. Needless to say, Turner's crew doesn't
 succeed on its mission (or else the film would have ended after an hour), and
 proceeds to make things worse. It's all downhill from there with as the
 characters are put through the meat grinder in an attempt to create for
 suspense which only comes across as melodrama (and poorly-written melodrama at
 that). It's difficult to feel sorry for them since they're so generic, not to
 mention how sloppy the script is in its attempt to balance the story.
        The last act clinches this idea as it seems like the world really will come
 to an end and yet none of the characters seem worried about it. The attitude
 is so apathetic that it asks us to sympathize with the characters who see
 confronting the impending apocalypse head-on as an honorable notion. The
 script conviently provides for the massive special effects disaster imagery it
 promises and a climatic resolution, but still fails to work even as eye candy
 as it's very unconvincing and ends much too quickly.
        Perhaps "Deep Impact" would have worked as a television mini-series as it
 tries to squeeze so much into such little time and space. It's no wonder story
 and character flaws and massive continuity errors take the place of drama and
 suspense.


Title
Review for Mallrats (1995)
*** (out of 4 = good)
1995, R, 95 minutes [1 hour, 35 minutes]
[comedy]
starring: Jason Lee (Brodie), Jeremy London (T.S.), Shannen Doherty (Rene),
Claire Forlani (Brandi), Michael Rooker (Mr. Spenning), produced by James
Jacks, Sean Daniel, Scott Mosier, written and directed by Kevin Smith.
There have been a lot of movies about GenXers that try to be realistic by
placing them in their "natural surroundings." But the movie execs forget that
GenXers love to hang out at the malls (the bigger the better), and this is an
entire movie exploiting that. Newcomer Kevin Smith has once again captured
the spirit of youth by making a funny and wholly original movie that is
virtually without plot, yet is very entertaining and hilarious.
First there is Brodie (Lee), a typical apathetic fanboy who also has a very
nice girlfriend, Rene (Doherty), who he likes, but doesn't know what to do
with. His problem is he treats her like one of the guys and this is why she
dumps him. Then there is T.S. (London), who is also dumped by his girlfriend,
Brandi (Forlani), after the two get into a fight over her appearance on her
father's dating game show at the mall.
And so the two buds, both dumped on the same day, try to find pleasure at
that little Heaven on Earth - The Mall. 
The mall is packed with interesting characters, among them are: the preppy
bully who has a grudge against Brodie because he hates "mallrats;" the idiot
who stares at the 3-D poster all day trying desperately to see the image; and
then there is Jay and Silent Bob (Jason Mewes, Kevin Smith). These two
troublemakers have even less to do than anyone, so why not not do nothing at
the mall? 
Smith knows how to work the element of friends who don't seem like they
would be friends, which is must have been difficult to script, and perhaps
even more difficult to act out. Brodie is a comic junkie who doesn't
understand the preppiness of T.S. Why the two are friends is a mystery, but
they do have a great sense of comradery between them. They talk about their
guy stuff like sexual conquests and whether or not Lois Lane could carry
Superman's baby, which isn't the kind of dialogue usually recited in such
films, and it's very funny.
Eventually T.S. confronts Brandi's father, Mr. Spenning (Rooker), about how
he is just trying to keep him away from Brandi, and Spenning acknowledges it
with great pride. Then the film becomes a parody of zany commercial comedies.
There are chases scenes and topless fortune tellers. And of course a
sit-com-esque turn of events that might be a bit cheesy, but is still funny.
The ending a huge, overly climatic scene, and everything that had been a
problem before is resolved. It's predictable, but it's a satire - it doesn't
try to be something to take seriously.
A lot of action happens in "Mallrats," but in the end everything is back to
normal. It's just been another Saturday at the mall, only a bit more wild.
(3/31/96) (2/2/97) (5/20/97) [see also: "Chasing Amy," "Clerks"]

Title
Review for Big Lebowski, The (1998)
Chad'z rating: **** (out of 4 = excellent)
1998, R, 117 minutes [1 hour, 57 minutes]
starring: Jeff Bridges (Jeff "The Dude" Lebowski), John Goodman (Walter),
Julianne Moore (Maude Lebowski), Steve Buscemi (Donny); written by Joel and
Ethan Coen; produced by Ethan Coen; directed by Joel Coen.
Seen March 5, 1998 at 7:30 p.m. at the Crossgates Mall Cinema 18 (Guilderland,
NY), theater #2, by myself, for free using a promotional advanced screening
pass. [Theater rating: ****: excellent picture, sound, and seats]
        Perhaps one of the greatest feelings one can experience while watching a film
is realizing how complex the story is and yet how easy it is to follow. It
takes a lot of effort and craftsmanship to construct a screenplay and film it
in such a way as to give the viewer this experience, therefore it's no
surprise "The Big Lebowski," which epitomizes this concept, is delivered to us
by veteran filmmakers Ethan and Joel Coen. 
        From film to film the Coen brothers never fail to top themselves by making
their stories more bizarre and/or complicated, and yet still very enjoyable.
Just describing the basic elements that make up this film would prove this
idea as it manages to combine bowling, kidnapping, two wars, sadomasochist
art, pornography, washed-up rock stars, and many other things. But what's most
amazing is the fact the film is essentially a straight comedy, and yet an
intricate web of mystery, all strung together through a script chiseled to
perfection.
        Jeff Bridges stars as Jeffrey Lebowski - an L.A. roundabout who always seems
to be in his pajamas, whether he's bowling at the local lanes or smoking weed
in his apartment (that's about all he does). Lebowski hates his name and
prefers to be called "The Dude," and calls everyone else "Man," just like a
hippies (apparently, he hasn't been able to get over the 1960s). The film's
first joke perfectly establishes his character in just a few moments time as
we see him buy a quart of half & half at the supermarket by writing a check
for $0.68.
        Within a matter of minutes a conflict and plot are quickly thrown into the
mix as The Dude is mistaken for another Lebowski by slow-witted bookies who
have mistaken him for a millionaire by the same name (hence the film's title).
When one of the thugs "soils" his rug a hilarious scene of dialogue between
The Dude, and his raving Vietnam vet friend Walter (Goodman) and always-two-
steps-behind friend  Donnie (Buscemi) ensues. Immediately the atmosphere of
minute details is present as we are able to get a reading on these characters
and their situations through their conversations alone. Bridges is great, but
it is Goodman who is surprisingly affective here - always making for comedy
simply through attitude, not one-liners or slapstick.
        Soon the plot becomes complicated as The Dude get mixed up in the kidnapping
of The Big Lebowski's wife, as he is asked to deliver the money to the
kidnappers, but his efforts are hindered when Walter decides to help him out.
>From this point on the story keeps twisting and turning and never ceases to
surprise us in where it goes. Things never go according to plan in crime
movies, especially crime comedies, and The Dude is thrown from one strange
situation to another.
        If ever there was an example of the genus to this film's script, and to the
Coens in general, it would be how the film transitions itself from conflict to
conflict and even scene to scene. At no point in the film is it possible to
predict where it will go next, even the aforementioned examples of plot
devices would not act as spoilers. And what's most amazing is not just that
said examples could be used together, but that they are done so in such
original, enjoyable manners that anything less extraordinary would seem
incorrect.
        But it is not just the terrific scripting to the film that makes it great, it
is its comedic elements and outstanding acting which executes the script
flawlessly. Bridges and Goodman are both outstanding as they never kill their
character's personalities even when they say and do the same things over and
over again. Both are able to turn generic slapstick bits and the occasional
one-liners into fresh forms of comedy.
        "The Big Lebowski" is a film so grand on every level, it's almost frustrating
in trying to evaluate it for fear of over-looking elements. Still, it is
filmmaking at its best as every subplot, every scene, even every individual
line of dialogue and camera angle have meaning here, absolutely nothing is
wasted nor gratuitous. 

Title
Review for Gordy (1995)
* (out of 4 = poor)
1995, G, 90 minutes [1 hour, 30 minutes]
[comedy]
starring: Michael Roescher (Hank Royce), Kristy Young (Jinnie Sue
MaCallister), Justin Garms (voice of Gordy), James Donadio (Gilbert Sipes),
written by Leslie Stevens, Jay Sommers, Dick Chevillat, produced by Sybil
Robson, directed by Mark Lewis.
"Gordy" is not a movie, it is a 90-minute-long "Sesame Street" skit, and a
very bad one at that. This movie is so stupid and dumb that it's depressing
to think that some Hollywood executives actually gave this the green light,
and even more surprising is the fact that this is a Disney movie.
I'm sure children are the target audience of this movie, but only kids under
the age of five may be able to tolerate it. It is the story of a farm a
piglet named Gordy (voiced by Garms), whose family has been taken away to "up
north," which we know means death. Of course we can hear the animals talk to
each other, and they actually went to the trouble of attempting to sync the
voices with their mouths but it comes out terrible. Actually, it's almost
funny in a way. 
The only remotely interesting and likable character soon appears, a little
girl named Jinnie Sue MaCallister (Young) who sees Gordy on the back of a
truck and essentially steals him. Jinnie is a country singer and the film
goes off on a huge tangent to show her little concert and the people dancing
to it. What is the point of this? Maybe she is one of the producer's
relatives and they wanted to show her on camera to promote her or something.
We then cut to a huge social gathering and drop in on another young kid
named Hank Royce (Roescher) who is sad because his divorced mother is dating.
He leaves the party and meets Jinnie Sue, but he accidentally falls in a
pool (probably because he was sitting on the diving board with a $200 suit on
- nah, didn't see that one coming!), starts to drown, and is miraculously
saved as Gordy pushes an inflatable float over to him and saves him. 
If this had not been insanely stupid already the story quickly changes when
Jinnie gives Gordy to Hank who then ends up becoming the CEO of a food
processing corporation when Hank's grandfather, the original CEO, dies and
leaves his fortune to Hank... and Gordy!
Of course there must be a villain, but even this villain (Donadio as Sipes)
isn't that evil. He never raises his voice or becomes angry, and of course he
has the typical idiot goons kidnap Gordy but this is just so beyond stupid
and cartoony we are constantly two steps ahead of the story. It's hard to
tell whether the overall corniness and cheesiness to the movie is intentional
because it is a family film, or if the filmmaker's are just this untalented
and stupid.
At times "Gordy" is tolerable to watch, thus earning it one star and not the
dreaded "z-." But it's just so unbelievably boring, cliche, dumb, unfunny,
corny, and just plain bad it may scare children, it certainly disturbed me. 
(4/21/96) (1/29/97) (6/13/97) [see also: "Babe"]
please visit Chad'z Movie page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz/index.html

Title
Review for Clockwork Orange, A (1971)
Chad'z rating: ***1/2 (out of 4 = very good)
1971, R, 136 minutes [2 hours, 16 minutes]
starring: Malcolm McDowell (Alex), Patrick Magee (Mr. Frank Alexander),
Anthony Sharp (Minister of the Interior), Michael Bates (Chief Guard),
written, produced, and directed by Stanley Kubrick, based on the novel by
Anthony Burgess.
"A Clockwork Orange" may be the epitome of the idea of portraying a theme
through allegory. The only problem is that sometimes the allegory becomes
blatant, but the story told is still interesting because of its bizarre
nature. 
The film takes place in an alternate reality, where crime is out of control
and technology seems both advanced yet ancient at the same time. We don't
know how the world got this way, it is just implied and assumed as Gothic,
sci-fi tale. 
We meet the four "Droogs" as lead by Alex (McDowell), a sadistic hoodlum
with a sharp wit and quick reflexes. The Droogs go around beating up bums for
pleasure, fighting with other gangs simply because of rivalry, and have even
more fun by storming the countryside and raping a woman while forcing her
husband to look on. This is a very disturbing picture, not in just the
graphicness, but because of the pleasure they take in their actions. Kubrick
uses this to emphasize the human element by paradoxically dehumanizing the
characters.
A "Julius Ceaser" plot develops when the Droogs betray Alex and lead him to
be captured by the police. Almost instantly the film starts to lose its
artistic edge, as everything seems "normal" compared to the surrealistic
opening. Alex is sentenced to prison, but we don't get a surrealistic, brutal
image of prison. Instead, Alex studies with the prison chaplin, and reads the
Old Testament because of its many violent tales of war.  
The real theme of the story starts to develop when Alex volunteers for a
psychological "cure" created by the government to reduce crime. The
treatment's premise seems promising, as it will subconsciously stop Alex from
committing crime, but in effect, he loses his sense of true free will. Some
will argue man has no free will to begin with, and this film serves as a
battleground for such philosophical arguments.
When Alex finds himself wandering the streets, the earlier Gothic mood seems
to be gone. Through a series of events that are almost mirror images of the
beginning of the story, Alex becomes the victim. 
As moving as "A Clockwork Orange" is, it could have been even more powerful
had it not be so gratuitous in some respects. I found the much of the nudity
and sexual innuendo quite excessive. I loved the dark, twisted mood that
opens the film, but why wasn't the atmosphere as surrealistic throughout?
Still, the film's ability to make for such a grand theme despite its shock
value is remarkable. 


Title
Review for Planes, Trains & Automobiles (1987)
*** (out of 4 = good)
1987, R, 93 minutes [1 hour, 33 minutes]
[comedy]
starring: Steve Martin (Neil Page), John Candy (Del Griffith), written,
produced, and directed by John Hughes.
"Plane, Trains, And Automobiles" is a great bonding movie about two
completely opposite strangers that, through a series of strange coincidences
that seem perfectly logical, keep bumping into each other and driving each
other crazy.
The story starts off simple enough: Neil (Martin), an ad executive from
Chicago on a business trip to New York, eagerly awaits a client's approval of
his project (immediately Hughes' world of fantastic satire makes itself
clear). Next we see Neil running around the streets of New York trying to
find a cab during rush hour. And just as it seems he has found one, someone
steals it! Later at the airport, Neil recognizes the thief, who is
surprisingly apologetic and seems kind. He introduces himself as Del
Griffith, a shower curtain ring salesman who is constantly anxious and can't
keep quiet. 
Like magnets, Neil and Del keep coming together, almost as if fate won't let
them separate. They end up sitting next to each other on the plane, and even
end up sleeping in the same bed in the same hotel room that night. I won't
explain how that happens because it would kill the point of the comedy.
Hughes' story is so charming, and the acting so convincing we never once
question the reality of any of the plot devices.
The chemistry between Martin and Candy at times upstages Hughes' script and
direction, because it's a relationship that really can't be written. Candy's
happy-go-lucky attitude is countered by Martin's cynicism and acid tongue.
Consider the situation of the two being stuck in the same hotel room: while
Del enjoys a beer, Neil showers to a faulty water system and is left with
only a washcloth to dry himself with. And to top it off, the two must sleep
in the same bed soaked with beer because it didn't occur to Del that leaving
a six pack of beer on a vibrating bed might cause contents under pressure.
Even more hilarity ensues when the two wake up the next morning in one of the
funniest and most clever situations I've ever seen.
Why is fate so cruel to these poor guys? While at the hotel they are robbed,
then travel 30 miles in the freezing cold to a train station only to have the
train break down and then take a bus full of even more characters.
The last act is the best even though it takes place mostly in a car. The two
rent a car and try to drive home, but as if the comedy had not already been
off the wall, it becomes even more zany. Even dropping hints would 
give too much away, but let's just say whatever hasn't happened to Neil and
Del probably will by the film's end.
We'll probably never go through such wacky adventures as Neil and Del, but
"Planes, Trains, And Automobiles" is so fun to watch you'll wish the same
things would happen to you. 
[Note: This film could have been rated PG had it not been for a 1-minute
scene in which Martin's character rattles off the "F" word many times. The
film would be appropriate for children 13 and up.]
please visit Chad'z Movie Page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz

Title
Review for Bean (1997)
1997, PG-13, 90 minutes [1 hour, 30 minutes]
starring: Rowan Atkinson (Mr. Bean), Peter MacNicol (David Langley), Pamela
Reed (Alison Langley), Harris Yulin (George Grierson); written by Richard
Curtis, Robin Driscoll; produced by Tim Bevan, Eric Fellner; directed by Mel
Smith.
Seen Monday, November 17, 1997 at 7:20 p.m. at The Glenwood Movieplex Cinemas
(Oneida, N.Y.), theater #4, by myself for free (press pass). [Theater rating:
**1/2: fuzzy, dark picture, slightly uncomfortable seats, average sound.]
The problem with making a motion picture related to some kind of cult
following is that it usually doesn't adapt well to the mainstream. And it's
not that "Bean" fails because of this principle (although that has a lot to
do with it), it's just not a very funny, nor entertaining film to begin with.
Rowan Atkinson stars as Mr. Bean, the title character whose British
television series has been acclaimed by audiences around the world. The
premise to the show is simple: a slow-witted, almost mute man wanders around,
oblivious to world around him, and in the process creates for zany comedy.
What makes the show so good is the fact this simple concept makes for some of
the funniest comedy without becoming too lowbrow. It was really just a matter
of time before this was applied to a feature film and this is the net result.
Unfortunately, where the TV series works, the film fails. Bean's antics
don't work here  because, unlike the cartoony nature of the show, the film
establishes a relatively serious setting, therefore the character doesn't
keep with the atmosphere at all. 
Bean is about to be fired from his job as a security guard at a London art
museum, but the head of the board of directors won't let him go (for reasons
not well explained). When a Los Angeles art museum buys their most valued
painting (an American impressionist portrait they've had for years), they
decide to send Bean as their representative as either some kind of obscene
gesture to the Americans, or to show the head of the board what an idiot he
is, or both.
What ensues is a cross between a generic fish-out-of-water comedy, recycled
gags from the show that don't work out of their context, and ideas the show
probably threw away. Example of the first: Bean seeing an armed guard at the
airport and pretending he has a gun. A wild chase scene occurs and when they
tell him to "take out the weapon and place it on the floor," he does this
using his hand in the shape of a gun and is still arrested. Example of the
second: Bean trying to cheer up a sick kid on a plane and ends up popping a
vomit-filled bag over someone's head. Example of the third: Bean making silly
faces and doing a Dirty Harry impersonation for his passport photo. These
might sound funny on paper, but what actually shows up on the screen seems
pretty lame. There's just such a rigid contrast between Bean's eccentricity
and the realistic world around him, the jokes don't mesh will.
The film is virtually without plot, except a sub-plot involving the L.A.
museum's curator, David Langley (MacNicol), who invites Bean to stay with him
even though his wife Alison (Reed) decides to take the kids and leave five
minutes after Bean arrives. In fact, most of the film is MacNicol's, as the
story revolves around his character's attempt to make sure the unveiling of
the painting and the accompanying ceremony go smoothly. 
Of course Bean is a klutz and an idiot and ends up ruining the priceless
work of art. The scenes depicting this and showing his attempts to fix it are
set up through cliches and unbelievable plot devices. Bean's appeal lies in
his stupidity, therefore the scenes of him going to great lengths to restore
the painting seem all wrong. Some funny things do happen in the process, but
not nearly enough to make up for the mediocre screenplay.
But it is the last act that really kills the film. It plays like one of
those "serious" episodes of a sit-com, and what's worse is it's done in
questionable taste. Once again, Bean is mistaken for a doctor and somehow
ends up in a few scenes that seem very serious, but look like poor parodies
of "ER." The ending itself should be a ripping satire, but is just another
fish-out-of-water gag.
It's disappointing "Bean" is the empty comedy it is. This is just another
case of a good premise ruined by commercialism.


Title
Review for One Flew Over the Cuckoo's Nest (1975)
***1/2 (out of 4 = very good)
1975, R, 129 minutes [2 hours, 9 minutes]
[drama]
starring: Jack Nicholson (R.P. McMurphy), Louise Fletcher (Nurse Ratched),
William Redfield (Harding), Sydney Lassick (Cheswick), written by Lawrence
Hauben, Bo Goldman, produced by Saul Zaentz, directed by Milos Forman, based
on the novel by Ken Kesey and the play by Dale Wasserman.
Milos Forman's "One Flew Over The Cuckoo's Nest" is good, but it should be
great. It's based on a classic novel which means it should have a vivid,
powerful theme, but that forms only in passing. However, what we do get is an
enjoyable (and often hilarious) piece of strange human interaction with a
battle against authority.
Jack Nicholson stars as R.P. McMurphy, a convict who is sane, but has faked
insanity to be transferred from a prison work farm to a mental institution.
When he arrives he is surprised because his fellow inmates don't seem too
crazy. But McMurphy doesn't know how to deal with these people. When he tries
to treat them as fellow prisoners his lack of sensitivity makes for scenes
that are more funny than they are thematic.
McMurphy's fellow inmates include: Harding (Redfield), a relatively sane man
who cannot get over his wife's adultery; Cheswick (Lassick), a paranoid
neurotic who has no self-confidence; Tabor (Christopher Lloyd), a cynical
sadist who likes to cause trouble; Martini (Danny Devito), a man with the
personality of a 3-year-old; Billy (Brad Dourif), a young, stuttering
paranoid whose shyness makes him deathly afraid of his mother; and "Chief"
(Will Sampson), a large Native American who claims to be deaf and dumb. All
in all, an excellent supportive cast.
The film is basically the story of how authority can be organized,
calculated, and polished on the outside but still corrupt on the inside. The
head nurse, Miss Ratched (Fletcher), represents that kind of power. She is
completely unemotional and quiet, but her sternness comes across clearly.
It's not what she does or what she says, but the way she says things with
such totality. Unlike a prison warden, she does not use force to control her
patients, but a precise system of intimidation. For example, McMurphy begs
her to let them watch the World Series, but she says that would interrupt the
schedule. The inmates are such slaves to Ratched that even when it is put to
a vote (the first of two times), McMurphy loses. 
Little happens in terms of plot. Instead, Forman opts strictly for
atmosphere to establish theme. Subtle mind games between McMurphy and Ratched
start to occur and become the most crucial element of the film, but does not
go overboard. We also get scenes of basketball and card games that are  funny
because the inmates are so paranoid they usually end up fighting with each
other. McMurphy even hijacks the institution's bus and takes them all on a
fishing trip. He knows he won't get into any more trouble because he's just a
crazy nut - right?
Although the film does an excellent job of characterization, after a while,
the lack of organization becomes distracting. Some elements start to become
questionable. For example, McMurphy is in a medium security institution with
mostly voluntary patients which doesn't seem logical. Also, why do they
complain so much if they can leave whenever they want?
Perhaps mental instability is contagious, and if so, McMurphy, along with
the film, seems to become unbalanced throughout the last act. He has an
opportunity to escape, but decides to throw a going away party for the ward.
It certainly is interesting to see how the "mental defectives" respond to the
anarchy. But everything comes to a boiling point as Nurse Ratched's control
indirectly leads to the most absolute of all power - death.
"One Flew Over The Cuckoo's Nest" is good but has even more potential.
Because the film remains so lighthearted, the message isn't as poetic as it
should be, but it's still fun.         
please visit Chad'z Movie page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz

Title
Review for Analyze This (1999)
1999, R, 103 minutes [1 hour, 43 minutes]
Starring: Billy Crystal (Dr. Ben Sobel), Robert De Niro (Paul Vitti), Joe
Viterelli (Jelly), Lisa Kudrow (Laura MacNamara); written by Peter Tolan,
Harold Ramis, Ken Lonergan; produced by Jane Rosenthal, Paula Weinstein;
directed by Harold Ramis.
Seen March 5, 1999 at 7:40 p.m. at Hoyts Crossgates Cinema 18, theater #2,
with my brother John for free using my Hoyts critic's pass. [Theater rating:
***: good seats, sound and picture]
(author's note: this is the first review I've written since October 1998 when
I reviewed "Rush Hour." That was FIVE months ago... so if I'm a little rusty,
please bear with me.)
        Originality is something today's entertainment industry seems to be running
short on, so the new thinking seems to be "How many ideas can be recycled
without going overboard?" I think it's fair to say `Analyze This' is an
example of that thinking since its not exactly the most novel concept in the
world, but it still manages to be everything a good movie should be. Isn't
that the point of entertainment?
        The film's selling point is obviously its plot, its stars and the creative
forces behind it. We've seen a lot of crime movies starring Robert De Niro and
a lot of comedies starring Billy Crystal and of course veteran comic talent
Harold Ramis usually guarantees something good. But each's talent comes from a
different school... world even. Bringing big names together for the sake of it
is something Hollywood thrives on but doesn't necessarily succeed at (i.e.
`Heat'), so why should this movie be expected to work?
        Probably because everyone does what they do best, often stepping on the
other's toes just to upstage them and it works.
        The film tells the story of Dr. Ben Sobel (Crystal), a middle-aged
psychiatrist who lives and works in the burbs of New York City, and his
forced encounter with mob boss Paul Vitti (De Niro). Vitti's your typical
Mafia guy in a typical Mafia scenario surrounded by other typical Mafia guys
in a typical conflict about typical `family' betrayal and rivalry. 
        Ramis doesn't try too hard to disguise the obvious which is good because
otherwise the setting would immediately seem trite and cliched. He doesn't
waste our time by giving a lot of back story, instead we're just kind of
dropped in the middle of another `GoodFellas.' Within a few minutes or so
we've got an idea of a bitter war between Vitti and Primo Sindone (Chazz
Palminteri). There's some mention of some kind of big meeting coming up, which
does play a major role in the film, but Ramis and his fellow screenwriters
don't let it get too convoluted with the comedy.
        How Sobel and Vitti come together really isn't relevant, and it's another
obvious point the filmmakers know not to dwell on. What is relevant is the
interaction between the two characters, especially as portrayed by these two
fine actors.
        Both Crystal and De Niro are allowed to do their usual schticks for a while
and it's surprisingly effective. De Niro's Vitti is a bit more mature and calm
than those he's played in Martin Scorcese's films. Here, he gets to play a
`kinder, gentler' mobster with a bit of heart and soul (emphasis on `a bit').
After one of his elders is killed it actually saddens him, causing him to have
anxiety attacks, although he refuses to believe it despite medical evidence.
        Here's where the two come together and the initial confrontation is
interesting. Mobsters in the movies only believe what they want to hear and
people only tell them what they want to hear, so when Sobel begins telling
Vitti what his problems REALLY are, it's a breath of fresh air (or maybe I
should say nitrous oxide).
        The chemistry between the two is great. Both characters are secretly afraid
of each other despite their attempts to have macho facades. Vitti is afraid to
hear the truth and Sobel is just plain afraid of Vitti. The result is dozens
of funny scenes of each caricature trying to psych out the other. Imagine the
type of routine Crystal does at the Academy Awards interacting with a De Niro
character out of a Scorcese flick, except without the security of a blue
screen. Now image both men slightly possessed by Woody Allen - how funny is
that?
        Of course the whole film isn't just the two men freaking each other out. This
is a comedy about the mob so it definitely becomes the driving force of the
plot. In fact, the film's handling of the plot is one of its best aspects. It
plays its elements straight and realistic for the most part. If a mobster were
to suddenly become an integral part of a regular person's life, it probably
would have a huge effect of them. Since this is a comedy that effect is played
for laughs and always very well.
        Sobel is about to marry Laura MacNamara (Kudrow, in full `Phoebe
Buffay'-form), a Miami television journalist, but can't since Vitti and his
goons keep butting in. The goons, such as Jelly (Viterelli in a great
performance), are played strictly for laughs a la `The Simpsons.' The
atmosphere is enough to keep the satire cartoony enough for such a mainstream
film, but without going too far and becoming zany (okay, it is a little bit
zany but I liked it anyway).
        There's nothing genus or ground-breaking to `Analyze This,' but it never
really tries to be something it's not. Anyone can do a crime spoof or a fish-
out-of-water flick or violent crime movie, but not everyone can do all three
at once. That's what makes this film a fine investment of 103 minutes.
---------------------------------
Please visit Chad'z Movie Page @ 
http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz - Over 200 new and old films reviewed in
depth, not just blind ratings and quick capsules.
Member of The Online Film Critics Society
(www.ofcs.org)

Title
Review for I Know What You Did Last Summer (1997)
1997, R, 100 minutes [1 hour, 40 minutes]
starring: Jennifer Love Hewitt (Julie), Sarah Michelle Gellar (Helen), Ryan
Phillippe (Barry), Freddie Prinze Jr. (Ray); written by Kevin Williamson;
produced by Stokely Chaffin, Erik Feig, Neal H. Moritz; directed by Jim
Gillespie; based on the novel by Lois Duncan.
Seen Monday, November 3, 1997 at 9:20 p.m.Glenwood Movieplex Cinemas,
(Oneida, NY), theater #7 (theater rating: **1/2 - low volume, small screen,
slightly uncomfortable seats, theater not dark enough), by myself for free
(free press pass).
The horror genre, or more specifically, the slasher genre, is attempting at
a comeback whether we want it to or not. What's interesting this time around
is that, unlike the completely brain dead flicks of the 1970s and 80s, horror
films of today are written and presented with complete logic, which is
somewhat commendable. "I Know What You Did Last Summer" is a perfect example
of this as it's relatively plausible, but all the logic in the world can't
make up for using every cliche in the book.
The story starts off like any horror movie as we meet our main characters -
four GenXers living in a small fishing town on the North Carolina coast (none
of them have Southern accents though). The first 15 - 20 minutes rushes to
define the one-dimensional characters and establish some kind of back story. 
First there's Julie (Hewitt), the generic
strong-willed-girl-in-a-horror-movie. Then there's her friend Helen (Gellar),
the blonde bimbo, and her boyfriend Barry (Phillippe), the short-tempered
jock. There's also Julie's boyfriend Ray (Prinze Jr.), the quiet, sensitive
guy. Let's not forget Max (Johnny Galecki), the jealous outsider who will
become the first suspect once things get rolling. 
It's the fourth of July and after Helen wins a beauty contest, the four
drive out to the beach, drink a little, fool around, tell the urban legend of
"The Man With The Hook," and on the way back accidentally run over a man.
They realize if they go to the police they could be charged with
manslaughter, so they decide to throw the body into the ocean even though he
doesn't seem to be entirely dead (my first clue was when he opened his eyes
and tried to strangle them). Everything that had happened up to this point
had been believable and entertaining, but then you really have to wonder why
they believe their plan will work.
We then flashforward to one year later as Julie returns home from college
and receives an anonymous letter (hence the title). The four get together and
try to figure out who could have sent it. They're convinced it's Max, but the
most obvious suspect is always the first to die. 
The mid-section of the film showed promise. The gang does some detective
work which is quite interesting and realistic in the way they go about it
(using the Internet), and it seems like the killer (someone in a slicker and
rain hat with a hook but no face) might be a relative of the person they ran
over. But this is a horror film, not a mystery, and soon we're back to scenes
of the killer turning corners before the kids see him and hiding in shadows
and closets. The killer messes with their heads, often hurting them
physically, but doesn't always kill them. 
Much like he did with his screenplay to "Scream," writer Kevin Williamson
makes it seem like almost anyone could be the killer. Unfortunately, once we
realize this the cliches start kicking in full throttle, such as the killer
standing behind someone and killing them with hundreds of people around. Or
the chase scene where the killer walks, but the victim runs and never seems
to be able to get away. Then there's stuff that's idiotic such as when
regular people are killed, or the victim who tries to get into and out of a
building with locks on the inside!
The ending is the worst of the cliches - a supposedly suspense finale on a
fishing boat with lots of places to hide but nowhere to run. There's a fist
fight, a heroic rescue, and a revelation of the killer and their motives. In
the end justice is served.... or so it seems.
"I Know What You Did Last Summer" ultimately fails because it tries to have
the best of both worlds - as both a plausible horror film and a horrific
plausible film. But as they old saying goes, you can't have your cake and eat
it too.


Title
Review for Dark City (1998)
1998, R, 100 minutes [1 hour, 40 minutes]
Starring: Rufus Sewell (John Murdoch), William Hurt (Inspector Frank 
Bumstead), Keifer Sutherland (Dr. Daniel P. Schreber), Jennifer Connelly 
(Emma Murdoch/Anna); written by Lem Dobbs, David S. Goyer, Alex Proyas; 
produced by Andrew Mason, Alex Proyas; directed by Alex Proyas.
Seen May 31, 1999 on home video (rented).
        One of the best things about the movies is that they can make you 
really start to wonder and analyze things in your own, everyday life that you 
might not have thought much of otherwise. With some films it might be just a 
secondary issue, but with `Dark City' what we get is nearly an entire film 
committed to philosophizing and theorizing about human memory and how it 
defines who we are, which is a poignant theme made through an absolutely 
beautifully-constructed film with the kind of story and setting that could 
only happen in a movie.
        There's an old role-playing computer game called `Déja Vü' wherein 
the player takes on the role of a man who can't remember who he is, where he 
is and how he got there. The goal is to gather as many clues as possible to 
figure that out and along the way overcome a conflict. The premise to this 
film is not unlike that game, only this time we don't have control over the 
protagonist. 
        We begin by meeting a seemingly ordinary man living in an extremely 
dark and dirty city (actually, it's more than just the city, it's the whole 
reality) that isn't just that neo-Gothic look (a la `Batman,' `Blade 
Runner,'), but is so fully developed it's almost a different genre 
completely. Later he will learn that his name is John Murdoch (Sewell), but 
for now he has no idea what's going on other than the fact something is not 
right. The fact there's a dead body in the corner goes to enhance the feeling 
of paranoia and a mysterious, hurried call telling him to leave immediately 
is also very chilling.
        This opening scene alone goes a long way to define the setting of the 
film and its bizarre, horrific tone. The man doesn't know who he is nor where 
he's going and it's interesting to follow him since we the viewers have no 
idea either we can sympathize and identify with him. In fact, this is the way 
all stories begin since it's impossible to know the history of a character, 
their feelings, values, morals, etc. until after we've observed them for a 
while. But in this case, the total feeling of amnesia is an excellent tool 
towards characterization, developing the mood and outlining the story.
        Eventually, some semblance of a plot begins to unfold as it appears 
that John is a serial killer wanted by the police. We met Inspector Frank 
Bumstead (Hurt), a quiet, unemotional, soft-spoken deadpan man who appears to 
have been on the trail of the killer for some time. Two other important 
characters are also introduced: Dr. Daniel P. Schreber (Sutherland), a 
neurotic psychiatrist who claims to be John's doctor; and Emma Murdoch 
(Connelly), a jazz singer dolled up to look like a caraciture right out of 
the old Dick Tracy serials or any given leading lady of the old film-noir 
movies. It was Schreber who contacted John for reasons that are continually 
revealed throughout the course of the film. He also contacts Emma, which 
further helps the film reveal what is seemingly a complex, mysterious back 
story.
        But absolutely nothing is as it appears to be in `Dark City,' which 
is what makes it so fascinating throughout its continual scenes of confusion 
and vertigo. Everything the filmmakers want us to see has some significance - 
considering how intricate the detail is to every single shot, its lighting, 
art direction and overall production design, they don't seem to be able to 
afford any gratuities. However, that might also be what's keeping it from 
reaching its maximum potential. 
        By continuing to follow John as he wanders around this strange place, 
so much unlike the real world we know, we come to realize that it's all a 
hoax. Everyone in the city is the subject of an experiment being conducted by 
a race of aliens to understand what makes humans tick in their efforts to 
somehow save themselves from extinction. But, as the film's tagline says, 
`Last night, one of us went off.'
        For reasons that are never clearly explained, it appears that John 
possesses telekinetic powers to can do pretty much whatever his mind can 
conceive (a process known as `tuning'). The aliens, which look like very old 
bald human men with pasty skin, also possess the power en masse and use it to 
change the city every night at midnight. At the same time all the humans fall 
asleep and after the changes are made, they awake and either continue where 
they left off or begin a new life they have no idea they did not have until 
then.
        This premise certainly is interesting and director and 
co-screenwriter Alex Proyas is able to keep the film consistently mysterious 
in this regard. He does provide some explanations such as that Dr. Schreber 
is an assistant to `The Strangers' because he somehow could synthesize memory 
into chemical form. The aliens mix and match the memories of the city's 
population to see who will change and who will not. In the process this 
creates for a good deal of deep, thought-provoking philosophies that could be 
applied to the real world.
        However, where the film errs is by not playing up the idea of memory 
versus the human heart as to what makes a person who he or she is. The main 
characters are all closely intertwined within the seemingly complex murder 
mystery which never actually happened, yet when they start to go through some 
of the expected emotions it comes off as distant, static and cold (mediocre 
performances by Hurt and Connelly don't help either). For example, John 
realizes Emma is not and probably never was his wife so he does not feel an 
emotional bond to her, yet in some scenes crucial to the film's plot, we are 
expected to believe they do have a genuine love for each other, which is also 
part of the film's climax and ending.
        And that's what Proyas seems to be inferring with the film, but never 
quite manages to convey in its fullest sense. Ironically, this is what made 
his first film `The Crow' work so well, which had a similar theme of 
struggling to find hope and the human spirit within a nearly identical, dark 
twisted world. With `Dark City' the messenger seems to be mistaken for the 
message.
        Still, the film is by no means bad and is consistently entertaining 
and enjoyable. There's a lot to like here, most notably the sheer visual look 
and style of it all which accounts for at least half the reasons the film is 
able to tell the story it does. The story as a whole is one of the most 
original to come out of Hollywood in years. `Dark City' is what the movies 
are all about - the escape from the real world.
---------------------------------
Please visit Chad'z 
Movie Page
 - over 220 new and old movies reviewed in-depth, not just blind ratings 
and blather capsules.
Member of The O.F.C.S. (Online Film 
Critics Society)

Title
Review for Man in the Iron Mask, The (1998)
Chad'z rating: ** (out of 4 = fair/below average)
1998, PG-13, 130 minutes [2 hours, 10 minutes]
starring: Leonardo DiCaprio (King Louis XIV, Philippe), Jeremy Irons (Aramis),
 John Malkovich (Athos), Gérard Depardieu (Porthos), Gabriel Byrne
 (D'Artagnan); produced by Russ Smith, Randall Wallace; written and directed by
 Randall Wallace; based on the novel "L'homme au masque de fer" by Alexandre
 Dumas pčre.
Seen March 14, 1998 at 9 p.m. at Mohawk Mall Cinemas (Niskayuna, NY), theater
 #3, with my sister Jena for free using my Sony/Loews critic's pass. [Theater
 rating: **1/2: excellent sound, good picture, poor seats]
        Both critics and audiences alike have scolded Hollywood for monotony and lack
 of originality. Perhaps the reason filmmakers feel the need to turn works of
 literary classics and/or legends into modern movies is a form of penance,
 because if they can't come up with new ideas they can at least use long-loved
 ones as a guarantee for success... in theory. "The Man In The Iron Mask" is
 such a mediocre piece of filmmaking that it not only disproves said theory,
 but goes to show how even the most skilled of filmmakers can go wrong with the
 most basic of concepts.
        The film starts off in traditional "period piece" fashion with the generic
 rhetoric about its setting - something to do with the story of the "Three
 Musketeers," combined with some information about the infamous King Louis XIV
 - a young, greedy, arrogant king who didn't care much about who or what he
 ruled, just as long as he had the power. Leonardo DiCaprio stars here as this
 king, always with a gentle voice and manner which is probably realistic, but
 portrays the character in an extremely stiff way. He seems quite lost here,
 almost to the point of boredom.
        No time is wasted in establishing the story's key elements. Within a few
 minutes we meet our main characters and are given minimal amounts of
 characterization, which will become the film's biggest flaw. All information
 about King Louis is provided in the prologue, or simply implied, so the sense
 of an antagonist or even a conflict feels weak. We then meet our so-called
 heroes: Aramis (Irons), the king's high priest and leader of a silent
 rebellion against him; Athos (Malkovich), a retired musketeer who has the
 film's only emotional sense, that is, his love and honor for his (dead) son;
 Porthos (Depardieu), a bumbling womanizer who provides for lame comic relief;
 and D'Artagnan (Byrne), general of the king's army who will be torn between
 his loyalty to the king and his long-time friends. To say the characters are
 going through the motions is an understatement, especially as portrayed by
 such a talented cast who never give them any definition or texture beyond what
 is required by the script. Like DiCaprio, they seem lost and bored with this
 picture, and the bland direction certainly doesn't help.
        The actual plot involves Aramis' "brilliant" plan to replace the king with
 his identical twin brother Philippe (DiCaprio in a dual role), with whom he
 was separated at birth, lived in the country for 16 years, and has spent the
 last six years in a terrible prison forced to wear an iron mask. The problem
 is this idea is not hatched until the second hour as the first hour is spent
 trying to show how vile the king is, but the story offers nothing new or
 interesting. The king uses a woman for sex and forces her fiancée to die
 "honorably" in the army. The people of Paris are starving to death, but he
 doesn't seem to care. Yes, these two examples should provide us with enough
 reason to hate him, build suspense, and provide for an exciting, action-packed
 finale, but it just doesn't happen.
        Most of the blame falls on writer/director Randall Wallace. As is the case
 all too frequently today, Wallace falls into the Jeckyl and Hyde category - as
 he is responsible for penning the Oscar-winning "Braveheart," and yet fails to
 take a clue from his previous work. The dialogue is too highbrow or
 "Shakesperian-esque" for a modern movie, therefore the actors sound like they
 are reading lines from a script based on a classic novel. 
        The general organization of the story works, but the important details are
 missing or dealt with too quickly. The proof of this is in the conflict itself
 - of course the musketeers free the man in the iron mask  and offer him the
 chance to be king, but they never state a reason why he should accept the
 offer and what this will mean in the long run (Philippe himself brings this
 up, but their answer is more of the boring rhetoric that explains almost every
 conflict in the story). I kept waiting for someone to say something along the
 lines of, "You'll take his place and slowly change from a bad king to a good
 king and everyone will live happily ever after" but this is never hinted at
 until the very end, and by then it's too late.
        I'm sure "The Man In The Iron Mask" is meant to be a light-spirited,
 swashbuckling adventure, but it's difficult to see it as such due to the
 boring story and lack of swashbuckling altogether. In fact, I'd classify the
 film as a straight drama on this basis, and if that doesn't go to show where
 and how much the film goes wrong, I don't know what will.
Please visit Chad'z Movie Page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz - over 190
 new and old films reviewed in depth, not just blind ratings and quick
 capsules. Also, check out The FIRST Shay Astar Web Page @
 http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz/ShayAstar.html

Title
Review for Piano, The (1993)
**1/2 (out of 4 = OK)
1993, R, 121 minutes [2 hours, 1 minute]
[drama]
starring: Holly Hunter (Ada), Harvey Kietel (Baines), Sam Neill (Stewart),
Anna Paquin (Flora), produced by Jan Chapman, written and directed by Jane
Campion.
"The Piano" is a good movie but not a great movie. Taking into consideration
the elements that make up this film, it's not much more than a Victorian soap
opera, full of passion, seduction, sex, and violence. It's interesting and
well acted, but the elements that make it up and push it along aren't
anything special.
The setting is 18th Century New Zealand with Holly Hunter starring as Ada, a
pale but beautiful widow who has been arranged to marry someone she has never
seen in a country she has never been to. She also brings along her daughter
Flora (Paquin), who provides for some of the film's best moments.
Ada cannot talk, she speaks through sign language and by playing her piano.
But Stewart (Neill), her new husband, won't let her bring it into the house.
The piano is the major plot element and metaphor for just about everyone and
everything in this film. It shows how music reflects and defines mood and
attitude. When Ada is happy she plays a flowing, beautiful song, and when she
is angry she slams the keys and hits the deep notes.
Stewart is a shy and withdrawn man, he is not cruel, but he just doesn't
know how to handle the situation. His co-worker Baines (Keitel) is the
typical brute with a heart of gold, he can't read but he does understand what
art and beauty are. When he hears Ada's piano he adores the music and buys it
from Stewart and agrees to sell it back to Ada one key at a time if she
teaches him how to play. 
As Ada tries to play for Baines, he keeps making sexual demands. This
element is definitely erotic because of what it doesn't show, as it is an era
when woman wore layers of clothes - just getting one layer off would excite a
man. This is the kind of passion we don't usually get to see, and Campion
films with careful craftsmanship and detail.
The way that Hunter portrays this character, it doesn't seem like Ada likes
Baines. She is just using him to get her piano back, so they're both being
shallow. But when she does get it back, she throws herself at him and they
make love. I was totally confused, it seemed like she hated him, now she
loves him? 
Then the story becomes a glamorous soap opera as Stewart finds out about Ada
and Baines and spies on them. He chops off one of Ada's fingers and sends it
to Baines via Flora. The ending is predictable and not very appealing.
Overall, "The Piano" was somewhat enjoyable, very well acted, but much too
eloquent in its attitude.

Title
Review for Fugitive, The (1993)
**** (out of 4 = excellent)
1993, PG-13, 133 minutes [2 hours, 13 minutes]
[thriller]
starring: Harrison Ford (Dr. Richard Kimble), Tommy Lee Jones (Deputy Sam
Gerard, U.S. Marshall), Joe Pantoliano (Cosmo Renfo), Daniel Roebuck (Biggs),
written by Jeb Stuart, David Twohy, produced by Arnold Kopelson, directed by
Andrew Davis.
"The Fugitive" is probably one of the greatest thrillers ever made. It takes
realistic, believable characters and tells an exciting story that's totally
believable throughout. This isn't an over-the-top action flick for the sake
of action, this is an intelligent adventure story with a real sense of
mystery to it and it works perfectly. 
Harrison Ford stars as Dr. Richard Kimble, a man who is wrongly accused and
convicted of murdering his wife. The entire premise of the story revolves
around this murder, but is not told in a straightforward manner. We
constantly see flashbacks to the murder from Kimble's perspective. Hints are
dropped from various times of the night Kimble's wife, Helen (Sela Ward) was
murdered. We don't get to see who the killer is until much further into the
story. In fact, we might even have a little doubt about Kimble's innocence
ourselves.
The film doesn't spend much time on the details of Kimble's trial and
conviction as it is not the point of the story. One of the greatest action
scenes ensues as we get a botched escape attempt by his fellow inmates which
leads to a fantastic train wreck. But it does not at all seem gratuitous or
formulated, it is actually suspenseful to watch. This movie is so incredible
because it's able to take elements like these and make them wholly original
and believable.
Tommy Lee Jones almost steals the show as Deputy Sam Gerard, a U.S. Marshall
who is an expert in hunting fugitives. From the moment he appears we know a
huge game of cat and mouse is about to occur. Kimble and Gerard are equally
matched as there is no way to tell how one is going to outsmart the other.
Most of the film deals with Richard's complex investigation as he tries to
find the one-armed man who killed his wife. Ford does not have a lot of lines
here, so it is Stuart and Twohy's script and Davis's outstanding direction
that make the film as great as it is. Just watching Richard use his keen
intelligence and wits, disguising himself, and doing his own detective work
is very interesting. We know just as little as he does as to why his wife was
killed, so as he learns more so do we.
Meanwhile Gerard and his staff are using all their skills to hunt him down.
At one point they run into each other and a great chase ensues, but Richard
is just too smart for them. He leaves clues for Gerard to show his innocence
and to help him solve the mystery.
One of the greatest charms to the film is its sense of humor. There is a
great sense of comradeship between Gerard and his two closest deputies Cosmo
Renfo (Pantoliano) and Biggs (Roebuck). They are trying to catch what they
believe to be a dangerous murderer, yet they constantly start up small talk
with each other, making funny wisecracks and one-liners, but not in any kind
of distracting manner.
The final act concludes with another terrific chase. Richard figures out who
the killer is and confronts him, and although we get a typical fight scene,
the case is far from solved. The man who ordered the murder has been under
our nose all along, and we don't realize this until the end when both Richard
and Gerard put the pieces together. Maybe the finally scene is a bit much,
but it still has a believable atmosphere to it. We're so relieved when
justice is served.
It's not the plot is that makes "The Fugitive" great, it's all the motions
the characters go through to make for an intriguing story. Watching a
seemingly average man go through as much as this is what makes the movie so
adventurous. If only Hollywood could produce more movies like this.         
(10/31/96) (1/29/97) (6/13/97) [see also: "Nick Of Time"]
please visit Chad'z Movie Page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz/index.html

Title
Review for Batman & Mr. Freeze: SubZero (1998) (V)
Chad'z Rating: ** (out of 4 = fair/below average)
1998, no MPAA rating, 67 minutes [1 hour, 7 minutes]
Starring: Michael Ansara (voice of Mr. Freeze/Dr. Victor Fries), Loren Lester 
(voice of Robin/Dick Grayson), Mary Kay Bergman (voice of Barbara 
Gordon/Batgirl), Kevin Conroy (voice of Batman/Bruce Wayne); written by Boyd 
Kirkland, Randy Rogel; produced and directed by Boyd Kirkland; based on the 
television series `Batman: The Animated Series' and characters appearing in 
DC comic books; Batman created by Bob Kane
Seen June 1, 1999 on home video (rented)
[critic's note: this film was not produced with the intention of a theatrical 
release and therefore went straight to home video, although it may have been 
show on television.]
        Anyone who knows something about the modern comic book industry knows 
that no other single character has had more comic series and specials than 
Batman. Unfortunately, as is the case with a lot of mass production, the 
quality can't always be pinnacle and the result is often gratuitous, weak 
meaningless stories told because they can be, which `Batman & Mr. Freeze: 
SubZero' is the equivalent of in terms of an animated motion picture. It's a 
product produced just because it could be and the lack of effort is clear.
        There really isn't too much to say about the film because there's 
hardly anything to it. It's a direct-to-video movie obviously intended for 
parents to buy their children, but it's also based on a television series 
which is most certainly not your average kid's cartoon. The show is as dark 
as an Alex Proyas film with an equal amount of artistic styling and very 
smart teleplays. But this movie has very little to do with the series itself 
and at times feels like the producers threw together a bunch of unused clips 
and added in a few new scenes to tie them all together.
        In fact, the movie is so dependent upon the fact it's a spin-off from 
the show, it doesn't take the time to define any back story which is why it 
never succeeds for all the reason the show does.
        It starts off simple enough, we're shown a man living in the arctic 
with an Eskimo boy and his cryogenically frozen wife. For the 
Batman-ignorant, his name is Victor Fries (Ansara), a/k/a `Mr. Freeze' - one 
of Batman's supervillains whose power is based on ultra coldness, and he has 
a cool gun that can spray ice for hundreds of feet at anything (that gun 
never seems to run out of ammo, and they never explain how it's powered 
either). His secluded home is accidentally invaded by a submarine crew which 
also destroys the casing of his frozen wife, Nora, who suffers from a rare 
blood disorder. Freeze winds up in Gotham City and forces Dr. Gregory Belson 
(voiced by George Dzundza) into helping her. The doctor is a shady character 
with a serious credit problem and helps out Freeze because he is told he'll 
be rewarded soundly.
        The real problem ensues when it turns out that the only available 
match of the rare blood type and necessary organs is Barbara Gordon 
(Bergman), the daughter of James Gordon (voiced by Bob Hastings) - Gotham's 
Police Commissioner. Also for the Batman-uninformed, Barbara Gordon just 
happens to be Batgirl and the girlfriend of Dick Grayson (Lester) - a/k/a 
Robin.
        It's not too difficult to tell where this story's going to go and 
what the net result of mixing all the appropriate characters in such a 
convenient plot will be. Superhero stories rely on these kind of coincidences 
on top of coincidences both for story and for comedy, but neither of those is 
resulted here. Instead, it's just a lot of scenes of Mr. Freeze trying to 
capture Barbara Gordon, then Mr. Freeze arguing with the doctor, then Batman 
(Conroy) and Robin trying to locate Mr. Freeze's secret lair while Babs makes 
several unsuccessful escape attempts.
        The film has a very cyclical feeling. To say it's predictable is an 
understatement. And given the fact it's only a 67-minute-long movie doesn't 
help much either.
        There's just so much more room for expansion here. Why not delve into 
Mr. Freeze's history a little for those who aren't familiar? Maybe we could 
feel a little sympathy for him because he certainly does seem to be concerned 
about his wife who is nothing more than a popsicle the entire film. Why not 
play up the connection between Freeze and Dr. Belson a little more? Why would 
such a supposedly respectful doctor be such a goon? And why not actually 
stick to the title and show Batman [for more than just the ending]? The comic 
books and the cartoon program have gone to extreme lengths to show that 
Batman is not just a guy who punches out the bad guys, but that he's an 
extremely intelligent detective who more often than not relies on brain over 
brawn. To show him as only the typical superhero who goes against all the 
odds and performs the fantastic stunts is fine to placate to children, but I 
don't think children would be too excited watching him do his thing since the 
story is so thin and light. A climax after only 20-odd minutes of actually 
storytelling is quite boring.
        I hate to rag on `Batman & Mr. Freeze: SubZero,' because it's not 
meant to be taken very seriously, at least not by anyone over age 10. It just 
doesn't seem like something the people behind the show would come up with 
considering all the material they have to work with. They do succeed in one 
aspect by making the film absolutely beautiful to look at, but with such 
resources available at their disposal, why not at least make something worth 
watching more than once?
---------------------------------
Please visit Chad'z 
Movie Page
 - over 220 new and old movies reviewed in-depth, not just blind ratings 
and blather capsules.
Member of The O.F.C.S. (Online Film 
Critics Society)

Title
Review for Whipped (1999)
If you ever read an issue of "Maxim," "G.Q." or "Playboy" you'd probably 
think all men are single studs who occupy most of their time with either 
fashion, money or scoring with chicks. "Whipped" is like the filmed version 
of those magazines. I didn't think these kinds of guys actually existed, but 
this film goes a long way to show they do and the result is a funny but kind 
of frightening story. 
The movie has all the makings of an indie flick - no name stars (except 
Amanda Peet), shot mostly indoors with mediocre lighting and only five 
central characters who push the story along by their dialogue alone. It's 
also very honest and unapologetic in its depiction of the characters, 
especially the three male leads who curse up a storm and whose sole purpose 
for living is to have sex with as many women as possible. 
Those guys are Brad, Zeke and Jonathon. Brad's a suave Wall Street guy who 
can schmooze women in trendy bars and clubs. Zeke's a coffeehouse hermit who 
doesn't seem to have a job besides writing screenplays. He picks up women 
right off the street and says he almost always gets some on the first (and 
usually last) date. Jonathon's the more sensitive guy who'd rather have 
something of a connection first but deep down he's just as horny and perverse 
as the other two. There's also Eric, the married guy of the group who's been 
ostracized because of that. When the guys get together every Sunday morning 
for brunch and swap sex stories, they don't want to hear Eric's because they 
know his wife and don't want to picture it. For a bunch of horndogs they have 
a lot of Freudian issues - they view women mostly as sex objects but if and 
when they're in a relationship women suddenly are people who must be 
respected by the other guys. 
Within the film's opening five minutes these guys come off as sexist pigs and 
I was afraid all the men in this picture were going to be depicted as such. 
After all they're all New York City residents and are caught up in the high 
life and trendiness of the city. They call themselves "scammers" in that 
they'll make up any lie to get a woman in to bed as quickly as possible. And 
they do it so easily because they are so comfortable with their atmosphere 
and their lifestyles (as opposed to the guys in "Swingers" in Los Angeles). 
After one or two Sunday brunch scenes the guys all swap stories of a special 
girl they met who they didn't "rail" or "smoke" yet because they like her. 
When each guy chides the other for not scoring they become genuinely offended 
because they don't want to think of the girl as just another slutty chick 
they met. The problem is the guys don't know they've all met the same woman, 
a cute young lady named Mia played by the adorable Amanda Peet. She radiates 
charm in everything she does, especially with that Julia Roberts-type smile 
with the pouty lips and extra teeth. Mia is a charmer - she's sweet, smart 
and sexy in a relaxed, passive way. The guys do most of the "work" with the 
relationship and conversation and she simply responds, she doesn't initiate. 
Not surprisingly the three dudes' friendship is torn apart by the fact they 
all like the same woman and none of them refuses to stop seeing her. Mia 
likes them all so much she can't choose and agrees to date all three 
simultaneously. It's an interesting idea and the second and third acts show 
how each guy tries to one-up the others behind their backs and each tries to 
be the best in bed with her as possible. 
The screenplay does a fine job in filling up the running time with a lot of 
comical moments each guy goes through with Mia, such as Jonathon snooping 
through her medicine cabinet and ending up doing a toilet dive not unlike 
that infamous scene in "Trainspotting." Zeke and Mia have a funny debate over 
which condoms to buy at a drug store - the ones for her pleasure or his. Brad 
gets the least screen time with Mia and they don't have that many funny 
scenes together. It seems the director has a hard time establishing any new 
ground for the character outside of his sex-obsessed personality. 
This idea of sharing a woman isn't some twisted sexual amalgam - they're not 
swingers or orgy guys or members of any of those underground sexual realms. 
It's a familiar idea that, coincidentally, Amanda Peet has been a part of 
before. There was an episode of "Seinfeld" in which she guest-starred as a 
girl Jerry asked out and when he picked her up saw she was living with a guy 
who didn't seem to mind she was going out with another guy. She later dumped 
that dude for Jerry but Jerry couldn't keep up with her so he enlisted the 
help of George and the two kind of split the job of the boyfriend ("Each of 
us would only half to be a half-man" said George). 
"Whipped" kind of toys with this notion of three guys splitting the job of 
the boyfriend but it's not the theme or the point of the film. It's a really 
vulgar, no-holds-barred character sketch of modern men. The black comedy is 
as cold as it can be without being absurd. Eventually something has to give 
way and it does as the film segues into the last act. 
Everyone winds up getting hurt in most relationships, and the more intense 
they are the more it hurts. There's a lot of pain to be emphasized with as 
the story wraps up, but it's in that black comedy kind of way so it's hard to 
tell how seriously we're supposed to take it. It's something Neil LaBute 
could pull off but rookie writer/producer/director Peter M. Cohen only hits 
the nail about halfway in. He's more interested in making a point than making 
a good movie about the characters. It's kind of betraying in a way because 
even though the guys are pretty unlikable characters at the core they start 
to show real signs of growth and maturity that Mia has brought out of them. 
In the end all we're left with is the message that everyone's a slut whether 
they realize it or not. 
After seeing "Whipped" I think there's more of those "Maxim" guys out there 
than I could have guessed, that's scary. 
You can also read this review at: 
http://www.epinions.com/mvie-review-305C-4938892-39D29E91-prod1 
And other reviews on the same topic at: http://www.epinions.com/mvie 
Check out my profile page at: http://www.epinions.com/user-chad9976 
*****
Chad'z Movie Page is back! 
In-depth reviews of nearly all mainstream films playing at your local 
cineplex. There's also reviews of a few classic films and some of your 
personal favorites.

Title
Review for From Dusk Till Dawn (1996)
**1/2 (out of 4 = OK)
1996, R, 108 minutes [1 hour, 48 minutes]
[action/horror]
Starring: George Clooney (Seth Gecko), Harvey Keitel (Pastor Jacob Fuller),
Juliette Lewis (Kate Fuller), Quentin Tarantino (Richie Gecko), Ernest Liu
(Scott Fuller), written by Robert Kurtzman, Quentin Tarantino, produced by
Gianni Nunnari, Meir Teper, directed by Robert Rodriguez.
"From Dusk Till Dawn" is one of the most bizarre films I've ever seen, but
it's also one of the most original films I've ever seen. The basic premise to
the movie is, "What if the tough criminals from brutal crime films found
themselves trapped in a cliche, grotesque, horror flick?" The answer should
be a great satire, but instead all we get is a violent bloodbath with
vampires, bikers, a preacher's family, and Tarantino-style thieves.
Robert Rodriguez and Quentin Tarantino are two of the most promising
writer/directors working today. Rodriguez has a great sense of action and
adventure, and doesn't usually rely on cliches to tell his stories (i.e. "El
Mariachi"). Tarantino is a master of uncanny dialogue and great crime stories
(i.e. "Pulp Fiction"). The two come together pretty well: we get a bit of the
pulp crime genre, combined with a lot of action, but this time both wander
into uncharted territory when they approach the horror genre.
The film opens in traditional western/crime style with a liquor store
robbery that goes awry when one of the two robbers can't control himself.
George Clooney and Quentin Tarantino star as Seth and Richie Gecko, two
cliche thieves-on-the-run who happen to be brothers. Seth is the older,
smarter brother in charge, while Richie is the mentally unbalanced,
trigger-happy, adult brat. The casting of these two is strange as neither can
really pass for a mass-murdering, vile criminal. They just don't have the
basic look at all, they are too likable.
The first half of the film is quite enjoyable even though little happens. The
Gecko brothers kidnap a pastor and his two children, and force them to drive
them to the Mexican border. At this point we're not really sure whether to
hope they escape the law, or to hope the family escapes them. Harvey Keitel
co-stars as Jacob Fuller, a Christian pastor who seems to have lost his faith
in God, and only a little explanation is given as to why he has had a sudden
change of heart. In an earlier scene he briefly discusses it with his
daughter Kate (Lewis) and adopted son Scott (Liu). This is the same type of
character as Father Karras in "The Exorcist," and is used in the same manner,
so that everything comes down to his faith.
The group find themselves waiting in a Mexican strip club for tough bikers,
which has fight scenes written all over it. And then the film turns on a dime
and becomes a bizarre horror flick as all the strippers turn into demons and
vampires and a huge orgy of fighting and bloodshed ensues. Everything had
been relatively normal and a creative up until this point, so the sudden
shift is like a punch in the face. Absolutely no explanation is given as to
why this supernatural element takes over a seemingly normal reality. Are we
actually supposed to be excited because now it's a battle of who is the
toughest - criminals or vampires?
That question really can't be answered because even though we had spent the
first half getting to know the Gecko brothers and the Fuller family, we
hardly recognize them once they become pawns in a cross between a bad horror
movie, and a mindless action flick.
Horror movies are essentially all the same, and this one isn't much
different. The characters find themselves trapped, surrounded by evil, and of
course start to turn on each other. Eventually they team up and escape, but
only two of them come out alive. 
It seems strange to discuss "From Dusk Till Dawn" in terms of plot because
it's really two movies in one. I don't know why such talented filmmakers
would dabble with such strange elements. Maybe the whole thing was really
just a personal experiment to see what happens when they mix things up. The
result could have been brilliant, but perhaps the instructions weren't clear
enough. 
(1/11/97) (1/29/97) (6/13/97) [see also: "Natural Born Killers"]
please visit Chad'z Movie page @
http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz/index.html

Title
Review for 4 Little Girls (1997)
Chad'z rating: **1/2 (out of 4 = OK/average)
1997, no MPAA rating, 102 minutes [1 hour, 42 minutes]
Produced by  Spike Lee, Sam Pollard; directed by Spike Lee.
Seen January 18, 1998 on home video (a special copy and press kit sent to me
from Bazan Entertainment Marketing).
        More often than not, documentary filmmakers are able to make their points and
themes by simply stating the facts and allowing the viewer to grasp the
intended concepts. Perhaps why "4 Little Girls" falls just short of greatness
is due to the fact that director Spike Lee tries to encompass so many things
that the impact of the theme is weakened in the shuffle.
        The film's title refers to four young girls who were innocent victims of a
terrorist bombing of a Baptist church in the racially-heated Birmingham,
Alabama of 1963. The opening sequence shows the graves of the girls while a
sad song about them is played. We're shown authentic photographs of the girls
- always smiling and laughing, and it's easy to feel sympathetic even though
we don't know anything about them. 
        Family and friends of the girls begin to tell stories about them, of how much
they loved them, but also of the tense, racist environment they grew up in.
One father compares not being able to tell his daughter he couldn't buy her
lunch at a white-only restaurant with the equivalent of smashing her head with
a rock himself. Other such stories are told, and you can sense the pain in the
eyes of these people 40 years after the incident. 
        The stories and images give the film a powerful, gripping atmosphere.
However, this tight storytelling is weakened severely as the direction starts
to wander with little synchronization. Within a few minute timespan, the focus
of the girls as individuals is lost and instead shifted to a broader spectrum.
I hesitate to describe the depiction of the civil rights movement and the
oppression blacks suffered in the 1950s and 60s as "generic," but I can think
of no other way to describe it. Lee uses the standard stock footage that has
been used in every other documentary of the sort: the hosing of peaceful
marchers; the police brutality, etc. Although these images are still moving
yet disturbing, they don't seem to be adding up to anything within the context
of the film. For example: we continue to meet more people who were somehow
associated with the girls, but when they talk about the racist sheriff and
Gov. George Wallace - neither of whom had anything to do with the bombing, it
doesn't seem significant.
        Actually, it's not so much that those images and direction don't seem
relevant, it's that they only skim the surface of something much bigger.
Anyone who has studied U.S. history knows the struggles against racism blacks
endured (and still do today), but the film's problem is it essentially assumes
the viewer is an expert in that area. Only a few stories of first-hand racism
are told while the stock footage is shown, and it's clear much more could, and
should be said.
        Eventually, the bombing incident is brought into the whole scheme and the
film again presents it on a more personal level. Important news figures and
celebrities comment on the situation and finally the point comes across: the
bombing of the church and the killing of the four little girls was the turning
point in the civil rights movement. The irony of it all is that the bombing
was meant to do just the opposite, and this point partially re-lights the
film's fire.
        We do learn that one of the killers was brought to justice, a violent racist
whose name was "Dynamite Bob." Plenty of people describe him as a horrific
villain, but never really give examples. In fact, this is symbolic of how the
film works in establishing the evil atmosphere and mentality which lead the
death of four innocent people: it never really answers the who and why
question, which is: who could do such an atrocious thing and why? 
        Even though the themes to "4 Little Girls" are slightly weaker than intended,
they are still important. I could certainly sympathize with the tragedy of it
all, but as a film it could have been better.
Please visit Chad'z Movie Page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz - over 180
new and old films reviewed in depth, not just blind ratings and quick
capsules. Also, check out The FIRST Shay Astar Web Page @
http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz/ShayAstar.html

Title
Review for Dumb & Dumber (1994)
*** (out of 4 = good)
1994, PG-13, 110 minutes [1 hour, 50 minutes]
[comedy]
starring: Jim Carrey (Lloyd Christmas), Jeff Daniels (Harry Dunn) Lauren
Holly (Mary Swanson), produced by Charles B. Wessler, Brad Krevoy, Steve
Stabler, written by Peter and Bobby Farrelly, Bennett Yellin, directed by
Peter Farrelly.
I've seen some pretty funny movies, but "Dumb And Dumber" is one of the
funniest I've seen in a long time. This is not your typical comedy, it's
almost like a live action cartoon, but it's funny because it's so off the
wall and it works. 
Jim Carrey and Jeff Daniels are perfectly cast as Lloyd Christmas and Harry
Dunn, a pair of bumbling idiots who struggle to survive and are oblivious to
the world around them. Lloyd is a limo driver who falls in love when he
drives the sassy Mary Swanson (Holly) to the airport, and notices that she
left a briefcase in the terminal. 
But since this is a commercial comedy there has to be a plotline of sorts,
which involves animal kidnappers to whom Mary was dropping off a ransom. Of
course Lloyd doesn't know this, and grabs the briefcase before the goons can
pick it up. One thing leads to another and eventually our heroes find
themselves being pursued across the country by two criminals, who they
constantly outwit and don't even know it.
The road trip has always been a staple storyline for comedies, which comes
into play here as the idiots travel from Providence, Rhode Island to Aspen,
Colorado. But the plot is really just a backdrop, the film is about these
crazy and hysterical jokes, such as Lloyd selling a dead parakeet to a blind
child, urinating in empty beer bottles (you can just guess where that joke is
going), and being so ridiculously stupid around normal people that it almost
becomes a sociological commentary.
It's difficult to convey the level of stupidity of this film. Usually
all-out idiocy like this doesn't work well, but these aren't recycled jokes,
they are unlike anything I've seen before. This film made me laugh right up
until the end.
Eventually the two make it to Aspen and open the briefcase, which contains a
cool million in cash, and you can just imagine what these guys will buy with
that much money. The balance between the plot and cause of jokes is handled
quite well because it doesn't try to take itself too seriously, and it
doesn't throw away the storylines that had been built up either.
"Dumb And Dumber" is not exactly the most intelligent comedy, but it isn't
bad at all. Just when we think these idiots couldn't be any stupider they
prove us wrong. Still, for all its idiocy I found myself laughing a lot, and
I don't usually find such lowbrow humor to be all that funny. I'll bet we're
all as stupid as Lloyd and Harry, we've just been conditioned by society not
to show it.
please visit Chad'z Movie Page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz/index.html

Title
Review for Drop Dead Gorgeous (1999)
1999, PG-13, 97 minutes [1 hour, 37 minutes]
Starring: Kirsten Dunst (Amber Atkins), Kirstie Alley (Mrs. Gladys Leeman), 
Denise Richards (Becky Leeman), Allison Janney (Loretta); written by Lona 
Williams; produced by Judy Hofflund, Gavin Polone; directed by Michael 
Patrick Jann.
Seen July 27, 1999 at 7:30 p.m. at Crossgates Cinema 18 (Guilderland, NY), 
theater #18, by myself for free (see review for explanation). [Theater 
rating: ***: good sound, picture and seats]
"Drop Dead Gorgeous" was a movie I didn't really want to see. I had sat 
through its trailer dozens of times assuming it was another idiotic comedy 
meant to appeal to teens and those who enjoy lowbrow, b-movie humor (the 
marketing campaign focused only on the slapstick comedy, the film's 
mentally-challenged character and teenage girls shaking their booty). I went 
in fully prepared to be bored and offended and came out pleasantly surprised 
and I am now shocked at how poorly it has performed at the box office. I'll 
still review it anyway.
I was standing outside the cineplex at the local mall looking at the big 
board of titles and times when a woman came up to me and asked if I wanted to 
see a sneak preview of "Runaway Bride" because she had won some passes to it 
through one of those radio contests and she couldn't go. I thought it would 
be a good idea because then I'd be able to review that movie before it was 
released nationally, but when I got in line the manager said the theater was 
overbooked and those who couldn't get in could go see whatever else was 
playing for free. There weren't any other good movies playing until late and 
I had to get up early the next day for work and since "Drop Dead Gorgeous" 
was playing at the time I decided to see it. I heard really bad things from 
some of my fellow Internet critics and actually thought it'd be a good idea 
to see a bad movie because I haven't ripped into a film in a long time.
So I went in and had my watch set to clock the time it would take before I 
found something good to laugh at (hoping I could say "I didn't laugh until 
45:15 into the running time"). Boy was I surprised when big laughs came 
during the film's first few scenes.
An opening title card tells us that a major cosmetics company has sponsored a 
national teen beauty pageant at the local and state level for 50 years and to 
celebrate the anniversary a documentary crew was sent to the small town of 
Mount Rose, Minnesota to show what the pageant means to average high school 
girls, their parents and the communities they live in (they don't say WHO 
sent the film crew). Fortunately for this filming team, Mount Rose is the 
kind of town that only exists in a comedy movie, but that's okay because 
funny is funny.
We start with a shot of the town's welcome sign pointing out the fact it is 
home to "The Oldest Living Lutheran in Minnesota," which is a good indication 
of how this little town takes pride in anything. The joke is extended even 
further when the town's mayor says the sign isn't accurate because that 
person actually died and every year he asks the Shriners to "take down that 
goddamned sign but they never do." Maybe that's a little crude and lowbrow, 
but it probably wasn't what you expected to hear from a small town mayor, 
especially the way the comedy is delivered here.
The entire film is meant to be a real documentary on the town's beauty 
pageant which is a technique rarely used by mainstream comedies, but works 
well here because it allows the townsfolk to talk directly to the camera and 
say what they're feeling and makes them seem a bit more realistic. It also 
works as a regular fiction story in that it's easy to tell what the 
characters actually mean when they speak to the camera and when they're lying.
The first third of the movie is quite funny in its setup and depiction of its 
characters, who are all exactly that - characters. The pageant contestants 
each have their own trait that gives them their comedic hook. There's a girl 
who has a frightening love of dogs, one who wants to teach the world sign 
language through ballet-style dancing, one who thinks "Soylent Green" would 
make a great dramatic monologue, one whose brother is a drag queen in New 
York City and thinks it's the coolest thing, one who was adopted by an Asian 
family and thinks she's Asian, and one who can't stop making out with her 
boyfriend and fulfills the generic slutty blonde role. The two real 
contestants of the film are, not surprisingly, complete opposites, the 
best-looking and the only real names the film has to market.
Kirsten Dunst stars as Amber Atkins, a homely, good-natured and high-spirited 
girl who works part time as a mortician while she dreams of becoming a famous 
journalist like her idol Diane Sawyer. Amber is pretty bright and right away 
she has a lot of appeal thanks to Dunst making her cute and sweet in a 
cartoony way. Amber's nemesis is the rich snob Becky Leeman (Richards), whose 
mother, Mrs. Gladys Leeman (Alley) just happens to be the organizer of the 
pageant and whose father (Sam McMurray) is the wealthiest businessman in town 
(he runs a small furniture store as if it were a cut-throat car dealership). 
If it's easy to tell Amber is our hero, it's even easier to tell Becky and 
her mother are the antagonists who we love to hate.
And so we have this subtle battle between Amber and the Leemans who will stop 
at nothing to ensure Becky will win the pageant even though they have 
obviously rigged it anyway. Many of the jokes and the sub-plots involve 
mysterious actions occurring meant to thwart Amber's rise such as a few 
deaths here and there. That might seem cold and cruel but the comedy never 
comes across as mean-spirited despite these instances. For example, Amber's 
trailer explodes with her mother inside and when we catch up with her at the 
hospital we see she has a beer can singed to her hand!
Yes, that's lowbrow comedy but it works effectively here. But instead of 
giving the film an ugly, connotative atmosphere you'd get with a b-movie that 
uses many of the same jokes, it works just the opposite here to keeps things 
lighthearted and humorous. We're always laughing at the characters, but 
because they're so blatantly over-the-top in every way it doesn't feel bad to 
derive pleasure from it. It's that kind of comedy that you laugh at and 
repeat out loud not knowing whether you're laughing because it's so dumb or 
because it's actually funny.
A few examples of this: one of the judges is named "John Dough" and is 
clearly a pedophile, but one who is quite bad at hiding his secret (if his 
name doesn't already make that clear) and tends to ramble on about how normal 
he is, such as when we see him watching the girls practice and notice that 
he's carrying a camcorder which he claims is for insurance purposes, "in case 
of accidents." There's also a huge mentally-challenged young man who is the 
brother of one of the judges (who isn't much smarter). The two fight with 
each other and it's funny to laugh at the antics the "retard" performs 
because he doesn't know any better, but it's also funny to laugh at the way 
the others react to him because it's so politically incorrect.
There isn't much more to elaborate on the film's plot, which is probably its 
weakest point. It's filled with continuity errors galore and is predictable 
to the extreme, but really, how else could they have done it? It's  similar 
to "Titanic" in that it realizes it's placating to the audience and doesn't 
apologize. You can't possibly take the things as zany and stupid as this 
seriously so don't bother. "Drop Dead Gorgeous" is a comedy meant to be 
laughed at, so go ahead and indulge yourself.
---------------------------------
Please visit Chad'z 
Movie Page - over 230 new and old movies reviewed in-depth, not just 
blind ratings and blather capsules.
Associate member of The O.F.C.S. (Online 
Film Critics Society)

Title
Review for Back to the Future Part III (1990)
*** (out of 4 = good)
1990, PG, 120 minutes [2 hours]
[adventure/western/sci-fi]
starring: Michael J. Fox (Marty McFly, Seamus McFly), Christopher Lloyd (Dr.
Emmett Brown), Thomas F. Wilson (Buford "Mad Dog" Tannen, Biff Tannen), Mary
Steenburgen (Clara Clayton), produced by Bob Gale, Neil Canton, written by
Bob Gale, directed by Robert Zemeckis.
"Back To The Future III" was a sequel that didn't have to me made, but as
far as unnecessary sequels go, this is one of the best. It doesn't have the
originality of the first two films, but it is still a good, decent movie.        
Just like "Part II," this one picks up right where the last one left off.
Marty (Fox) gets a letter from Doc (Lloyd) from the year 1885 and learns he
is happy and not to rescue him. But Marty is still stuck in 1955 (again) and
needs the help of the 1955 Doc to get back to the future. But when the two
realize the Doc of 1885 gets killed, the 1955 Doc wants Marty to rescue him
(after all, that's going to be him someday). So Marty goes back in time and
hilarity and adventure ensues. 
It seems that every time Marty travels through time he gets stuck somewhere.
This time he becomes stuck in 1885 when he rips the fuel tank of the
DeLorean, thus the car cannot run without gasoline, unless they can get a
train to push it up to 88 m.p.h. (ah ha!). There's a lot of the standard time
traveling confusion and conflicts, almost exactly like the situations that
occurred in the first two, but surprisingly enough it doesn't wear itself
out. And for the first time, Doc gets the girl.
Mary Steenburgen co-stars as Clara Clayton, a school teacher who was
supposed to fall into a ravine but Doc saves her at the last minute. And so a
romantic affair develops between the two, and this is a nice little surprise.
It's nothing too sappy and it's nothing too implied either, and it also
affects the plot of the story. The chemistry between Lloyd and Steenburgen is
pretty convincing, they have a cartoonish charm of sorts.
Meanwhile Marty is having a problem with the "Biff" of this time period -
Buford "Mad Dog" Tannen (Wilson). When he continues to insult and provoke
Tannen they decide to settle it once and for all at a shootout, except that
it's scheduled at the time when Marty and Doc are supposed to hijack a train
to go back to the future. The grand finale of this film is not unlike that of
the original movie. It involves being in the right place at the right time
and of course little obstacles crop up to get in their way. 
Overall, "Back To The Future Part III" has a lighthearted adventurous tone
to it. I hope next time Doc will build a time machine that is impossible to
damage, or have it run out of fuel or power. What good is traveling through
time if you keep getting stuck somewhere?
visit Chad'z Movie Page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz/index.html

Title
Review for Tarzan (1999)
Tarzan
Chad'z rating: *** (out of 4 = good)
1999, G, 90 minutes [1 hour, 30 minutes]
[animated - adventure/drama]
Starring the voices of: Tony Goldwyn (Tarzan), Minnie Driver (Jane Porter), 
Lance Henriksen (Kerchak), Brian Blessed (Clayton); written by Tab Murphy, 
Bob Tzudiker, Noni White; produced by Bonnie Arnold; directed by Chris Buck, 
Kevin Lima; based on the story `Tarzan Of The Apes' and characters created by 
Edgar Rice Burroughs.
Seen July 4, 1999 at 7:15 p.m. at Crossgates Cinemas 18 (Guilderland, NY), 
theater #9, by myself for free using my Hoyts season pass. [Theater rating: 
***1/2: very good sound, picture and seats]
Title:  `Tarzan' beautiful to look at, easy to follow.
Review: Disney continues its trend of producing animated summer blockbuster 
movies meant mostly for children but with enough wit and charm for adults to 
be interested and at least entertained by the story.
        The basic premise is the same as every other `Tarzan' story: a boy is 
raised in the African jungle by gorillas and becomes one himself never really 
understanding (or even noticing) that he's human and is a lot different from 
the animals he befriends.
        The first third of the film shows how Tarzan comes to be adopted by 
Kala (voiced by Glen Close), a female gorilla who lost her own child in a 
classic case of Darwanism. Her mate, Kerchak (Henriksen), is a mean, 
conservative leader of the pack of gorillas who make up Tarzan's extended 
family. He refuses to acknowledge Tarzan (voiced by Alex D. Linz during the 
childhood scenes) as a son and often has to hold himself back from killing 
Tarzan after he continually does dangerous, wild things that are the result 
of his own childish instincts. I have a feeling children will quickly be able 
to identify with Tarzan since all he really is is just a kid who wants to 
have fun and it's funny how the adults fail to comprehend this.
        Later, as the story transitions from Tarzan as a child to a 
full-grown man (voiced by Goldwyn), he is encounter by a party of three 
humans from England: Jane Porter (Driver), a beautiful woman who is something 
of a zoologist and an artist, her father Prof. Archimedes Q. Porter (voiced 
by Nigel Hawthorne) who is also a scientist; and their slick and cunning, yet 
barbaric safari bodyguard Clayton (Blessed).
        It's easy to tell where the story is going at all times but the 
screenplay doesn't seem like it was written hastily nor dumbed down for 
children's enjoyment. Sure there's a lot of cliche stuff here, like Clayton's 
smugness and diabolical manipulation of Tarzan and Jane; the goofy supporting 
characters (voiced by Rosie O'Donnell [in full Brooklyn accent!] and Wayne 
Knight - `Hello Newman!').
        There's also a lot of fun action such as Tarzan's swinging through 
the jungle on vines and sliding down and around tree branches and trunks. 
It's just like skateboarding really fast and doing all sorts of tricks (those 
McDonald's commercials really prove this point).
        Ultimately, you get exactly out of `Tarzan' what you expect... and I 
mean that as a compliment, so have high expectations.
Pros: Animation and sound are a feast for the senses, story is lighthearted, 
breezy and not dumbed-down, no stupid sing-along songs to get stuck in your 
head.
Cons: Surprisingly violent, should have been rated PG. Young children may not 
understand some of the more adult themes (parents, be ready to have some 
heavy questions thrown your way). Running time is a bit short.
Would you recommend this to friends? Not to MY friends, but to the 
movie-going public I would.
Score: *** (out of ****) or 4 (out of 5 with no 0 rating).
---------------------------------
Please visit Chad'z 
Movie Page
 - over 220 new and old movies reviewed in-depth, not just blind ratings 
and blather capsules.
Member of The O.F.C.S. (Online Film 
Critics Society)

Title
Review for Anastasia (1997)
Chad'z rating: **1/2 (out of 4 = OK/average)
1997, G, 94 minutes [1 hour, 34 minutes]
[animated - lighthearted drama/fantasy/musical]
starring the voices of: Meg Ryan (Anya), John Cusack (Dimitri), Angela
Lansbury (Dowager Empress Marie), Christopher Lloyd (Rasputin); written by
Susan Gauthier, Bruce Graham, Bob Tzudiker, Noni White; produced and directed
by Don Bluth, Gary Goldman.
Seen December 8, 1997 at 8:40 p.m. at The Glenwood Movieplex Cinemas (Oneida,
NY), theater #2, by myself for free (free pass). [Theater rating: ***: good
sound, picture, and seats]
        One would think the animated film industry would be free of the same
criticism live-action, Hollywood movies often receive, such as too many
special effects and not enough story. Watching "Anastasia," it's apparent that
trend has been picked up on in the last place it should be, as the film is
flooded with spectacular imagery, but strung together by a weak story.
        In the spirit of most animated movies intended for children, this film opens
in traditional fashion by establishing all of its important aspects quickly.
And like many other films of the nature, the atmosphere is a lighthearted mix
of basic reality and some fantasy. The animation is beautiful, as its
computer-generated enhancements give a good sense of three-dimensional
realism, movement, and minute detail.
        The setting takes place in 1916 Russia where we get a glamorous royal family
and a nasty villain, each such obvious representatives of good and evil it's a
bit surprising these labels aren't stamped on their forehead. When the
villain, Rasputin (Lloyd), tries to put a curse on the Romanov royal family, a
chase scene immediately ensues. But the princess Anastasia doesn't make it,
and, after hitting her head while trying to catch a speeding train, suffers
amnesia. Thus the heir to the throne is thought to be missing for the next 10
years.
        Although the film does a fine job in establishing its basic plot, it does so
through typical song-and-dance routines that could be found in almost any
animated musical. We learn Anastasia wound up in an orphanage and is now named
Anya (Ryan). We also learn the Dowager Empress Marie (Lansbury), has moved to
Paris and is offering a reward to anyone who can find her. Of course, where's
there's a reward, there's got to be con artists, and those characters are
present here with Dimitri (Cusack), the likable kitchen boy, and Vladimir
(Kelsey Grammar), his chubby cherubic guardian of sorts. They plan to find a
girl to impersonate Anastasia and split the reward money - guess who becomes
their proxy?
        From this point the story plays itself out as expected: with a rivalry and
unspoken attraction between Anya and Dimitri; a long road trip to make for
adventures; and the villain trying to kill Anastasia even though he's dead.
The problem is the screenplay is confused and inconsistent. The scenes and
sub-plots between Anya and Dimitri are clever and funny, as they look, talk,
and act like real people. Yet the other characters look like comic-strip
caricatures and the result is a conflicting atmosphere.
        Then there's Rasputin and all the silliness that comes with him. We get lots
of gratuitous special effects, magic tricks, and the generic, wisecracking
sidekick. But it just doesn't synthesize with the story since everything else
seems so realistic in comparison. Rasputin has such little screen time we
never get a sense of his motivation, he's just the token villain.
        To say the film suffers an identity crisis is an understatement. The first
act is told almost exclusively through song, but once the story has focus, the
songs disappear and what had been a good musical becomes anything but. It's
all over the map using the interaction between the main characters to create
for comedy, the threat of Rasputin for wild adventure, and when they finally
arrive in Paris the melodrama comes pouring in. 
        There seems to be a charming fairytale within "Anastasia," but it never
really surfaces through the bland story. It is a bit charming, but it doesn't
have the magic touch it needs.
Please visit Chad'z Movie Page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz - over 180
new and old films reviewed in depth, not just blind ratings and quick
capsules. Also, check out The FIRST Shay Astar Web Page @
http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz/ShayAstar.html
To receive Chad'z movie reviews directly, send e-mail to ChadPolenz@aol.com
with "subscribe plan#_" in the header (plan 1 - new releases, plan 2 - all
movies reviewed).

Title
Review for Liar Liar (1997)
1997, PG-13, 86 minutes [1 hour, 26 minutes]
starring: Jim Carrey (Fletcher Reede), Maura Tierney (Audrey Reede), Justin
Cooper (Max Reede), Jennifer Tilly (Samantha Cole); written by Paul Guay,
Stephen Mazur; produced by Brian Grazer; directed by Tom Shadyac.
seen Sunday, October 12, 1997 at 9:10 p.m. at Cine 10 (Northway Mall, Albany,
N.Y.) with my brother John for $2.99
There's no denying the fact Jim Carrey's movies are aimed at the most
massive of audiences to make millions of dollars. Sometimes they are actually
good and funny, while others are stupid and ridiculous. "Liar Liar" is a film
that will test each viewer's loyalty to Carrey, as the humor is mostly
derived from his wild antics. I'm not a huge Carrey fan, but his performance
was funny enough to make the movie work for me.
As with most of Shadyac's films, this one opens with a sit-com-esque
atmosphere as we are introduced to Fletcher Reede (Carrey), a greedy lawyer
who can't help but constantly lie. He dodges phone calls from his mother, he
comes up with elaborate stories to convince his clients he's going to win
their case, and he kisses up to everyone all the time. Carrey is very
happy-go-lucky here, making Fletcher out to be a caricature if you ever saw
one. He spits out the wisecracks and one-liners like a machine gun, but
they're funny and there's nothing wrong with that.
It's not surprising Fletcher has an ex-wife (Tierney as Audrey) and has a
kid (Cooper as Max) who he loves but never has time to be with. It's Max's
fifth birthday and what else could a cute little kid in a movie like this
want more for his birthday than for his dad to stop lying? Max wishes for his
dad to stop lying for one day and his wish comes true.
The hook to the comedy starts off slowly, but within 15 minutes we find
Carrey doing his usual slapstick routine. It's funny how the situation here
is so prone to slapstick, but it works because Carrey is such a master at it.
There's a scene in which he must fight with his own hand over a pen, which is
pretty stupid in premise, but funny to watch at the time. 
In fact, I'll have to admit a lot of what goes on here is pretty absurd as a
whole, but the actual breakdown is not. This film is a Jim Carrey comedy
machine, but that doesn't necessarily mean it's bad. Carrey puts his all into
every scene, so even if he's beating himself up (literally), or acting like a
lunatic in court, or insulting people to their face it's funny mostly due to
his delivery. 
There isn't much else to say about "Liar Liar" because there isn't much to
it. The screenplay might be a little weak (the ending is bit much), but the
jokes usually connect giving the comedy a high batting average. The film is
about silliness and what makes it work is that it realizes this and doesn't
apologize for it.


Title
Review for Six Days Seven Nights (1998)
Chad'z rating: ** (out of 4 = fair/below average)
1998, PG-13, 101 minutes [1 hour, 41 minutes]
Starring: Harrison Ford (Quinn Harris), Anne Heche (Robin Monroe), David
Schwimmer (Frank Martin), Jacqueline Obradors (Angelica); written by Michael
Browning; produced by Roger Birnbaum, Wallace Nicita, Ivan Reitman; directed
by Ivan Reitman.
Seen June 22, 1998 at 7:30 p.m. at Rotterdam Square Mall Cinemas (Rotterdam,
NY), theater #1, with my brother John for free using my Sony/Loews critic's
pass. [Theater rating: ***: good sound, picture, and seats]
For the past few years a new trend, a conspiracy even, has been infiltrating
the mainstream movie market. Major studios have been producing a growing
number of "fluff" films, or what might be referred to as modern B-movies.
Although not nearly as bad as their predecessors, these pieces of medicore
filmmaking work in the same manner, that is, to simply clutter theaters in
effort to out-do the competition. The trend has been subtle as the films are
made mostly by rookies and flavor-of-the-month actors, but here comes "Six
Days Seven Nights" which could change everything. Not only is it another
generic romantic comedy without the romance nor the comedy, but it separates
it from the rest is the credit of Harrison Ford and Ivan Reitman, and yet
neither come close to working their magic with the material.
As is the case with most fluff movies, this one wastes no time in
establishing the minimum requirements necessary for a story to exist. During
the opening credits we're told the entire backstory as we meet the young New
York couple: Robin Monroe (Heche), a trendy editor at a semi-trashy women's
fashion magazine, and her boyfriend (and soon to be fiancée) Frank Martin
(Schwimmer), who may be the world's first dorky yuppie. The two have been
dating for a few years and are about to take a vacation together at a resort
on a remote tropical island. 
By the time the two arrive at their hotel, the feeling of complete and total
unoriginality is evident. This is worsened when the film decides to form a
plot of sorts by giving the characters something of conflict, which involves
their forced interaction with Quinn Harris (Ford), an old, shady airplane
pilot whose presence is annoying not only to Robin and Frank, but to the
audience as well since it's clear what will happen between which characters,
when, and why.
The first act rushes to get to the film's catch which involves Quinn and
Robin's being stuck together on an deserted (not desert) island. How this
comes about is presented as completely logical, but is really total stupidity.
It's clear the filmmakers don't want to spend too much time on plausibility,
otherwise they might have found less predictable and more believable plot
elements to move the story along.
Cliches don't necessarily equal flaws, and although they are abundant here,
it is the poor script and flat direction which suffocate the film. The cliches
are at least consistent, almost to the point of being satirical, but the way
in which they are employed is the film's problem. The foreshadowing is so
blatantly obvious it's pathetic. Of course an attractive man and woman who
don't like each other and are forced into being together are going to fall for
each other. Of course the junky little plane is going to crash so the
characters are stranded. Of course their lovers back home will get together.
And of course some "funny" things will happen along the way.        
Making a romantic comedy work shouldn't be a difficult task. It's a mixture
of two well-loved genres, but here the two clash so harshly it's painful. The
film's comedic side is basically a combination of every joke currently
availble on "Must See TV." We get the cartoony sight gags, some slapstick, and
lame one-liners at all the wrong times. Its romantic side is laughable as Ford
and Heche are completely out of place. Neither put much emotion into their
acting, probably because they've deserve better and have done much better than
this and thus they have no chemistry. Meanwhile, Schwimmer does his usual
Ross-from-"Friends" schtick, with the constant whining and over-acting. But
it's not entirely the actors' fault, since they have little to work with here.
The plot is weak, the dialogue is worse, and the attempt at suspense by
introducing villains is cartoonish to the extreme. I half expected Scooby Doo
to show up.
Critics often accuse today's films of ripping-off the classics, but with the
case of "Six Days Seven Nights" I really wish it had done so, then there'd be
at least some sign of taste. Just once I'd like to see a film as generic as
this copy the end of "Casablanca."


Title
Review for Men in Black (1997)
1997, PG-13, 98 minutes [1 hour, 38 minutes]
starring: Tommy Lee Jones (Agent K), Will Smith (James Edwards/Agent J),
Linda Fiorentino (Dr. Laurel Weaver), Vincent D'Onofrio (Edgar - The Bug);
written by Ed Solomon; produced by Laurie MacDonald, Walter F. Parkes;
directed by Barry Sonnenfeld; based on the comic book and characters created
by Lowell Cunningham.
Seen Sunday, November 2, 1997 at 3:15 p.m. at Crossgates Cinema 12 (Albany,
NY), with my brother John for $5.
Movies geared towards massive audiences tend not to be that complicated or
have that much intelligence to them. Americans especially don't like to watch
things they don't have to think too much about. What's good about "Men In
Black" is that, technically, it's another lightweight, mass-market
comedy/adventure, but it's also a very clever satire. It appeals to both the
child and the adult in us.
It's difficult to make a film that is intended for the family and can be
enjoyed by all members.  But this movie starts off well by displaying its
ability to do just that. The first scene depicts a truck full of illegal
immigrants which is stopped by highway patrolmen, until two men in black
suits show up and take over. Agent K (Jones) singles out one of the
immigrants and brings him back into the desert where his true identity is
revealed. He's an illegal alien all right - but he's from another planet and
he doesn't have a passport. 
The dialogue between K and the alien is cartoony, but witty, in a
"Simpson's" sort of way. Even though there's a slimy sight gag, it was built
up through satire, which shows how the comedy succeeds on many levels.
Satire derives its power from great acting. Anyone can write a joke, but it
takes talent to make subtle comedy funny. Tommy Lee Jones is fantastic here
as the Joe Friday-like Agent K. His sense of timing is perfect and his
deadpan delivery makes everything he says or does seem both serious and
funny. Then there's his counterpart, the always hyperactive Will Smith as
James Edwards - an NYPD officer who is asked to join "Men in Black" (the
secret agency K works for), because of an encounter he had with an alien.
 Many consider Smith a typecast actor who always plays characters like
himself - but it doesn't matter because he's hilarious! It seems like he
improvises every joke and gag, yet he never repeats himself.
The actual plot of the film involves some kind of pending inter-galactic war
with Earth in the middle. Agents J and K's job is to find a "bug" (D'Onofrio
as "Edgar") whose ship crash-landed on a farm in upstate New York. He has
made his way to NYC and wreaks havoc like a zombie in an Ed Wood movie, and
if they don't find him something terrible is going to happen. 
There's a lot of detail and attention given to the MIB operation, which not
only makes the satire even funnier and more clever, but shows how the film
doesn't cop-out where most others would. Everything the characters do has a
purpose, and there's actually a real sense of mystery here. At times I wasn't
quite sure what was going on, but because the story is so lighthearted I
never felt confused.
There's actually not much more to say about the film because the comedy is
so broad. It would be difficult to list even a few examples without
describing, in detail, the context in which they take place. Everything's
just plain fun, and the ending is a real hoot.
Special mention must be given to Linda Fiorentino as Dr. Laurel Weaver, the
sexy coroner who never plays the role of the damsel in distress nor the
butt-kicking, "strong-willed woman" stereotype. 
"Men In Black" is epitome what the summer blockbuster movie should be: it's
just plain fun.


Title
Review for High Fidelity (2000)
Don't you just love movies where the characters and their situations remind 
you of your own life? No movie can replicate your life verbatim, but those 
that have realistic characters in realistic situations speaking realistic 
dialogue are my favorites. That's why "High Fidelity" works so well for me. 
It's movie with a rather simply, calm story about a guy who pines over lost 
loves and discusses pop music history with his friends and it's fascinating. 
The film works on two levels: as a breezy portrait of modern-day GenX and 
GenYers who haven't really grown up yet and can still cherish, savor and 
appreciate spending most of the their time hanging with friends and rapping 
about their favorite CDs, TV shows and movies. So many people believe it's 
the little things in life that bring people together and make relationships 
work and the theme of "High Fidelity" exemplifies this when the main 
character Rob (John Cusack), is pining over his latest breakup and says, 
"It's not what YOU'RE like, it's WHAT you like." 
Cusack delivers one of his finest performances to date playing a character 
that's an assemblage of virtually every other characters he's played before. 
He also co-wrote and co-produced the film which works to his advantage all 
that much more. Rob Gordon is a GenXer in his late 20's who owns a used 
record store called Championship Vinyl. Business isn't exactly booming and 
most of the customers are personal friends of Rob's and his two employees': 
the hyperactive, bossy music snob Barry (Jack Black) and the quiet, low-key, 
almost masochistic Dick (Todd Louiso). Barry insults potential customers and 
guilts surviving ones into buying more vinyl albums ("What do you mean you 
don't own 'Blonde on Blonde'!? For God's sake don't tell anyone!" he says as 
he stacks another record on a stack a schmuck customer's carrying thereby 
totally obscuring his vision). Dick is Barry's whipping boy who's too much of 
an introvert to so much stand by his convictions, let alone raise his voice. 
"I can't fire these guys. I hired them for only three days a week and they 
just kept showing up. That was four years ago," says Rob. 
As the film opens Rob's in the middle of a break-up with longtime girlfriend 
Laura (Iben Hjejle). They've been living together and she's slowly moving her 
stuff out. Where's she's going to and why she's leaving aren't clear. The 
film doesn't go into a lot of detail and drama over their relationship, not 
at first at least. Instead, it's a catalyst for Rob to tell us all about 
himself - how he is doomed to be left, rejected and heartbroken. He launches 
into a "Top Five" list of his all-time most painful breakups, from the girl 
he went out with for three days in a row in seventh grade to the present day. 
The first half to two-thirds of the film is lighthearted character humor with 
the occasional check back to Rob and Laura's relationship, or what's left of 
it. The film does an excellent job in balancing these two separate stories of 
Rob's life within and outside of his relationship. There's so many great 
scenes of Rob hanging with Dick and Barry at bars and clubs making lists of 
the best songs ever and pondering about what it'd be like to date a musician 
who might include one of their jokes in the liner notes of their album. 
There's also flashbacks to the other breakups on his list, which stay within 
the confines of the lighthearted story and never get too serious despite the 
fact they're all about rejection. The only really "serious" aspects to the 
film are when Rob and Laura talk and argue about whether they can patch 
things up and what the future holds. The story will take a very serious turn 
as it winds down, teetering on melodrama but makes amends by having a 
slightly unusual but charming ending. 
If I had to cite the film for any major flaws it would be for how it deals 
with Rob and Laura's post-relationship relationship. This is a romantic 
comedy to be sure, which means a touch of the intense is a given but the 
screenplay is a just a bit choppy. The reason they broke up has to do with 
Rob having slept with someone else and Laura having an abortion without even 
telling him. Little detail is revealed about this aspect which I think is a 
necessity. If they were such a great couple why did Rob cheat and who did he 
do it with? And what's the deal with this new guy Laura's seeing? He's a New 
Age guru named Ian who eats a lot of organic food, listens to "whatever world 
music is popular this week" and supposedly has the best sex in the world 
(played by Tim Robbins with tongue firmly in cheek). For a film that's so 
relatable this seems just a bit out of place, although when we examine Rob's 
other breakups he's always been dumped for a guy who's a total jerk. 
I guess it's not the point, really. The payoff comes not in Rob's efforts to 
get Laura back (however unsuccessful and/or funny they may be), but in those 
moments where he opens up inside and says the reasons he REALLY misses Laura. 
Of course they involve the little things she did and other such 
characteristics which keeps with the film's theme. These romantic aspects to 
"High Fidelity" work on so many more levels and are so much more appreciable 
than most dramas try to do so much more forcibly (i.e. "The English Patient," 
"Bounce").
It's difficult to say what the best aspect to "High Fidelity" is. I love how 
the characters talk about real things and have real problems. I love the 
production design that makes every single set in the film look like a real 
place (the fact most of it was shot on location may be a reason why). And I 
absolutely adore the technique of having Rob speak directly to the camera, 
not just in scenes where he's alone in a room but scenes where there's people 
all around him. Everyone wants to have an anonymous outlet and we play that 
role for Rob. There's also a some smart fantasy scenes such as when Rob 
dreams of confronting Ian or when he asks Bruce Springsteen if he's one of 
"The Boss's" songs come to life. 
If there's any justice young men around the world will realize "High 
Fidelity" is probably the perfect film to watch on a date because it will 
inspire so much conversation. As Rob said, it's not what you're like, it's 
WHAT you like and I can't imagine anyone not liking this film. 

[Critic's note: This is a re-write of a capsule review I initially wrote back 
in April. It's the best movie I've seen so far this year and I thought I 
should give it a proper full-length review if I name it the best movie of 
2000. So I rented it and realized it was even better than I had given it 
credit for. So here's a proper, honest review. The original capsule review 
can be read here.]
Think of it as a really mature Kevin Smith flick (but not TOO mature), 
there's tons of discussions analyzing pop culture and music and relationships 
with an added dash of brash comedy and the like. The comedy and the drama 
(the main plot about Cusack's recent break-up with his long-time girlfriend 
and his attempt to win her back) balance nicely - so that you have one scene 
of serious human interaction and the next is banter about "Top five side A's, 
track 1's." 
It's a cute movie that has more to offer than the typical Hollywood romantic 
comedy. Probably one of the best [first] date flicks to be released in a long 
time.  
*****
Chad'z Movie Page is back! 
In-depth reviews of nearly all mainstream films playing at your local 
cineplex. There's also reviews of a few classic films and some of your 
personal favorites.

Title
Review for Cell, The (2000)
It's difficult to sell a serial killer movie these days. Audiences want 
another "Silence of the Lambs" or a "Se7en" but more often than not end up 
with scripts some second-under-sub-assistant-co-producer was using to keep 
his kitchen table sturdy. They're a way to win a box office for a weekend or 
two and usually fade away without much recognition. "The Cell" is along the 
lines of those flicks only this time there's a real effort made on part of 
the director and producers to come up with something original and shocking - 
they accomplish that but that doesn't make it a great movie. 
This film is basically your run-of-the-mill mystery thriller about cops and 
the Feds trying to track down a really sick and twisted serial killer. The 
story wastes no time with a lot of details and instead just jumps right in to 
the authorities' hunt for the madman and within two or three scenes they've 
already tracked him down. We already know who he is - a nutty loner with a 
penchant for drowning women and turning them into his own personal dolls. 
He's one of the most mentally disturbed villains I've ever seen in a movie 
(and that includes supernatural horror flicks). The guy gets off on dangling 
his own flesh from chains while watching his victims die. 
Of course for every bad guy there has to be a hero or at least a few 
wannabe/mini-heroes that add up to one almighty solver of the problem. 
Jennifer Lopez plays Catherine Deane, a child psychologist who can literally 
enter the mind of other people in a really high-tech futuristic lab that only 
exists in sci-fi movies and the like. Vince Vaughn is FBI Agent Peter Novak - 
a relatively weak character without much motivation other than the generic 
story of how a criminal walked on a technicality and he's dedicated his life 
to making sure that doesn't happen again. Somehow Novak and his crew learn of 
Deane's process and want to use it on the killer who is in a deep catatonic 
state when they catch him. There's a lot of jive about how he suffers from a 
rare form of schizophrenia and he'll never snap out of it. That sucks because 
there's one more still-living victim to be found and she'll die if they can't 
find out where she is. Put two and two together and you've suddenly got a 
journey into the mind of a madman on the slight chance they might be able to 
reach his logical side for a moment to discover the girl's location. 
Now that that's said and done we can get to what the REAL point of the film 
is - the dream sequences. Actually it isn't so much a dream as it is an 
exploration of the subconscious. The human mind is a strange and fascinating 
thing we'll never be able to understand fully, which means if you're going to 
make a movie about the inside of a killer's mind it's a license to go hog 
wild. At least "The Cell" succeeds on this level. For large bulks of time 
it's basically a filmed acid trip - an animated M.C. Escher or Salvidor Dalî 
painting. It's sci-fi, horror, fantasy and drama all mixed into one. There's 
a lot of disturbing, creepy images that go beyond S&M and are just plain 
psychotic. It's shocking and it's not - shocking because the art direction 
and production design are so meticulous in detail to convey such an 
atmosphere that would and should be terrifying if it didn't seem like such a 
cliche horror movie set. We see what made the killer who and what he is and 
we're supposed to feel sorry for him. 
What keeps the film from being great is that this is pretty much all it has 
going for it. There's virtually no characterization and the screenplay is 
pretty mediocre. How the mind transferring process works isn't explained (and 
should be because the reality of the film is the same as our own, it's not 
like the reality from "The Crow" or something). Lopez's character doesn't 
seem like a psychology professional at all, just a cartoony heroine. Vaughn's 
character at least has some built-in motivation due to the fact he's an FBI 
agent and the case is personal to him (has there ever been a movie where the 
FBI didn't take the case personally?). All the supporting characters are 
simply pawns with no apparent free will of their own - they just do whatever 
Lopez and Vaughn tell them to. 
Their purpose of going into the killer's mind is to find the girl's location 
- they don't learn that directly. Instead, a symbol in his mind points out 
something to the detectives and starts a chain reaction. Had they done better 
police work to begin with the whole mind-meld thing wouldn't have been 
necessary in the first place (but then the film would only be about 10 
minutes long). 
Although "The Cell" has something of an original plot and direction going for 
it, the screenplay is too weak and cannot support it. There's a lot of 
interesting stuff to look at here but it's mostly gratuitous art direction.
-------------------------------------- (here's where my e-mail ends and my 
signature begins)---------
Chad'z Movie Page is back 
after heavy renovation. Reviews of nearly all mainstream movies playing 
today! Get my reviews of everything playing at your local cineplex so you can 
better make an informed decision on what to see. Don't forget to vote on my 
poll and sign the guestbook!

Title
Review for Volcano (1997)
**1/2 (out of 4  = OK)
1997, PG-13, 105 minutes [1 hour, 45 minutes]
[thriller]
starring: Tommy Lee Jones (Mike Roark), Anne Heche (Dr. Amy Barnes), Gaby
Hoffmann (Kelly Roark), Don Cheadle (Emmit Reese), written by Jerome
Armstrong, Billy Ray, produced by Andrew Davis, Neal H. Moritz, directed by
Mick Jackson.
As a critic, I must remain as unbiased as possible before viewing a film.
But I had mixed feelings going into "Volcano" because I knew what was going
to happen. However, as routine as the film can be, I found myself genuinely
interested throughout.
The film works in the spirit of all big budget Hollywood disaster movies:
something strange is going on... no one knows what exactly... a strong leader
calls in an expert... the expert realizes something terrible is about to
happen... no one believes the expert... disaster ensues. Plus there are many
other elements that are plugged in: canceled vacations, bratty daughters,
offices with lots of computers and video screens, subplots of petty fighting
and bigotry, and of course impressive special effects.
Tommy Lee Jones stars as Mike Roark, the director of L.A.'s Office of
Emergency Management. He's about to go on vacation when some men die from
some sort of geologically related accident, but there's something unusual
about it. He calls in Dr. Amy Barnes (Heche), an "expert" who tells him
what's going on isn't just typical earthquake stuff, but volcanic activity.
It only takes a few scenes for Barnes' theory to be proven true as we see
manhole covers fly into the air and fireballs engulf the sewer system and
subway tunnels... then the real action starts.
And so we get scenes of total devastation with explosion after explosion and
fire after fire while a river of lava slowly flows down Wilshire Boulevard,
consuming everything in its path. 
Films like this try to make themselves as plausible as possible by throwing
in scientific jargon that makes perfect sense to us, even though we're not
sure what it means. I found most of the rhetoric here to be easy to swallow,
but I couldn't help feeling it was a little too convincing.
There isn't really a story here, just many scenes of teams of emergency
workers, police, and firefighters doing all they can to stop the lava flow,
evacuate citizens, and help the injured. Some of the individual scenes are
visually impressive but quite cheesy, such as Jones and Heche dangling by a
thread over the lava, or a rescuer using all his will to save someone, but
not himself. There are also two stupid subplots involving racism and
snobbishness that could only happen in L.A.
The characters are a bit bland and recycled though. Jones' Roark is the same
character as Sam Gerard in "The Fugitive." Gaby Hoffmann is sweet at first as
Roark's daughter Kelly, but becomes quite annoying by the end (not that it's
entirely her fault). Heche and Cheadle are obviously going through the
motions, but at least they don't over act, especially considering the
situation.
I can't say much more about the film without nitpicking all its unrealistic
and unbelievable aspects or describing the plot in detail. But for all the
trite aspects and through all the cliches (don't think I didn't notice them),
I couldn't help but be interested in seeing what happens next. The special
effects did make the lava and the sense of disaster realistic, which I'm sure
added to my interest. 
"Volcano" certainly impressed me more than "Twister," which is strange
considering how both are such movie machines. It has a few good points and
makes for a fair amount of suspense, but the bad points are obvious and bring
the film down. The title alone is a misnomer, there's no towering volcano
here, just a little stump of one. Maybe it should have been called "The
Secret Of The Ooze" (oh wait, that's already taken).
please visit Chad'z Movie Page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz/index.html

Title
Review for Point Break (1991)
1991, R, 122 minutes [2 hours, 2 minutes]
starring: Keanu Reeves (Johnny Utah), Patrick Swayze (Bodhi), Gary Busey
(Pappas), Lori Petty (Tyler), written by W. Peter Iliff, Rick King, produced
by Peter Abrams, Robert L. Levy, directed by Kathryn Bigelow.
Although "Point Break" is one of the most cliche action/crime movies I've
ever seen, it is tolerable to watch because its premise of crime as the
ultimate rush gives the film a unique hook. However, that theme could have
been conveyed better by not shoving it down our throats.
The story is a retread of staple action and crime formulas: the rookie and
the seasoned pro; the crime fighting camaraderie; the mean, cynical captain;
the rookie who almost blows his cover; the woman who falls for the rookie;
and of course the uncatchable criminals. Surprisingly enough, the beginning
of the film and the establishing of these elements work rather well.
Keanu Reeves stars as Johnny Utah (could that name be any more made up?), a
rookie FBI agent who is paired with Pappas (Busey), the veteran who has been
trying to catch a gang of bank robbers known as the Ex-Presidents for years.
We get some details and interesting detective work that leads them to believe
the robbers are surfers, and so Johnny goes undercover to try and find the
criminals.
One of the cardinal rules of undercover stories is that the hunky hero must
be involved with a woman so the bad guys can later use her for blackmail.
Lori Petty plays that role to the letter as Tyler, a surfer who Johnny
manages to seduce to teach him how to surf and to absorb him into the
community. Now this is all fine and good, and it doesn't seem too predictable
at the time, but the film lingers on the joy of surfing a little too much.
Reeves is a fine actor, but he isn't convincing when he is having an
adrenaline rush. He's even less convincing when he infiltrates the community
and is "accepted" by Bodhi (Swayze), a drifter in pursuit of "The Ultimate
Rush."
The first act builds up to a fantastic action scene as Utah, Pappas, and the
FBI bust who they thought were the Ex-Presidents, but turn out to be just
drug dealers. Then everything starts to conviently fall into place: Johnny
realizes the bank robbers have been under his nose all along and somehow
figures out where they will strike next. Then there are some more
over-the-top action sequences, and a part of me couldn't help getting caught
up in the action and thrill of it all. I was impressed by some of the camera
work during the chase scene, but as soon as it ended the film took a drastic
nose dive.
The final act of really lost me. Johnny knows Bodhi and his friends are the
Ex-Presidents and vice versa, but they all continue to act like friends. They
take Johnny skydiving and we think this will be another action-packed escape
scene but it's not. In fact, throughout this film there are many scenes of
surfing and skydiving that serve no purpose but to try and get the viewer
pumped because the story is not interesting nor clever enough to do it.
By the end we get many shoot-outs and nearly everyone dies. The final scene
is what should be a case of poetic justice, but turns out to be something
that's just plain dumb.
"Point Break" certainly had great potential to it. It could have been an
intricate crime and detective story or it could have been just a drama about
finding the greatest rush. Unfortunately, it tries to mix both with
gratuitous stunts and adventure, and the result is another action flick in
disguise.


Title
Review for Meet the Parents (2000)
As a single guy I know there's few things in life more uncomfortable than 
meeting your girlfriend's parents. You have this feeling that in the back of 
their minds they're thinking, "This is the guy who's corrupting my daughter." 
After years of movies and sitcoms with stories about this experience you tend 
to psych yourself into the worst, most nerve-racking scenario possible about 
meeting the parents. Thankfully, what actually happens isn't as bad as you 
had expected unless you're Ben Stiller in "Meet The Parents" where just the 
opposite happens. He goes in thinking positively and Murphy's Law takes over. 
The result is a funny but somewhat familiar comedy. 
Stiller stars as Greg, a male nurse who works in the ER of a Chicago 
hospital. He's been dating Pam Byrnes (Teri Polo), a kindergarten teacher, 
for over 10 months and is totally smitten by her. The opening scene shows us 
Greg's love for Pam is true because he's about to propose to her in a rather 
unique way. It's cute and funny (it involves little kids trying to spell) but 
due to some circumstances he aborts it at the last second when he realizes 
he's never met Pam's parents and gets the feeling they're the old fashioned 
type who would forever malign him if he didn't get their blessing first. 
Greg and Pam fly to one of Long Island's many upscale suburban towns - not 
unlike those neighborhoods from all the 1980s John Hughes comedies. The only 
reason this story doesn't take place there too is because there's a few 
crucial plot points and funny jokes that could only happen at an airport. 
Robert De Niro and Blythe Danner costar as Jack and Dina Byrnes and make for 
really convincing parents. You get the feeling they're a close family from 
their hospitality and how well they get along with each other. Greg feels 
welcome at first but he's still nervous because of what Pam has told him 
about her overprotective father. When she throws his cigarettes on the roof 
of the house he's already pretty freaked out and it's a mentality he's never 
able to snap out of (and with good reason). 
What ensues is a mixture of many formulas of commercial comedy. It's 
slapstick, it's one-liners, it's sight gags... and anything and everything 
else that involves being in the wrong place at the wrong time saying the 
wrong thing while doing the wrong thing. You get the feeling you've seen 
these things done before, and you have but only individually. "Meet The 
Parents" is not a carbon copy of any one movie, sitcom or specific plot - 
it's a hybrid of many of them and it works rather well. 
I'm not even sure how I would go about describing and analyzing the comical 
elements here. This is a big-budget Hollywood comedy directed by Jay Roach - 
the guy who brought us the "Austin Powers" movies, and his strategy here 
isn't all that different. The jokes are funny, they don't have a lot of setup 
for their execution to pay off (although there are quite a few long-running 
and foreshadowed jokes which work for the most part). Unlike the "Austin 
Powers" films which had much derivative British humor, "Meet The Parents" 
invokes more American humor. It's all about a nice guy who tries his hardest 
just to make his girlfriend's parents like him after he says or does 
something embarrassing that proceeds to compound after he tells a little 
white lie to try to get himself out of the corner he has backed himself into. 
The chemistry between Stiller and De Niro is great, one of the best 
father-and-son-in-law relationships I have seen. De Niro's Mr. Byrnes is a 
passive guy who rarely yells or loses his temper but you get the feeling that 
at any given moment he could snap and rip Greg's head off. Byrnes is 
constantly on Greg's case, busting his chops whenever he says something 
without properly thinking it through first (mostly for his own amusement, not 
because he's a mean codger or anything). The scene in which Greg claims he 
milked a cat is funny in and of itself but De Niro closes the scene with a 
hilarious one-liner. He upstages Stiller and humiliates the character Greg in 
one nonchalant breath. Who says De Niro can't do comedy with the best of 
them? 
Watching this film I made a mental list of other comedies I could compare 
individual aspects to: "National Lampoon's Christmas Vacation;" any given 
episode of "Frasier;" "Father Of The Bride;" "Planes, Trains & Automobiles;" 
"There's Something About Mary;" and a few others I can't think of now. And I 
just want to make it clear that I don't think this movie is ripping off any 
of these works, it's just reminiscent of them. 
"Meet The Parents" works because every character and his or her actions and 
reactions are convincing in every situation they're thrown in to. 
You can also read this review at: 
http://www.epinions.com/mvie-review-69B9-1C0E5C5B-39E1E0D5-prod3
And other reviews on the same topic at: http://www.epinions.com/mvie
Check out my profile page at: http://www.epinions.com/user-chad9976
*****
Chad'z Movie Page is back! 
In-depth reviews of nearly all mainstream films playing at your local 
cineplex. There's also reviews of a few classic films and some of your 
personal favorites.

Title
Review for Saving Grace (2000)
Don't you love those cute British comedies that come out every year? They 
always have a quaint charm and tell a rather unusual story in a breezy, 
lighthearted matter. As a critic it's difficult to review these films because 
they're just so good overall you can't really narrow it down to the 
specifics that made it work so well. "Saving Grace" is a good example of what 
I'm talking about. Its story is approached with all the delicacy of a 
children's tale, but at the core it's a smart, mature black comedy Americans 
don't usually have the patience for.
If I were to break to story down to the basics you might think it was about 
poor people living in the ghettos of New York or Los Angeles, etc. It's about 
a woman whose husband just died and left her with so much debt she can't 
possibly pay it all back and is dangerously close to losing her house. Her 
friends are pot-smokers without much ambition who spend most of their free 
time drinking and fooling around. There's also an out-of-wedlock pregnancy, a 
police officer who looks the other way, a big drug deal at the end and many 
funny scenes of people getting high. 
But consider the circumstances of the film: it's set in present-day England; 
the protagonist is a very nice white woman in her 50s who has never really 
worked and is only good at gardening, making tea and playing cards with the 
other ladies. The pot-smokers and drinkers are her young housekeeper, his 
dedicated girlfriend and their friend who happens to be a medical doctor. The 
cop is a man who should probably have retired a long time ago, but then again 
this is the English countryside - not too much chance he's going to get into 
a shootout or a car chase with criminals.
As for the scenes of people getting high, well, that's what the film is all 
about - the last people you'd expect or even want to see smoking marijuana 
not only are but are also growing it! If you're conservative that idea might 
offend you, heck, if you're liberal you might be offended by the idea of 
people other than 20-something college kids smoking weed. But it's not like 
there's scenes of huge bong hits and blacklite posters and roundtable 
discussions of stoned philosophy. It's funny in that fish-out-water way only 
because this is the kind of situation in which that formula works very well.
This all comes about because the main character ,Grace (Brenda Bleythen), 
needs to raise at least Ł300,000 fast and can't think of a better way to do 
so than to put her gardening techniques towards growing a product that's 
worth a lot more than tea leaves and roses. She's a master gardner and the 
progress she makes with her crop is pretty amazing. I know nothing about the 
growing and cultivation of marijuana but what she does with it is really 
amazing (did I mention the funny scenes of people being stoned?).
Of course there's also a story going on throughout this whole thing. It's not 
"Cheech and Chong Go to England" - it's really not. What it is is a clever 
black comedy that approaches committing a felony as if it were nothing. If 
you believe marijuana is bad and should be illegal that's fine, but the story 
is presented in such a manner than you know Grace and her gang aren't hurting 
anyone. You're also hoping she can somehow pull off this scam of a lifetime 
and get away with it. You'll probably be surprised by what actually happens, 
especially at the end.
What it all comes down to is "Saving Grace" is a funny, enjoyable film with a 
smart story and despite its risque subject matter doesn't come off as 
preachy. That's an accomplishment we don't usually get with most of our 
Hollywood flicks.
Chad'z Movie Page is back 
after heavy renovation. Reviews of nearly all mainstream movies playing 
today! Get my reviews of everything playing at your local cineplex so you can 
better make an informed decision on what to see. Don't forget to vote on my 
poll and sign the guestbook!
Get paid to surf the web! More than $25,000,000 
Already Paid to Members -- Join AllAdvantage today! 

Title
Review for Gladiator (2000)
Another Hollywood wannabe epic film made mostly for the sake of wooing Oscar 
voters with its classic
story of eternal love and quest for vengeance. 
It's a guy movie and a chick flick at the same time. It has many exciting and 
bloody battle scenes which
service the plot about a Roman war general named Maximus (Russell Crowe) who 
was about to become
the next leader of the great empire until heir-apparent Commodus (Joaquin 
Phoenix) has him removed.
Commodus becomes an arrogant, selfish emperor who uses his power to service 
his own desires instead of
doing what's good for Rome. 
At 150 minutes the film is a bit overlong but at least its story is full of 
detail so pay close attention. The basic
plot is familiar and very Shakespearean, but the gladiator life Maximus finds 
himself trapped in is the most
interesting aspect of the film. Not as good as "Spartacus" or "Braveheart" 
but it's a fine effort. 
Chad'z Movie Page is back! 
New reviews of the latest movies in easy-to-swallow capsule form with the 
trendy, Entertainment Weekly-style of letter grades instead of the old star 
system. Have I sold out? Visit my page and decide for yourself ;-)

Title
Review for War of the Worlds, The (1953)
The War Of The Worlds
Chad'z rating: *** (out of 4 = good)
1953, not rated, 85 minutes [1 hour, 25 minutes]
[science fiction]
starring: Gene Barry (Dr. Clayton Forrester), Ann Robinson (Sylvia Van
Buren), Les Tremayne (General Mann), Lewis Martin (Pastor Matthew Collins),
written by Barre Lyndon, produced by George Pal, directed by Bryon Haskin,
based on the novel by H.G. Wells.
        "The War Of The Worlds" is a good film that wonders just how smart and
powerful humans really are. Here in the United States we'd like to think
we're the most powerful nation ever. We can win wars, but are we prepared to
take on invaders from another planet?
        Gene Barry stars as Dr. Clayton Forrester, the token genius scientist who is
called into a Californian town when a huge meteor crashes in the nearby
mountains. The opening scenes are not very intense, so everything seems
normal. The dialogue and storytelling style is interesting, as it adds a bit
of suspense when we realize the meteor is not all it seems. There is also a
good sense of humanism here as we meet Sylvia Van Buren (Robinson), a regular
woman who is fascinated by Dr. Forrester's work, and her uncle, Pastor
Matthew Collins (Martin), who is one of the most realistic clergy characters
I have ever seen in the movies.
        Three men are left to watch the meteor as it has been causing some fires in
the area in which it landed. One of the men notices a long, metallic probe
sticking out of the meteor. The design to this probe is simple, yet it is
frightening because of the mood. We know nothing about it, only that it must
be  extra-terrestrial in nature. A catastrophe ensues but what makes the film
so intense is that it doesn't move too quickly. It's obvious what's going to
happen in the long run, but it takes the time to establish the necessary
details which are quite exciting. 
        When Dr. Forrester and the local sheriff look for the men, we then see,
through their perspective, an alien spaceship in its entirety which proceeds
to attack and shows just how powerful and ruthless it is. Obviously these
aliens are not friendly, and we get an old fashioned military defense set up
for resistance. 
        Haskin does a good job in establishing the presence of the aliens. We see a
reporter talk about similar events happening all around the world saying,
"Once the alien crafts move on, no news continues to come out of that area." 
        Since the story already has a good sense of humanism to it, it uses that
element to transition to moods of fear and suspense. When one of the main
characters approaches the crafts they are incinerated, after which the
military opens fire to no avail. This entire scene might not be completely
original, but it is interesting to watch because it shows just how primitive
the humans are compared to the aliens.
        Dr. Forrester and Sylvia try to escape via an unreliable airplane. They
crash land and hide in an abandoned farmhouse, which is later surrounded by
three alien ships. This is one of the best scenes in the film and it is
really scary because the suspense has been built up. The fear of the unknown
comes to a boil when the two find themselves face to face with one of the
aliens.
        The two escape and manage to make it to the authorities, all the while we
have really learned a lot about the invaders through the scientific logic and
the characters' rationale. The military resorts to atomic warfare, but even
this effort is futile.
        The last act starts to crumble a little as Forrester and Sylvia are
separated. All we really see are scenes of devastation by the aliens and
people fleeing for their lives. The ending can only been seen as either very
weak or very strong  as it is a case of classic, literary irony, but does
give a sense of poetic justice.
        "The War Of The Worlds" proves everything in nature has a purpose, but it's
far from a work of thematic genius. It's your basic science fiction film and
it works. 
Please visit Chad'z Movie Page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz - over 140
new and old films reviewed in depth, not just blind ratings and capsules.
Also, check out The FIRST Shay Astar Web Page @
http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz/ShayAstar.html

Title
Review for Godzilla (1998)
Chad'z rating: **1/2 (out of 4 = okay/average)
1998, PG-13, 138 minutes [2 hours, 18 minutes]
Starring: Matthew Broderick (Nick Tatopoulos), Jean Reno (Philippe Roche) Hank
Azaria (Victor "Animal" Palotti), Maria Pitillo (Audrey Timmonds); written by
Dean Devlin, Roland Emmerich, produced by Dean Devlin, directed by Roland
Emmerich, based on a character created by Toho Co. Ltd.
Seen May 20, 1998 at 7:15 p.m. at Rotterdam Square Mall Cinemas (Rotterdam,
NY), theater #5, with my brother John for free using my Loews/Sony critic's
pass. [Theater rating: ***: very good picture and sound, average seats]
        For most filmmakers the task of turning aged and simple concepts into
something original would prove difficult. However, the creative team of
writer/director Roland Emmerich and writer/producer Dean Devlin are not
discouraged by such obstacles as they have made some rather successful films
because of their attitude. Even with "Godzilla," a complete Hollywood movie
machine, they at least show a sense of craftsmanship. But craft in the midst
of limitation doesn't make up for lack of idea and form.
        Considering the film's premise it comes as no surprise that little attention
is paid to detail and plausibility, and this unapologetic notion is clear from
the first frame. The opening scene depicts a Japanese fishing boat being
attacked by a mysterious creature, which serves no purpose other than to add a
bit of superstition when the lone survivor believes it was a mythological
figure come to life. 
        For every superstition there's a "logical" explanation which is provided
through our "main" character (the character with the most screen time, that
is) Nick Tatopoulos (Broderick), a young American scientist who has been
studying the effects of nuclear radiation on nature. He's the closest-there-
is-to-an-expert the military tend to call in to investigate wacky situations
in films such as this. After seeing damage done by the huge, unseen creature
in the French Polynesian islands, he theorizes, with total logic, that it must
be a mutation caused by all the nuclear testing done there many years ago.
        It's clear the film doesn't want to waste time on reality and thus the
attempt to establish plausability (the most minimal amount necessary) comes
across as a half-assed effort. Supporting characters and shady sup-plots are
introduced, but as is the case with films made up of a large cast of
characters, only a handful have any real significance. Here, the characters of
the sort include Nick's ex-girlfriend Audrey Timmonds (Pitillo), a meek
research journalist who hopes to one day be a real reporter like her arrogant
boss (played by Harry Shearer in full cartoon form). Also lending support is
Audrey's friend, cameraman Victor "Animal" Palotti (Azaria), who functions
mostly as comic relief. Then there's the mysterious Philippe Roche (Reno), a
secret service agent for France who will take things into his own hands when
need be. The way the characters are eventually thrown together is typical, and
for the most part it works since the film doesn't concentrate too hard on
detail.
        This is a summer blockbuster movie and it exists for action and special
effects, not wholesome storytelling. The first act works as quickly as
possible to plug in the characters, plot devices, sub-plots, and general
details. It doesn't take long for Godzilla to emerge in full form and reign
terror on New York City. Surprisingly, the initial sense of panic and hysteria
is quite exciting due mostly to the effects and the fast direction. It's eye
candy all right and it's certainly tempting, but the taste doesn't last long
enough. 
        Even though action often overwhelms the story, there is still an effort on
behalf of the screenplay to give the film some intelligence. Many sub-plots
crop up involving the characters and how they relate to defeating Godzilla and
an entirely separate plot involving a possible nest which no one but the
characters believe exists. The individual plot pieces do have a sense of
organization, but it is the scenes themselves that do not. The dialogue exists
mostly for the characters to have something to say when they're not running
for their lives. Other flaws crop up which are totally inexcusable since
alternative means of telling and pacing the story are easily available. Are we
supposed to believe the military would get rid of Nick because one of his top
secret videos was leaked to the press? Then again, the way it is leaked is an
equally poor plot device, and the follow-up resolutions are predictable and
cheesy too.
        There's a fine line separating homage from plagiarism which serves as a
tightrope to some filmmakers and a sidewalk to others. For some reason Roland
and Devlin feel the need to walk this line with every film they make even
though they often trip themselves up (with the exception of "Independence
Day"). For example, there are many scenes reminiscent of the "Star Wars"
films, such as those in which helicopters fly through the narrow spaces
between the skyscrapers while at the same time trying to fight Godzilla. Also,
the constant rain and darkness might be an attempt at Gothic design a la
"Blade Runner" or "The Crow," but it doesn't nearly evoke the moody
atmosphere. And if you've seen either of the "Jurassic Park" films, then
you've seen the entire last act of this one.
        There's only so many ways big-budget disaster movies can be made, and
everyone seems to take this notion for granted. "Godzilla" certainly is made
up of the right pieces in the right places, but that's where the problem lies
- there's not much of a hook to it.


Title
Review for Wag the Dog (1997)
1997, R, 95 minutes [1 hour, 35 minutes]
starring: Dustin Hoffman (Stanley Motss), Robert De Niro (Conrad Brean), Anne
Heche (Winifred Ames), Denis Leary (Fad King), written by Hilary Henkin, David
Mamet; produced by Robert De Niro, Barry Levinson, Jane Rosenthal; directed by
Barry Levinson; based on the novel "American Hero" by Larry Beinhart.
        Satirical films usually fall into one of two categories: 1) long-term satire
where everything, including the jokes, is somehow related on a large scale
(i.e. "Dr. Strangelove"; 2) situation satire in which the comedy and themes
are derived moment by moment and scene by scene (i.e. "Men In Black"). What's
unique about "Wag The Dog" is that it doesn't necessarily fit either of these
descriptions, and yet is both at the same time. The result is a clever comedy
based on an original, smart premise, even if the focus does tend to wander a
bit.
        If there's anything that affects Americans the most it's politics and
showbusiness. In this age of information and technology, we've been so
conditioned by the media and the entertainment industry in our ways of
perceiving things, it's gotten to the point that we are practically controlled
by it. We need the media to bring us the most up-to-date news, but we also
need the escapism of Hollywood to counter all that thinking. This film starts
off well by quickly establishing these ideas, and then presents an interesting
scenario: if politics, the media coverage of politics, and the entertainment
industry are so closely related, couldn't someone with the power and authority
to manipulate one of the aspects manipulate them all? That's the idea Conrad
Brean (De Niro), a professional Washington spin doctor, comes up with in order
to restore the president's good name who has been accused of child molestation
just weeks before the election.
        Brean, along with the president's top advisor, Winifred Ames (Heche), fly to
California to meet up with hot-shot movie producer Stanley Motss (Hoffman).
They pitch him an idea to "produce" the image of a war with Albania (it's a
country no one's heard of so they people will buy it). Soon the wheels are in
motion and the film's riffing satire comes into play. We're inundated with the
Hollywood mind set as Motss brings in a number of experts to help manage the
situation, such as a folk singer, visual and sound effects technicians, and a
modern style expert known as the Fad King (Leary). 
        The initial atmosphere is rich with numerous pop culture references where
everything somehow relates to something on TV, in the movies, or in the news.
The characters' dialogue is witty and funny, although some of the actual jokes
and gags seem rather sitcom-esque. For example, one scene shows Motss and
Brean's production crew filming an actress portraying a poor Albanian refugee.
Motss ordered a kitten for the girl to carry, but instead wound up with a
dozen different dogs. Since it's all computer-enhanced anyway, she ends up
cradling a bag of Tostitos with the kitten to be inserted later. This
demonstrates the film's ability to take a relatively ordinary situation and
make it smart and funny just through the premise. But then there's the gags
and one-liners that, although are humorous, seem a little gratuitious in the
long run such as Motss not being able to remember the actress's name, or,
whenever a problem emerges, always responding with,"This is nothing!"
        By the time the film makes it to the midpoint, everything that is going to
happen in terms of plot happens. The first act is quickly paced, while the
second act contains most of the jokes and is the core of the film. Every ten
minutes or so a new problem crops up that Motss and Brean must deal with, and
it's always fascinating to see what they do and how they do it. The screenplay
provides good characterization and actually deals with most of the problems
head-on in realistic manners. However, it does have a tendency to avoid things
and shift its focus from the election campaign and false war smokescreen to
something a bit off the subject.                 
        As the third act rolls around the satirical nature becomes more concerned
with the situations and less so with the big picture. What had started off as
a brilliant, somewhat harmless conspiracy to fool the general public begins to
seem more like something that would happen in a movie. Still, the situation
comedy is quite funny, especially a montage showing the entire country
flinging old shoes into trees to honor Sgt. Willie Schumann - a war hero Motss
and Brean concocted.
        Truly great satire manages to create for an entertaining story that makes you
laugh at the time, but think about afterwards and "Wag The Dog" at least
succeeds in this respect. However, in retrospect it seems like so much more
could have been done, namely by extending the running time and filling in the
plot holes. Then again, it's a valiant effort.
Please visit Chad'z Movie Page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz - over 180
new and old films reviewed in depth, not just blind ratings and quick
capsules. Also, check out The FIRST Shay Astar Web Page @
http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz/ShayAstar.html

Title
Review for Twister (1996)
Twister
Chad'z rating: ** (out of 4 = fair)
1996, PG-13, 117 minutes [1 hour, 57 minutes]
[thriller]
starring: Bill Paxton (Bill Harding), Helen Hunt (Jo Harding), Jami Gertz
(Melissa), Cary Elwes (Dr. Jonas Miller), written by Micheal Crichton,
Ann-Marie Martin, produced by Michael Crichton, Kathleen Kennedy, Ian Skye,
directed by Jan De Bont.
If we told you once, we told you a thousand times - movies are not roller
coaster rides! "Twister" has to be one of the prime examples of the typical,
cliche, summer action movie with lots of stunts and special effects to keep
an audience in awe every step of the way.
In the spirit of "Jurassic Park," Michael Crichton has produced another
blockbuster extravaganza flick with so many special effects it's unreal. And
that's where the problem to this film lies: it isn't believable. You don't
have to be an experienced critic to realize how trite this film is. 
We start out in the 1960s and witness a small farming family have their home
destroyed and father killed by a tornado. We then cut to the present as Jo
(Hunt), the little girl whose family was destroyed by the tornado, has grown
up to become a professional "tornado hunter." She and her
soon-to-be-ex-husband, Bill (Paxton), have invented a device that will allow
scientists to study a tornado from within the funnel. One this particular
expedition, Bill has brought along his fiancee Melissa (Gertz), and hopes he
and Jo can finalize their divorce. Melissa is the typical, fragile, female
character who has no idea what is going on. Even though little has happened
by the time all these factors come into play, the film is already very
formulated, you wonder if it could get any worse?
Apparently Bill and Jo have some competition, and just like all those old
sci-fi movies, it's a mad scientist, only updated for the 90s. Cary Elwes
co-stars as Dr. Jonas Miller, a scientist working for a commercial
corporation who has invented the same device as the Hardings (how does anyone
profit from tornados?). Of course there's an immediate definition of a
rivalry between Miller and the Hardings. Now this is all nice and good, but
it's just a petty excuse at characterization and storytelling. Who cares? We
want to see the cool computer-generated special effects and stunts! 
And so we get those effects and stunts, and as lame as the film is, it does
deliver on its promise to impress us. The tornados here look real, and the
whole point of making a film about people chasing them is to actually show
them running away from them. And yes, the supposedly suspenseful scenes do
kick in full gear, but it's hard to care when you don't know why these idiots
are risking their lives in the name of "science."
Thrillers with scientific (read: "sci-fi") overtones like this are usually
interesting to watch because we learn about the reality of the situation and
thus it seems more believable, and even scary in a way. But we learn
absolutely nothing about tornadoes here. There are some scenes of
destruction, but they are isolated incidents. We really don't learn how much
damage a tornado can cause. It's almost as if the tornado is an intelligent
monster chasing our heroes (a la "Jaws"). I never thought weather had an
agenda!
"Twister" has all the makings of a suspenseful action movie, but its cliches
and cheesy storylines and sub-plots are just so distracting it's hard to care
what happens - and isn't that really what makes for fun at the movies?
Please visit Chad'z Movie Page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz - over 140
new and old films reviewed in depth, not just blind ratings and capsules.
Also, check out The FIRST Shay Astar Web Page @
http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz/ShayAstar.html

Title
Review for "Stand, The" (1994) (mini)
The Stand (originally television mini-series)
Chad'z rating: ***1/2 (out of 4 = very good)
1994, not rated, 366 minutes [6 hours, 6 minutes]
[drama/horror]
starring: Gary Sinise (Stu Redman), Molly Ringwald (Fran Goldsmith), Jamey
Sheridan (Randal Flag), Adam Storke (Larry Underwood), Laura San Giacomo
(Nadine Cross), Ruby Dee (Mother Abigail), produced by Mitchell Galin,
written by Stephen King (based on his novel), directed by Mick Garris.
        The horror genre seems to be dying a slow death in Hollywood. Even Stephen
King's film are learning more towards surrealistic drama than straight horror
and "The Stand" is a perfect example of this. The story is a long and
complicated one, but it has much plausibility to it and it becomes more
frightening on a metaphysical level than any horror flick could ever be,
period.
        The story starts off simple enough about a virus manufactured by the
government, but something goes wrong and all the scientists who manufactured
it die immediately. Only one man and his family manage to escape the base,
but do not escape the virus. By the time their car crashes halfway across the
country in east Texas, they have inadvertently spread the disease because it
is so communicable. The military attempts to quarantine the town, and perform
experiments on those who have become sick, but it does no good. 
        We then meet many different characters throughout the U.S. who are somehow
immune to the virus while the rest of the planet dies off within a week. The
supernatural villain here is not the typical horror movie monster, but just
invisible germs, and this is what makes the film so scary because it's an
original, realistic nemesis. To think invisible, one-cell organisms could
destroy the entire planet's population so quickly is disturbing indeed. 
        Many of these characters have dreams about a farmhouse in Nebraska. They
meet an old black woman named Mother Abigail (Dee), who warns them of the
coming apocalypse and to beware of the "Dark Man." It's obvious she and her
words are symbolic of the ultimate powers of good versus evil. The moody
lighting, the music, and the sudden camera movements combined with Abigail's
dialogue warning them of the devil, all adds up to an atmosphere that is both
fantasy and brutal reality at the same time and is quite sensational.
        Because the film is over six hours long, the story is slowly paced, but is
always interesting to watch. Every character here is chizzled with detail
(although some can be annoying and cliche), just watching them going through
the motions, learning about their destiny, and their interaction is great.
        The story is so epic and detailed I won't attempt to summarize the plot any
further. Basically it is a modern mythological tale of the final showdown
between good and evil with the characters representing the greater forces in
the universe. The only problem is they don't necessarily know who or what
they are working for, nor really care. 
        Sometimes just hinting at elements of greater beings and/or powers makes for
great mystery, suspense, and philosophy (i.e. "2001"), but here it's a bit
too commercial to see it as the grand story it puts itself forward as. The
film has the potential to be a "Star Wars" of modern-day Earth, but because
it was made for television, it downplays its supernaturalism into a story of
good guys vs. bad guys.
        Perhaps "The Stand" tries a too hard to be a fantastic odyssey, but it's
certainly entertaining and moving for what it is. 
Please visit Chad'z Movie Page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz
E-mail: ChadPolenz@aol.com
(C)1997 Chad Polenz

Title
Review for Alien (1979)
1979, R, 117 minutes [1 hour, 57 minutes]
starring: Sigourney Weaver (Ripley), Tom Skerrit (Dallas), Yaphet Kotto
(Parker) Ian Holm (Ash); written by Dan O'Bannon, Ronald Shusett; produced by
Gordon Carroll, David Giler, Walter Hill; directed by Ridley Scott.
>From the title alone, "Alien" doesn't sound too appealing because it's so
generic and boring. It's the epitome of a sci-fi title, and not surprisingly,
this is the epitome of a sci-fi movie. It takes place in the distant future
and in outer space, there's lots of advanced technology and slimy aliens, and
it tries to use both intelligent reasoning and barbaric violence to solve
problems - guess which method dominates?
The film opens in a dark, dismal manner as it establishes its setting of a
giant spaceship on its way back to Earth. Where it's coming from and what its
crew's mission is we never really find out, which is the film's first major
flaw. The first half hour is a tedious exercise in mood - all we get is
sci-fi jargon that is nearly impossible to comprehend as nothing said nor
done seems to lead to anything. However, I admired the bleak art direction -
it is full of intricate detail and is just as Gothic as Medieval cathedrals.
This helps to create a chilling mood, but is ultimately unable to save the
film from its screenplay.
We quickly meet our characters, but we're not given many clues as to who
these people are or what their purpose is. They all have radically different
personalities, and almost none of them seem like they should be on a such a
high-tech, important ship. 
First there's Tom Skerrit as Dallas, the stern leader who likes to bark
orders. Then there's Sigourney Weaver as Ripley, a strong-willed officer who
doesn't think the crew follows procedure correctly. Two other generic
characters include Yaphet Kotto as Parker, who tends to be exploited since
he's the only black character, and Ian Holm as Ash, the obsessed scientist
who values research over human life. The rest of the crew consists of another
scientist, a frail woman who worries and screams a lot, and another guy who
doesn't do much of anything.
The crew has been awoken from "hibernation" (the same technique used in
"2001") to investigate a signal coming from a nearby planet. Of course they
check it out and end up coming back on board the ship with an alien larvae
attached to one of the crew members. Ripley had warned them this could
happen, and since she's the main character who's never wrong, it creates a
somewhat suspenseful atmosphere due to the fear of the unknown. The problem
is, it takes almost 45 minutes for the film to raise this kind of interest.
And just as the film becomes thrilling and intriguing, it essentially turns
into a horror flick as an alien creature runs amok throughout the ship. One
by one the characters are killed off in the most predictable of ways. It's a
dark ship with lots of hiding places and no one is smart enough to hunt the
alien with a partner?
There is a fair attempt to balance the mindless cat-and-mouse game with a
subplot when we learn one of the crew is actually a robot and it would
willingly sacrifice the others to study the alien. There's some dialogue
like, "How do we kill it?"/ "You can't, it's a perfect organism." For such a
superior being, this alien never shows signs of intelligence. Its size and
composition certainly isn't any kind of advantage. And why must it hiss, drip
slime, and eat people?
I would say the film goes downhill from the mid-point on, but it never
really goes uphill enough to come down. Everything stays on the same level,
which isn't terribly low, but never gets very high. It does a satisfactory
job in terms of general storytelling, but falls short with its specific
attempts at characterization, suspense, and shock (the last act proves this).
"Alien" is rich with atmosphere in all respects, but takes the easy way out
by becoming another thriller. What's most disappointing is the fact it never
really had to.

Title
Review for Rocket Man (1997)
1997, PG, 90 minutes [1 hour, 30 minutes]
starring: Harland Williams (Fred Randal), William Sadler (Cpt. Overbeck),
Jessica Lundy (Julie Ford), Beau Bridges (Bud Nesbitt); written by Oren Aviv,
Craig Mazin, Greg Erb; produced by Eric L. Gold; directed by Stuart Gillard.
Seen Monday, October 27 @ 6:50 p.m. at the Glenwood Movie Plex Cinemas in
Oneida, NY by myself for free (free pass) (theather rating: **)
        As bizarre as this may sound, it takes a lot of intelligence to make
stupidity seem funny. Back in the 1980s Pee Wee Herman proved this as he
didn't just rely on gags to make jokes, he created an original, detailed
atmosphere in which the gags fit in perfectly. Unfortunately, the same is not
true of  "Rocket Man," a supposedly lighthearted, zany comedy which fails
because it's actually not stupid enough.
        The key to making a good comedy about stupidity is to first define
a setting
in which the ridiculous and the absurd is only slightly different from
everything else. This film starts off on the wrong foot by giving us a
seemingly normal reality but introduces us to a character who is both stupid
and smart at the same time.
        We meet Fred Randal (Williams), an idiot manchild who works for NASA and
programmed the computers that will be used on the first manned mission to
Mars. Fred is 30 years old, but often acts as if he's 10. Right from the
get-go it's hard to believe he could act the way he does (and work where he
does) without anyone noticing how immature he is. All the other characters
are played straight, but there's no wit or satire, so the "idiot in the real
world" shtick doesn't work. When Fred does his elaborate impersonations and
many Jim Carrey-esque slapstick routines, it's not that funny because there's
absolutely no reaction within the film.
        At least the movie doesn't waste any time in getting to the point.
When one
of the astronauts slated for the Mars mission can't make it, Fred is selected
to go in his place since he knows how the mission's computers work. Of course
all of this is explained with complete logic which only enhances the overall
lameness.
        Most of the first act depicts Fred's space training and consists of one
generic sight gag after another. The majority of them aren't funny because
they're cartoony and just plain dumb. There's Fred holding his breath for
three minutes and kicking the other guy in the groin, there's Fred throwing a
monkey around the room and making monkey noises, there's Fred's face turning
to rubber on the G-force simulators.... the list goes on.
        Eventually the mission to Mars is a go and Fred finds himself on a space
shuttle with the arrogant Captain Overpeck (Sadler), and the sweet Julie Ford
(Lundy) - the pretty woman who despises Fred at first but will eventually
come to like him. There's also Beau Bridges as Bud Nesbitt, a mission
controller who botched the Apollo 13 mission, but forms a subtle friendship
with Fred. How many times have these formulas been used before? It's not even
worth holding cliches like these  against the film because there's so many of
them. It's like trying to scrape rust off a car made up almost entirely of
rust.
        This film is a comedy, which means it's meant to make you laugh. So
does it
at least succeed in this respect? There are a few funny gags here and there,
but overall the film has a very low batting average. I'd say about one out of
every 10 or 15 jokes actually works. And what's most annoying is that all the
jokes are the same - sight gags, farting noises, moronic slapstick, and every
two minutes hearing Fred say, "It wasn't me" (which seems like a rip-off of
Bart Simpson's "I didn't do it"). In other words, the comedy is lowbrow,
repetitive, and not very taxing on the brain.
        The last act is just another generic attempt at some kind of
seriousness and
suspense, but since this is a comedy you know what will happen due to the
blatant foreshadowing at the film's beginning.
        Even if "Rocket Man" is seen as the innocent screwball comedy it
intends to
be, the fact remains it's not clever enough to use the stupidity to its
advantage.


Title
Review for Casablanca (1942)
**** (out of 4 = excellent)
1942, not rated, 102 minutes [1 hour, 42 minutes]
[drama]
starring: Humphrey Bogart (Rick Blaine), Ingrid Bergman (Ilsa Lund), Paul
Henreid (Victor Laszlo), Claude Rains (Captain Louis Renault), written by
Julius and Phillip Epstein, Howard Koch, produced by Hal B. Wallis, directed
by Michael Curtiz, based on the play "Everybody Goes To Rick's" by Murray
Burnett, Joan Alison.
If ever there was a story about "love and war," "Casablanca" is it. It's a
story of love, power, destiny, and doing what's right. The film's theme
serves to disprove the attitudes of the characters within it - that the
problems of a few people do "amount to a hill of beans in the whole scheme of
things."         
As the film opens we learn during World War II many refugees made their way
to Casablanca in French Morocco to escape the Nazis and for a passage to
Lisbon, where they could in turn flee to the United States. There is no
further explanation of WWII but none is needed. Everyone knows the power the
Nazis had and the darkness of man they represent.
Humphrey Bogart stars as Rick Blaine, a dapper American who owns a club, The
Cafe Americain, where all the important people in Casablanca go to socialize.
At the same time we start to meet other key players such as French Police
Captain (and part-time friend of Rick) Louis Renault (Rains). Renault says he
is going to arrest someone who murdered two German couriers for passport
clearance papers in front of his superiors - the German Gestapo.
The importance of the papers is really what the entire film revolves around.
But this is not an adventure or war story, it is actually a story of love and
self sacrifice. This is proved true with the introduction of two more
characters, Victor Laszlo (Henreid) and Ilsa Lund (Bergman). Hints about
these characters had been dropped through some of the characters' dialogue,
but mostly in passing. This is the greatest element to the film - the use of
intelligent subtlety.
Rick and Ilsa had a romantic encounter in Paris some years prior, but Rick
had to escape the Nazis and assumed Ilsa was coming with him... There aren't
many details of their affair, but none are necessary. The characters radiate
such an awesome presence, just their glances and actions tell us all we need
to know.
It's obvious Rick and Ilsa love each other, but she reveals something very
shocking and puts Rick into a very awkward position. Basically, Rick holds
the key to Ilsa's freedom, and he knows that giving it to her is the right
thing to do, but it may cost either or both of them their happiness. What is
the right thing to do?
"Casablanca" is so full of human spirit it seems like Shakespeare himself
might have wrote this great story. This film is quite conservative, it wastes
no shots, actions, nor dialogue in telling its story. Everything works to
tell the story, define the mood, and make for theme. Excellent filmmaking
indeed. 
visit Chad'z Movie page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz/index.html

Title
Review for Back to the Future Part II (1989)
***1/2 (out of 4 = very good)
1989, PG, 108 minutes [1 hour, 48 minutes]
[adventure/sci-fi]
starring: Michael J. Fox (Marty McFly age 17, 47, Marty McFly Jr., Marlene
McFly), Christopher Lloyd (Dr. Emmett Brown), Thomas F. Wilson (Biff Tannen
age 17, 47, 77, Griff), Lea Thompson (Lorraine Baines/McFly age 17, 47, 77),
produced by Bob Gale, Neil Canton, written by Bob Gale, directed by Robert
Zemeckis.
Us critic-type people are always shaking our heads and telling everyone that
movies aren't thrill rides, but I think that "Back To The Future II" is one
of the few exceptions. If the original film had the spirit of the 1950s, then
this has the spirit of the 80s: full of fights; chase scenes; cliff hangers;
special effects; some detective work; and of course the vision of the
high-tech future.
The film picks up exactly where the first film left off, with Doc (Lloyd),
Marty (Fox), and Jennifer (Elizabeth Shue) travelling 30 years into the
future, because something bad is going to happen to Marty and Jennifer's
kids. Doc tells Marty he must take his son's place at an incident that will
cause a chain reaction if Marty McFly Jr. says yes to Griff (Wilson - in one
of four different roles). 
Whoever said history tends to repeat itself wasn't joking, especially when
it comes to the movies. Essentially the same chase scene that Marty endured
in the 50s takes place again in the year 2015, but it's not as authentically
exciting this time because it is so obviously a parody of itself. At the end
of the situation Marty has changed the course of history for the better, and
it seems like everything's copasetic right? Wrong. Since when do things go
according to plan in the "Back To The Future" movies? 
There are so many minor conflicts and details that effect the plot and the
direction of the story I won't even bother to list them all. Basically we get
to see Marty as an old man, his house, his family, etc. We also go back to an
alternate 1985, and then back again to 1955, with everything happening so
fast the film never stops to catch a breath. 
The films' best aspect is the fact that it actually goes back to the first
movie and shows a lot of the action that occurred from another angle.
It's difficult to convey the sense of wild and zany fun without describing
every little detail. The only thing sacrificed in this film is the suspense.
Instead of a grand finale, we get lots of little victories. By the end
everything is back to normal, but something happens that leads to yet another
sequel, but it doesn't seem gratuitous.
"Back To The Future Part II" is a really great adventure movie. It certainly
has more originality than other films but it lacks a certain charm that was
dominate throughout its predecessor. 
Visit Chad'z Movie Page @http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz/index.html

Title
Review for What's Eating Gilbert Grape (1993)
What's Eating Gilbert Grape?
Chad'z rating: ***1/2 (out of 4 = very good)
1994, PG-13, 117 minutes [1 hour, 57 minutes]
[lighthearted drama]
starring: Johnny Depp (Gilbert Grape), Leonardo DiCaprio (Arnie Grape),
Juliette Lewis (Becky), Mary Steenburgen (Betty Carver), Darlene Cates (Mrs.
Grape), produced by Meir Teper, Bertil Ohlsson, David Matalon, written by
Peter Hedges (based on his novel), directed by Lasse Hallstrom.
The American Family is an institution slowly deteriorating, especially in
Hollywood. What makes "What's Eating Gilbert Grape?" so good is the way it
shows how a family who you assume would be the most dysfunctional turns out
to be the just the opposite. It's not a sappy family movie, it's a wholly
original and enjoyable picture.
Johnny Depp stars as Gilbert Grape, a 20-something GenXer who lives with his
family in a small town way out in the country. He works at a "Mom and Pop"
grocery store to help support his family, as his 500-pound mother (Cates) is
unable to work. Gilbert also has a full-time job of taking care of his
brother Arnie (played wonderfully by Leonardo DiCaprio). There isn't one
specific plot to the film, it is just a tale of this young man's life that
can seem like Heaven and Hell at the same time.
Gilbert isn't exactly happy, perhaps it's his desire to take care of his
family that keeps him going. He is having an affair with a local married
woman (Mary Steenburgen as Betty Carver), but even this doesn't do much for
him, probably because he's deathly afraid of her husband who constantly
encourages Gilbert to "see him."
One day a girl named Becky (Lewis) who is Gilbert's age with the same
maroon-dyed hair arrives in town. She is traveling with her grandmother
across the country and their camper breaks. The two meet, flirt, and you can
tell where it's going. We don't exactly get a passionate love story, but just
the subtlety to their relationship, and the realistic dialogue and
interaction is fascinating. 
But the story does not drift, it focuses on Gilbert's commitment to his
family and we learn a lot about their situation from his interaction with
Becky. When she asks him what he wants, he says what he wants for everyone
else, but not for himself, which is one of the best scenes in the film. Not
only is Gilbert becoming closer to Becky but he is also becoming closer to
his family when he looks at them from afar.
Arnie is also quite a character. He's about to turn 18 but he has the
maturity level of a 5-year-old. There are some hilarious scenes resulting
from Arnie's ignorance, and we can laugh because he's not  portrayed as a
victim, he just doesn't know any better. Gilbert cares for Arnie with all his
heart, we constantly see him endangering himself in order to save Arnie from
predicaments he gets himself into (such as climbing to the top of a water
tower).
There's no one specific plot to this film, although many conflicts do arise.
What makes it so good is the interaction between characters and the unique
dialogue. Stories about small towns tend to be dry and boring, but there's
more atmosphere here than any other commercial film set in a big city.
Even though the family and the characters in "What's Eating Gilbert Grape?"
might be strange, they seem like real characters with real emotions. Perhaps
if everyone had a family this close, the world would be a better place. 
Please visit Chad'z Movie Page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz - over 140
new and old films reviewed in depth, not just blind ratings and capsules.
Also, check out The FIRST Shay Astar Web Page @
http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz/ShayAstar.html

Title
Review for Titanic (1997)
Chad'z rating: **** (out of 4 = excellent)
1997, PG-13, 194 minutes [3 hours, 14 minutes]
starring: Leonardo DiCaprio (Jack Dawson), Kate Winslet (Rose DeWitt Bukater),
Billy Zane (Cal Hockley), Gloria Stuart (Old Rose); produced by James Cameron,
Jon Landau; written and directed by James Cameron.
Seen February 13, 1998 at 8 p.m. at Crossgates Cinema 18, theater #4, by
myself, using Hoyts Cinema Cash. [Theater rating: ****: excellent seats,
sound, and picture]
        One thing all films considered to be "epics" and/or "classics" have in common
is that they weren't made with the intention of being crowned as such. What's
so remarkable about "Titanic" is that it seems as if it was made with such a
goal in mind - a nearly unreachable, almost pompous level of greatness, and
does manage to fulfill and even surpass its expectations. 
        The legend of the Titanic disaster is a story we've heard about for years,
but does anyone really know the whole story? Director James Cameron spent
years researching the material for this film, and his effort is clear from the
get-go. We're introduced to Brock Lovett (Bill Paxton), a modern-day scientist
exploring the wreckage who is looking for a diamond necklace worn by one of
the passengers in a drawing dated the night the ship went down. When this news
is broadcast on television, an old woman named Rose (Stuart) contacts Lovett
to tell him she is the girl in the picture and proceeds to tell her story.
        The first hour does an excellent job in establishing the reality of the
situation. Cameron makes full use of the actual wreckage, sending robots and
probes into the cracks and crevasses no one has seen in over 80 years. As the
explorers and their submarines reach the ocean floor and turn their lights and
cameras on, the sheer site of it all is awesome and yet frightening because it
is real. Lovett's line, "Seeing her come out of the dark like a ghost ship
gets me every time" accurately reflects the feeling all viewers will think.
What's also fascinating is the use of modern technology to tell the story, and
I don't mean special effects alone. One of the film's best scenes involves a
computer-animated simulation of the ship hitting the iceberg and sinking while
one of the explorers narrates in lighthearted, plain English, conveying the
tragedy of it all and still creates for a moving moment.
        But the film is not simply about the sinking of the ship, or even the ship
itself, it's a humanistic drama about all the people involved. The Titanic was
meant to be all things to all people - for the rich it was the ultimate form
of elitism, but for the poor it was simply an escort to a better life. Rose
was a member of the former group, a society in which she never felt a part of,
and Kate Winslet's portrayal as 17-year-old Rose DeWitt Bukater is quite
convincing in this aspect. She's engaged (somewhat against her will) to Cal
Hockley, a multi-millionaire who epitomizes the image of the snobbery and
elitist imagery associated with the type, especially as played by Billy Zane
with just the right accent, facial expressions, and cold attitude. But of
course where there's the uptight rich, there must also be the free-spirited
poor, and this class is represented by the American teenage bounder Jack
Dawson (DiCaprio), who gains entrance to the Titanic by winning a ticket in a
poker game.
        Taking these basic elements into consideration it's easy to tell where they
will go and how the film will use them. Jack and Rose will of course get
together and the differences in classes will be played up and used to develop
character and plot. One thing will lead to another and Jack and Rose will
completely fall for each other while Cal will become extremely jealous and
retaliate. This sounds cliche and it is, but taking into account the scope and
premise of the film, there doesn't seem to be much else that could be done.
Epics such as this aren't exactly known for their idiosyncratic observations
and terrific chemistry. I think Cameron realized this and carried out the film
the way he did to spite the situation, not to work with it. However, he does
manage to squeeze in just the right amount of one-liners and comedic
situations to keep the mood easy-going (my favorite examples include: a
situation in which Rose must hit something with an axe in just the right place
before the water rises, but Jack suggests she take a few practice swings
first; after the ship has sunk Jack says, "I don't know about you, but I
intend to write a strongly worded letter to the White Star Line about all
this!").
        This is not a dialogue-driven film, nor is it too concerned with plot, it is
a complex drama utilizing dozens of characters and showing how all of them
relate to each other. Most of the second act focuses on Jack and Rose, but the
script works perfectly to allow their "adventures" to take place throughout
the ship in a wholly believable, realistic manner: from the first-class suites
and ballrooms, to the third-class barracks; from the clean, precision of the
captain's deck, to the dark, dirty, hellish boiler room with engines as big as
houses. How the film manages to incorporate everything, and be so well-paced
at that is amazing.
        In the last few years we've been inundated with disaster films which work
mostly as eye candy, not as the believable, suspenseful joyrides they intend
to be. The first two hours are so intriguing by themselves, at times it's easy
to forget where the ship's destiny lies. Throughout the film hints are dropped
that perhaps the ship's executives have been too arrogant in their ways, and
had they been more cautious the disaster might have been averted. The entire
third hour of the film takes place in real time from the moment the iceberg is
spotted to the last inch of the ship going under water. Cameron is a veteran
when it comes to action and special effects, but usually with sci-fi movies,
not dramas, so the payoff is even more impressive. Here he is able to create
for gripping suspense as the ship sinks slowly at first but later breaks in
half, speeding up the action tenfold. 
        What's most impressive is the reality of it all: the authenticity to the set
of the ship; the people screaming and running for dear life; the atmosphere of
panic and chaos. Never before have I felt such a connection with such horrific
events taking place on a screen. The plausibility is vivid, giving one a
shocking sensation, especially when we consider that this actually happened.
One of the last scenes, involving a search for survivors, is more frightening
than any horror movie I've ever seen.
        "Titanic" accomplishes what it set out to do: to be an epic film in all ways
possible. At first glance it seems to be trying too hard, but upon close
inspection we realize it is everything a great film can and should be.
Please visit Chad'z Movie Page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz - over 190
new and old films reviewed in depth, not just blind ratings and quick
capsules. Also, check out The FIRST Shay Astar Web Page @
http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz/ShayAstar.html

Title
Review for Matrix, The (1999)
Chad'z Rating: **** (out of 4 = excellent)
1999, R, 135 minutes [2 hours, 15 minutes]
Starring: Keanu Reeves (Thomas `Neo' Anderson), Laurence Fishburne 
(Morpheus), Carrie-Anne Moss (Trinity), Hugo Weaver (Agent Smith); produced 
by Joel Silver; written and directed by Andy and Larry Wachowski.
Seen April 17, 1999 at 7:10 p.m. at Crossgates Cinema 18 (Guilderland, N.Y.), 
Theater #2, by myself for free using my Hoyts' season pass.
        Before I could even begin to write this review I had trouble trying 
to distinguish which genre to classify `The Matrix' as. Considering the basic 
premise of the film and the sheer title alone, it definitely falls under the 
science fiction category, yet there are a lot of other elements that make up 
this film such as action, adventure, fantasy and a helluva lot of deep 
philosophy. But that's what science fiction is, and this film completely and 
totally lives up to all aspects of the genre.
        It seems that many modern filmmakers have lost the concept `science 
fiction,' which is as simple as breaking down the phrase into its two words. 
But instead of taking elements of science and mathematics and bending them to 
tell a story, creators seem to be relying more heavily on recycling bits and 
pieces of works of the genre and not concentrating on the basic ideals of 
science plus fiction.
        `The Matrix' succeeds where other films have not because its creators 
demonstrate a vivid knowledge and personal experience with all aspects of 
sci-fi and how to make it poignant, interesting and thrilling for a 
mainstream audience.
        The premise of the film and its look is not unlike many of the best 
sci-fi works Hollywood has produced in the last few years. The art direction, 
production design and cinematography go to show that the film has many 
inspirations, thus the result is a movie that does not seem very familiar to 
any specific work or series. It seems more like a mathematical result of the 
absorption of every aspect of the genre.
        As the film opens it's clear we're about to be told a story of 
something relative to the world as we know it, but of course with a sci-fi 
spin on it. And what else could be more scientific and modern than computers? 
The first shot is of a black screen with a green, blinking cursor in the top 
left corner which seems to type automatically a message partially 
understandable and partially coded. Then there's a shot of dozens of rows of 
letters moving vertically up the screen while changing thousands of times per 
seconds and slowly a phone number is revealed. It's a simple trace of a call, 
but listening to the conversation it has a very eerie tone and gives the 
feeling that what the voices were referring to wasn't remotely simple and 
mundane.
        After a brief, but visually-stunning opening credits sequence, the 
real story begins. The filmmakers, Andy and Larry Wachowski who are former 
comic book writers, show us they've been paying attention to what it takes to 
create a neo-Gothic setting without it coming off as cliche horror or 
pretentious hardcore. There is a brief but violent scene of arrest in which 
the arrestee, a seemingly normal woman (Moss as Trinity), moves so quickly 
and powerfully it's unreal. Then there's a rather typical rooftop chase 
scene, but at the same time the establishment and the villains who are one 
and the same, are introduced, demonstrating their power and cold presence.
        Soon the real story begins to unfold which revolves around a computer 
hacker/working stiff named Thomas Anderson (Reeves) who goes by the alias 
`Neo' on-line. His introductory scene shows him being awaken at his bedside 
PC by words slowly appearing across the screen. It's as if the PC itself is 
talking to him and the message is very typical of a sci-fi/fantasy story, yet 
still interesting and moving. It's reminiscent of `2001' and `2010' where 
unknown, unseen intelligent sources manipulated man's technology. The overall 
theme of the film is much the same as Stanley Kubrick, Arthur C. Clarke and 
Peter Hyams tried to evoke with those films.
        Neo is basically a loner who can tell that something is wrong with 
the world but can't put his finger on it. He's been searching for the hacker 
`Morpheus' (Fishburne), who has also been searching for him. When the two are 
finally introduced it's clear that the rest of the story about to unfold is 
not going to take place in the reality as we know it, or even one closely 
related to it.
        >>SPOILERS

        Morpheus also broadens the story (and thus the plot) but mentioning 
something about `Zion,' the last human city and that a man was born inside 
the matrix who prophesied the coming of `The One' who would free man from the 
machines. There is also reference to an `Oracle,' a psychic-like woman who 
will later tell Neo of his significance and will also make some other 
predictions about him that come true (sort of).
        And thus begins a story which is both simple and of epic proportions 
simultaneously. The conflict is as basic as good versus evil without many 
sub-plots or goals for the heroes to achieve besides beating the machines. 
Yet at the same time the Wachowski brothers go out of their way to continue 
to flesh-out the world they've fashioned and in the process create for 
numerous philosophies that are profound within the film's context, but many 
also carry over to the real world. 
        For example, one of Morpheus's crew members says he liked `Tasty 
Wheat' when he was in the matrix, but wonders how the machines knew what it 
tastes like. For all he knows, what he's tasting is the taste of chicken, 
`which is why chicken tastes like everything,' he says. That might not seem 
too deep much beyond a one-liner but there is validity to it and many of the 
other philosophies dropped here and there carry much more weight.
        Another sign of the film's intelligence and originality is in the 
structuring of its story. The basic idea of a man coming to save mankind 
isn't anything new, that's what the entire Bible (and Judeo-Christian 
theology) is about. Most creators wouldn't dare try to make such a parallel 
within a story with such universal implications, but the Wachowski brothers 
are able to pull it off well here. They don't try very hard to disguise their 
symbols, though (`Neo' is an obvious anagram of `one,' as is `Morpheus' to 
`Push Rome.' The last human city is `Zion' which is a term for Heaven in the 
Bible. Other references: the character name Trinity, the ship Nebuchadnezzar, 
a Judas-like betrayal of the alleged savior... oh, and a slight case of 
resurrection).
        However, the film is not without its problems. It essentially has no 
middle act  as the first two-thirds of the film are spent explaining the 
reality and the concept of the matrix to Neo and his importance and his 
training, and all of a sudden a specific conflict is thrown in as Morpheus 
and his crew fall into grave danger because of a traitor. The last half hour 
is mostly a typical series of violent action sequences in the name of the 
ultimate good versus the ultimate evil.
        Even if the last act is somewhat of a cop-out it's no different than 
many other excellent sci-fi and fantasy films' climaxes (eh hem, >cough

        Rumors indicate this film is only the first of a trilogy, but even if 
it's not, there's so much to the film that the viewer can conclude their own 
background elements and the long-term finale of the story.
        There's really nothing more satisfying than watching a film and 
getting the sense the creators are simply taking everything they've learned 
about the genre from tons of other similar works, drawing from them all and 
producing something new and original without coming off as trite and cliched. 
That's the feeling that comes with `The Matrix,' which is great because it 
doesn't rub off after the film is over. It's something to continually ponder 
how well so many elements were synchronized together to make for such an 
enjoyable piece of entertainment.                 
---------------------------------
Please visit Chad'z 
Movie Page
 - over 220 new and old movies reviewed in-depth, not just blind ratings 
and blather capsules.
Member of The O.F.C.S. (Online Film 
Critics Society)

Title
Review for Goonies, The (1985)
The Goonies
Chad'z rating: *** (out of 4 = good)
1985, PG, 113 minutes [1 hour, 53 minutes]
[adventure/comedy]
starring: Sean Astin (Mikey), Josh Brolin (Brand), Jeff Cohen (Chunk), Corey
Feldman (Mouth), written by Steven Spielberg, Chris Columbus, produced by
Harvey Bernhard, Richard Donner, directed by Richard Donner.
Filmmakers know children have the wildest imaginations and the greatest
spirit of adventure, but few are able to make movies depicting that sense
accurately. So what makes "The Goonies" so good is the fact it epitomizes
that innocent feeling with a grand adventure all children fantasize about.
The film starts off in a lighthearted way as we see two brothers escape from
prison with help from their mother. They are the Fratelli's, a bickering,
bumbling family of criminals who are quite the caricatures, yet they keep
with the zany atmosphere. A funny, non-violent chase scene ensues and in the
process we are introduced to some of the supporting characters via cameos.
Anywhere else this might seem like too strong of an opening, but Donner's
pacing is breezy and fun.
Paldom and adventure always compliment each other, which is probably what
makes this film so enjoyable. The first act is a believable, funny portrait
of a group of pre-teenage boys known as The Goonies. First there's Mikey
(Astin), the leader who believes his father is going to save the neighborhood
from impending foreclosure (the reason for this is not clearly stated, and
although it is a flaw, it is not entirely relevant). We also meet Mouth
(Feldman), Data (Ke Hey Kuan), and Chunk (Cohen), whose nicknames reflect
something about them (Mouth is the wiseass, Data is the inventor, Chunk is
the fat kid). There's also Brand (Brolin), Mikey's older brother who's always
pushing him around. 
Right away we get a sense of reality and it's very funny as the boys are
always making fun of each other, telling each other to shut up, and using
curse words when adults aren't around. When they think they've found a map to
a pirate's treasure they jump on their bikes and head off to find it, even
though they know it could be dangerous.
Most of the film walks a fine line of plausibility, and it does a good job
in its manuevering. You don't find yourself wondering if the kids really
think they'll find the treasure, instead, you wonder if they'll actually get
to it. There are many obstacles in their way including the Fratelli's, booby
traps galore, and their struggle to work together. Sub-plots start to form
such as Chunk's "The boy who cried wolf" personality and his attempt to bond
with the Fratelli's deformed, almost mutant-like brother. 
There isn't much here in terms of story, it's basically a trek through miles
of tunnels and the encounters that ensue. The screenplay doesn't really
emphasize character development per se, but the characters don't seem
two-dimensional either. The movie aims to be an adventure and it does deliver
on that notion, even when the attempts at suspense and comedy go overboard. 
I'm not sure how I felt about the last act. Even though I was constantly
entertained, the entire final segment starts to push the envelope further
than necessary. The finale seems only slightly more grand than all the other
adventures, and the ending itself is just plain cheesy. 
It's difficult to tell if "The Goonies" is specifically aimed at "the kid in
you," or if it's just an offbeat adventure. Any way you look at it, it's
still innocent, funny, exciting, and original - you can't argue with that.
Please visit Chad'z Movie Page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz - over 150
new and old films reviewed in depth, not just blind ratings and quick
capsules. Also, check out The FIRST Shay Astar Web Page @
http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz/ShayAstar.html
e-mail: ChadPolenz@aol.com or Polenz02@morrisville.edu
(C) 1997 Chad Polenz

Title
Review for People vs. Larry Flynt, The (1996)
***1/2 (out of 4 = very good)
1996, R, 130 minutes [2 hours, 10 minutes]
[drama]
starring: Woody Harrelson (Larry Flynt), Courtney Love (Althea
Leasure-Flynt), Edward Norton (Alan Isaacman), Brett Harrelson (Jimmy Flynt),
written by Scott Alexander, Larry Karaszewski, produced by Oliver Stone,
Janet Yang, Michael Hausman, directed by Milos Forman.
Free speech is an issue we debate every day in the United States, and
although our country has been around for 220 years, we still aren't sure what
the framers of the constitution mean when they wrote the First Amendment.
"The People Vs. Larry Flynt" is an enjoyable, thought-provoking film about a
modern battle over the issue. However, sometimes it becomes just as
gratuitous as the lives of its characters. 
Woody Harrelson stars as Larry Flynt, who most would consider to be the
lowest of society as he makes his living from selling "immoral smut." As a
child he sold moonshine, and as an adult, he and his brother Jimmy (played by
Harrelson's brother Brett) run a strip club. The immediate atmosphere of the
film is quite lighthearted and satirical. It doesn't seem like something to
take too seriously even when a passionate relationship forms between Larry
and a bi-sexual stripper named Althea Leasure (Love). None of these
characters are all that likable, but they are not repulsive either.
Larry and Jimmy start publishing "Hustler," a pornographic magazine, but
unlike "Playboy," the Flynts' magazine contains much more explicit
photographs. Larry knows no one buys such magazines for the articles, and
he's just giving his customers what they want - right? 
Flynt is arrested for selling obscene literature, and is defended by a young
lawyer named Alan Isaacman (Norton) who comes to Flynt because he is a
champion of civil liberties. They lose the case and he is sentenced to 25
years, but in the next scene he is out of jail. This is one of my small
peeves with this film, as it seems to cop-out often. Flynt is constantly
arrested, tried, sentenced, and then released - and it becomes a bit
predictable as a whole, but still manages to be interesting.
Although the dominating theme is Flynt's battle for free speech, the film
also acts as an offbeat love story. Love is great as Larry's drug addled wife
Althea, who is the only woman who seems to love and support him through his
troubles. Harrelson and Love do make for an interesting couple, but they seem
to be in constant haze of drugs and sex - what is their relationship based
on?
The films' biggest problem is the constant flip-flopping between the
satirical aspect of Flynt's court battles and the depravity of his
relationship with his wife, who eventually is diagnosed with AIDS. Because
this is based on a true story I understand why both themes and moods are
relevant and important, but they tend to cloud each other's impact. One
minute we are laughing at Flynt in the courtroom, and the next we are
supposed to be crying over his home life.
The final legal battle Flynt endures is a libel suit issued by Jerry
Falwell, which goes all the way to the Supreme Court. Falwell and the
Christian right are constantly portrayed as enemies throughout the film, and
I think this is shaky ground. The film seems to depict them all as insane
zealots, and I really don't think that's true. 
Most people don't realize how important Larry Flynt's legal battles really
were. His ultimate victory was one involving libel, not pornography, and I
don't think the film emphasizes this enough. Whether or not you agree with
Flynt's life is irrelevant; what everyone must understand is the U.S.
Constitution must protect "scumbags" like him in order to protect everyone
else. 
Please visit Chad'z Movie Page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz

Title
Review for Pee-wee's Big Adventure (1985)
*** (out of 4 = good)
1985, PG, 90 minutes [1 hour, 30 minutes]
[comedy]
starring: Paul Reubens (Pee Wee Herman), Elizabeth Daily (Dottie), Mark
Holton (Francis), Diane Salinger (Simone), written by Paul Reubens, Phil
Hartman, Michael Varhol, produced by Robert Shapiro, Richard Gilbert
Abramson, directed by Tim Burton.
"Pee Wee's Big Adventure" is a live action cartoon farce that epitomizes
stupidity... and I  liked it. It's the story of an immature, idiot manchild,
and because he is so ridiculously silly, it makes for brilliant comedy.
Paul Reubens stars as Pee Wee Herman, an adult with a 4-year-old boy's face
and personality. Pee Wee does not live in the real world; his house is a
cross between an amusement park, a funhouse, and a huge toy store. He has an
"Absent-Minded Professor"-type device that makes his breakfast for him while
he wraps Scotch tape around his head in the bathroom. This opening scene is
only the first of countless sight gags, and what's amazing is they actually
work! 
The zaniness continues throughout the film with one of the best scenes
occurring when Pee Wee opens his secret storage facility for his bicycle
(which looks like the kind of bike the guys from "Mission: Impossible" would
have used as kids). The music becomes overly dramatic and spotlights and
dramatic camera angles are used to highlight the bike's gizmos and gadgets
and its importance to Pee Wee. 
But where there is good there must be evil, and we get the typical rich,
snobby "kid" Francis (Holton), who wants Pee Wee's bike more than anything.
As Pee Wee goes shopping for x-ray glasses and boomerang bow ties (to match
the tight grey suit he always wears), he is shocked to find his bike missing
from the robotic clown he chained it to. 
And so we get the typical road trip comedy as our small hero tries to
hitchhike 2,000 miles to San Antonio, Texas because a phony psychic told him
his bike is in the basement of the Alamo. First he is picked up by an escape
convict, who kicks him out after he drives the car over a cliff, then he is
picked up by an eccentric old truck driver who turns out to be a ghost. And
if that wasn't enough, he must escape the 300-pound boyfriend of a friendly
waitress, and is almost killed again when he accidentally messes with a biker
gang.
Although most of the jokes stem from Pee Wee's wild antics and zany sight
gags, there is a good amount of witty satire here. In fact, the film uses its
childish attitude to make for some of the funniest satire I've ever seen.
There are many "goofs" throughout this film where crew and/or equipment is
visible, but since there is such a "don't care" attitude to everything, it's
funny and quite original.
"Pee Wee's Big Adventure" isn't anything genius, but it is very funny. There
is a laugh-out-loud joke a few times a minute and most of them work (unlike
most commercial comedies). Maybe it's likable because it speaks to the child
inside of us, or maybe we just like to see stupidity once in a while. 
please visit Chad'z Movie Page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz

Title
Review for Dances with Wolves (1990)
***1/2 (out of 4 = very good)
1990, PG-13, 181 minutes [3 hours, 1 minute]
[drama/western]
starring: Kevin Costner (John Dunbar/Dances With Wolves), Mary McDonnell
(Stands With A Fist), Graham Greene (Kicking Bird), Rodney A. Grant (Wind In
His Hair), written by Michael Blake (based on his novel), produced by Jim
Wilson, Kevin Costner, directed by Kevin Costner.
"Dances With Wolves" is touching and well made, but at times it seems as if
it's trying just a little too hard to exist. It has makings of a classic:
full of drama and passion, understanding and communication, and violence and
power, but perhaps they are emphasized a little too much.
Kevin Costner directed, produced, and stars in this epic tale about John
Dunbar, a Union lieutenant during the Civil War, who heads west to mark a
post for pioneers and soldiers. He encounters some Sioux Indians who are
portrayed rather savagely at first. We fear them and almost hate them as much
as Dunbar. Can they make peace?         
Much of the story revolves around the Indian tribe as we learn they are just
as afraid of the white man as he is of them. Dunbar makes his first real
gesture for peace when he encounters an injured Indian woman and gives her
medical attention. When he brings her back to her tribe, they are not
thankful, instead they scare him away. 
Eventually, the two sides work together and communicate. Both Dunbar and
Sioux wonder where all the Buffalo have gone, and this gives them their first
conflict to solve together.
Little happens in terms of plot and individual events. There isn't much
dialogue because the two people cannot speak the same language. However, the
body language and other forms of symbolic communication they use makes the
story interesting. The characters show their emotions through their actions,
they work together, hunt together and at least try to communicate with one
another. 
But a film cannot depend on indirect communication, so a translator (and a
lover) is provided. Mary McDonnell co-stars as Stands With A Fist, a white
woman who has lived with the Sioux since she was a child. It is obvious she
and Dunbar will fall in love, but it does not seem as cliche it sounds.
Because we are experiencing a new culture here, the concept of love is
different from what we are used to. This originality and sense of character
is what makes the film so great and touching. At first we feared the Sioux,
now they are our friends and our family.
I didn't like the third act that much, but it's the entire point of the
film. When Dunbar goes back to his cabin he is no longer John Dunbar, he is
Dances With Wolves, and when the newly arrived Northern Army sees him, they
mistake him for an Indian. These are the people we and Dunbar started out
with, and now we see them in a completely different manner. The story almost
becomes an adventure as we hope Dunbar will escape. It's exciting to watch,
but it does seem a bit much.
Despite a few flaws, "Dances With Wolves" is excellent for what it is. But
it does have a vivid theme about maturity, tolerance, and war and peace. We
are all John Dunbar, but how many of us go through such experiences to become
Dances With Wolves?
please visit Chad'z Movie Page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz/index.html

Title
Review for U-571 (2000)
The story tells of the United States' efforts to crack Nazi U-boats' 
communication codes during World War
II. To do so they must get an encoding device off a Nazi submarine without 
the rest of the German army
knowing they've done so. 
Matthew McConaughey stars as Lt. Andy Tyler, a sub-under-assistant Naval 
officer who thinks he could be
a leader and gets his wish when his crew's mission to get the encoder is 
botched and all hell breaks loose. 
The film presents an interesting and original plot when Tyler and his crew 
are stuck in a German sub and
must fight off another German sub and a destroyer ship while their own boat 
is falling apart. 
The action sequences are interesting at first but wear out quickly after the 
same scenarios keep repeating
and the individual conflicts and problems within the sub become so 
predictable and just plain fake. A good
premise hurt by poor direction. 
Chad'z Movie Page is back! 
New reviews of the latest movies in easy-to-swallow capsule form with the 
trendy, Entertainment Weekly-style of letter grades instead of the old star 
system. Have I sold out? Visit my page and decide for yourself ;-)

Title
Review for Trzy kolory: Bialy (1994)
White
Chad'z rating: *** (out of 4 = good)
1994, R, 92 minutes [1 hour, 32 minutes]
[drama]
starring: Zbigniew Zamachowski (Karol Karol), Janusz Gajos (Mikolaj), Julie
Delpy (Dominique), Jerzy Stuhr (Jurek), written by Krysztof Piesiewicz,
Krzysztof Kielowski, produced by Marin Karmitz, directed by Krysztof
Kielowski.
"White" is the second installment of Krzysztof Kielowski's "Three Colors"
trilogy. My ethnic origins are French and Polish so maybe I have some kind of
internal bias for liking this film which takes place in both France and
Poland (and was made by French and Polish filmmakers). But all of that is
really irrelevant because this is a good, moving film about love and freedom.
The story starts out in a French courtroom where a couple is getting a
divorce. The husband's name is Karol Karol, (Zamachowski), a depressed and
desperate man who loves his [soon to be ex-] wife Dominique (Delpy), but
doesn't know what he did wrong and doesn't know how to make things better. 
We then proceed to follow Karol around for a while which makes from some
good characterization and offbeat dialogue and situations. He is a Pole stuck
in France and wants to get back home, but has no money and no friends. Even
Dominique is unwilling to help him and we really can sympathize with him.
Karol is reduced to playing his comb like a harmonica, begging for change
until he meets another Pole named Mikolaj (Gajos), and the two become close
friends quickly. The two figure out a cunning way to sneak Karol back into
Poland. Maybe the situation in premise is difficult to relate to, but it is
the camaraderie between that two that makes the story so interesting, as
everyone knows how important, almost life-saving, a good friend can be.
But Karol's love for Dominique has not diminished. He becomes a con-man of
sorts, making a bundle of money through insider trading. Even through all
this great storytelling and characterization we can still sympathize for his
love for Dominique. He hatches a brilliant plan to get her back by faking his
own death.
I guess the final act works pretty much as you'd expect it to. It starts to
become a straight romance story, but all the while it's able to maintain its
good characterization.
"White" does harbor rather profound themes of love and relationships, but
it's more than a typical love story. It's a good film about living life to
the fullest, because unlike the characters, there's no guarantees of second
chances.
Please visit Chad'z Movie Page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz - over 140
new and old films reviewed in depth, not just blind ratings and capsules.
Also, check out The FIRST Shay Astar Web Page @
http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz/ShayAstar.html

Title
Review for Crew, The (2000)
It's mean to laugh at old people, unless they act like they're young - then 
it's okay. The problem is it's difficult to make a movie on this concept, you 
have to have a certain niche to center the story around. "The Crew" is a 
rather generic modern comedy that follows this rule to the letter, but that's 
fine by me because the result is a geniunely funny film that is actually 
entertaining for the entire running time. 
You might remember 1999's "Analyze This" - a comedy starring Robert De Niro 
as an aging gangster who finally starts to let his feelings show and thinks 
about retirement. "The Crew" is the next progression of that - it's what 
happens after the gangster has retired and moved to Florida and is now just 
like every other senior citizen there. 
The movie stars Richard Dreyfuss, Burt Reynolds, Dan Hedaya and Seymour 
Cassell who don't exactly look like retired mobsters, but their attitude is 
pretty close. Except for Reynolds' character, they've all gone rather soft in 
their old age to the point where they actually exchange greeting cards with 
other retired gangsters. They're not still involved in "the life" so why 
would they be enemies anymore? 
The story starts rolling when we see the four old guys sitting on the porch 
of their beach-view apartment complex watching all the hot babes in bikinis 
and the guys with the huge pecs go by ("everyone on the beach has giant 
breasts," the Dreyfuss character narrates). The problems it's those same 
people who want to seize all the vacancies in the hotels and condos formerly 
occupied by the seniors. Management realizes this and through a series of 
events that aren't explained in much detail it appears our four heroes are 
going to be evicted and have to find a new place they can afford just on 
their social security and leftover savings. 
They hatch a plan to mimick a mob-style hit in their building's lobby which 
proceeds to drive all the tenants out and land the men some reward money for 
agreeing to stay. One thing leads to another and suddenly they feel like 
they're back in the life and even get an offer to "whack" someone. They 
refuse and instead just try to fake it via arson but that backfires when the 
accidentally burn down the biggest drug lord's house in Florida. 
You can pretty much imagine where the story will go from here and what it 
took to lead up to this. However, this is where the film surprises you - the 
screenplay doesn't come off as a sitcom extended to feature-length status, 
and although there's quite a few coincidences on top of coincidences it's 
buyable. The writers don't use short-cuts and I'm sure the fact Barry 
Sonnenfield was a producer had something to do with the movie's quality. 
There is a good sense of character here, not only of the four "crew" members 
but also of the drug lord they've miffed, two detectives who are on to them, 
and a stripper and her step-mother who also get pulled into the fray. 
I have to say I liked pretty much everything I saw. The comedy has many 
laughs and quite a few belly laughs here and there. The tone keeps everything 
sane and it doesn't go overboard as another zany goofball picture and there's 
a dash of black comedy to give it some zing. I mean, when you've got a comedy 
about four retired gangsters trying to get back into the life you can expect 
some funny stuff - do you think they know how to handle a gun anymore, or how 
to fake a murder or how to kidnap someone properly anymore? 
"The Crew" works as a comedy not trying to be anything it's not. There is a 
sub-plot about Dreyfuss's character who's looking for his long-lost daughter 
that plays for some cheesy moments, but it's not so trite as to become a 
stumbling stone for the rest of the film. Everything's lighthearted enough to 
keep that tongue-in-cheek attitude alive. 
-------------------------------------- (here's where my e-mail ends and my 
signature begins)---------
Chad'z Movie Page is back 
after heavy renovation. Reviews of nearly all mainstream movies playing 
today! Get my reviews of everything playing at your local cineplex so you can 
better make an informed decision on what to see. Don't forget to vote on my 
poll and sign the guestbook!

Title
Review for While You Were Sleeping (1995)
While You Were Sleeping
Chad'z rating: *** (out of 4 = good)
1995, PG, 103 minutes [1 hour, 43 minutes]
[romantic comedy]
starring: Sandra Bullock (Lucy), Bill Pullman (Jack), Jack Warden (Saul),
Peter Gallagher (Peter), written by Daniel G. Sullivan, Fredric Lebow,
produced by Joe Roth, Roger Birnbaum, directed by Jon Turtletaub.
"While You Were Sleeping" is truly a modern day fairytale. It's a story so
fantastic and romantic you don't realize how impossible it seems. After all,
what are fairytales for?
The film stars Sandra Bullock as a Lucy, a cute but lonely token collector
for Chicago's famous elevated transit system. Everyday she goes through the
same routine, but there is one man (Gallagher as Peter) who comes to her line
everyday who makes it all worthwhile. She adores him, but she knows he'll
never ask her out and she isn't brave enough to ask him. She doesn't even
know his name.
One day the man is mugged and pushed on to the tracks and knocked
unconscious. Lucy runs to his rescue and miraculously saves him, and rushes
him to the hospital. But when the hospital staff won't let her in to see him,
she accidentally leads them to believe he is her fiancee just as the man's
family walks in. And so the typical comedy where everyone is mislead ensues,
but it works perfectly here. It's very romantic as you hope that somehow the
man will come out of his coma and the two really will fall in love. 
Enter Jack Callahan (Pullman), the brother of Peter (the mystery man), who
becomes suspicious of Lucy. The two start to hang out and get to know each
other, and it's obvious an unspoken attraction here. This makes for an
original situation, because you'd expect the two would fall madly in love
right away... but thankfully this doesn't happen.
Most of the film shows Lucy's relationship with the Callahans and her
involvement with Jack. Jack doesn't know the truth about the "engagement,"
but Lucy never tells him. Here is where a real problem starts to occur, do we
hope Lucy will tell the truth and get together with Jack? Or is this just a
bad idea altogether and should she somehow try to marry Peter? After all, she
did say he was her dream man - why would she turn down the opportunity to
finally be with him? 
Eventually Peter recovers from his coma, and when the family tells him about
Lucy he doesn't know what they're talking about. There are some pretty funny
scenes in which Peter tries to remember everyday things, but doesn't
understand why he can't remember meeting and falling in love with Lucy. We
also learn Peter's character is a Scrooge-like greedy lawyer who chases
ambulances and fakes his own heroics in order to make himself look good. Even
though Peter can't remember Lucy, he feels reborn and does fall in love with
her. He even proposes to her in a scene that's unlike anything you've ever
seen before.
The ending might be a little typical but at least it's funny and very
charming. I can't believe it works as well as it does, which is quite an
accomplishment for such a mainstream film.
Maybe the premise to "While You Were Sleeping" is a little cheesy, but darn
it, I liked it. It's funny, romantic, creative, and makes you feel good and
shows the mysterious power love has.  
Please visit Chad'z Movie Page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz - over 140
new and old films reviewed in depth, not just blind ratings and capsules.
Also, check out The FIRST Shay Astar Web Page @
http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz/ShayAstar.html

Title
Review for Bedazzled (2000)
Harold Ramis's movies are often difficult to review because they're just so 
good and solid it's hard to pick up on a particular aspect or niche and write 
around. "Bedazzled" is a good example of this. It's a straight comedy about a 
loser who sells his soul to the devil for some wishes but nothing goes as 
planned and hilarity ensues. It's certainly nothing genius but it is funny 
and entertaining. 
Brendan Fraser stars as Elliot Richards, a geeky dork who works as a tech 
support operator at a computer company. Elliot is the kind of guy who's in a 
deep state of loser denial: he tries to fit in with the other guys in the 
office by talking in outdated slang and constantly fake smiling and laughing 
but they all politely reject him. One of the first scenes shows him talking 
to an African-American co-worker asking him if he wants to play basketball 
after work and says, "Make sure you tell me the right time to be 
there because last time when I showed up you guys were all leaving." 
You can pretty much get the grasp of Fraser's character in just the first few 
scenes. Everyone knows someone like this so you're not just laughing at the 
character being funny in a comedy, you're laughing because you've seen this 
type of person do the type of things he does. You roll your eyes and you 
can't help but laugh at him being a goof. And thankfully Ramis doesn't resort 
to a lot of slapstick and sight gags (a la Kramer on "Seinfeld"), he just 
gives Elliot a lot of good lines and Fraser does a good job in playing the 
character. 
Of course whenever you have a nerd you have to have a bombshell for him to 
secretly be in love with. Frances O'Connor plays that character, a pretty 
brunette named Alison who is surprised when Elliot approaches her in a bar 
trying to make casual conversation and of course politely rejects him. 
Enter Elizabeth Hurley as the devil who knows how desperate Elliot and he'd 
be an easy target for a soul exchange. I think this is the first movie where 
the devil comes in the form of a woman and a hot chick at that. Hurley is as 
sexy as the role requires her to be. She oozes attraction and doesn't have to 
try very hard to persuade Elliot to trade his soul for seven wishes. It's 
predictable of course but it's not forced or trite - kind of cartoony but 
with a naughty adult appeal. 
And so Elliot proceeds to make his wishes, each involves a major lifestyle 
change that he thinks would be the key to getting Alison. 
I think a rule of movies, or pretty much any medium of fiction, is that if 
you make a wish to a wish granter you'll get it but there will be a price to 
pay for it. Edgar Allen Poe's "The Monkey's Paw" is a classic example of this 
and "Bedazzled" works in much the same way. Elliot wishes to be rich and 
powerful and married to Alison so the devil turns him into a Colombian drug 
lord whose wife is cheating on him. Technically he got his wish. 
That's how all the wishes Elliot makes turn out. He gets what he wishes for 
but they're all fulfilled as literally as he asked for them. There's a scene 
where Elliot wishes he could be the most sensitive guy in the world because 
he knows women want that in men, but even that backfires on him. That scene 
takes place on a beach and every time Elliot turns to look at the sunset he 
weeps and it drives Alison crazy. 
What "Bedazzled" secretly has going for it is the satire at work during every 
wish sequence. The sensitivity wish is a great example of this. Another is 
when Elliot becomes a pro basketball player and we see the announcers talking 
about how he's broken every record Michael Jordan and Wilt Chamberlain ever 
set. After the game he's interviewed by a reporter saying jargon so inane 
it's hilarious. He can't answer any question flat-out, he just says, "It was 
a team effort... you gotta give 110%... you can't give up." Meanwhile sweat 
is pouring down his face so hard it soaks the reporter. 
The film maintains balance by not making the surprises too ridiculous - 
they're fluffy and iconic enough to work in a mainstream movie. You know, the 
kind of stuff that might happen in a Jim Carrey flick only without the 
gross-out factor. Fraser is able to effectively hold his own in every 
outrageous scenario and still keep Elliot in character. The film utilizes the 
supporting characters in a "Wizard Of Oz" way where they are all play roles 
within each wish scenario. Orlando Jones (the 7-Up guy) is the best of them, 
however, the others are a little weak (think of a sub-par "Saturday Night 
Live" sketch). 
The ending's a nice breath of fresh air. Sure it's as standard as they come 
but it's not corny or sappy or anything so annoying as most comedies tend to 
rely on for effect. 
All in all "Bedazzled" works because it's put together well and doesn't try 
to be anything it's not. It has potential to be an innovative satire but 
works fine as a plain old "ha ha" comedy. 
------------------------------------------------------------------------ 
You can also read this review at: 
http://www.epinions.com/mvie-review-51A3-237574FC-39F4D434-prod3
And other reviews on the same topic at: http://www.epinions.com/mvie 
Check out my profile page at: http://www.epinions.com/user-chad9976  
Chad'z Movie Page is back! 
In-depth reviews of nearly all mainstream films playing at your local 
cineplex. There's also reviews of a few classic films and some of your 
personal favorites.

Title
Review for Unbreakable (2000)
I used to be a comic book geek. I loved comics so much as a kid that I 
actively pursued a career in comic book art... but that didn't pan out. If 
you had ever used the words "comics" and "stupid" in the same breath within 
my earshot I would have rebutted you for every irrational generalization you 
had made. Some people get hostile over social issues like racism and abortion 
- trying to convince the world comics weren't just for kids and are the 
missing link in the worlds of literature and art was my cause. 
I'll bet M. Night Shymalan feels the same way. His film "Unbreakable" is as 
close as a Hollywood will probably ever get to making a "comic book movie." 
Forget those campy Batman flicks and other special effects extravaganzas we 
get every summer, this is what would happen if a man really had super powers. 
The first rule of comics is that the origin is the nucleus of the characters. 
For some reason when it comes to superheroes we tend to be more interested in 
where they came from rather than when they beat the villains. Pick up any 
comic book price guide and you'll see that the first appearance  and/or 
origin of a character is worth FAR much more than the death or defeat of 
their arch nemesis. "Unbreakable" is basically one long origin story of the 
hero, not an action-packed "quest for justice" machine. We've had movies 
about that stuff for years, but when's the last time someone took the time to 
examine how the hero came to be a hero? 
Bruce Willis stars as David Dunn, a security guard at a college in 
Philadelphia who's on the verge of divorce with his wife and tries to keep a 
relationship with his 10-year-old son. As the film opens we see him on a 
train, he slips off his wedding band to flirt with an attractive woman who's 
just taken a seat next to him. Next we cut to his son watching a TV news 
report of a huge train wreck and he realizes his dad was on the train. We 
then cut to a hospital emergency room where David is being looked at by a 
doctor and receives word that he's the only survivor of that train wreck and 
he doesn't have a scratch on him. How is that possible? David has no idea and 
the doctors aren't like those typical movie doctors who want to keep him in 
the hospital to do experiments on him to find out what's so special about 
him. David simply walks away and goes back to living his life as if nothing 
had happened. 
David's introductory scenes are intercut with a completely different 
storyline about an African-American boy named Elijah who's been cursed with a 
rare genetic disorder that makes his bones very frail and his body easily 
susceptible to injury. His mother loves him deeply and wants him to still be 
able to interact with society so she gets him to cross the street to a 
playground where Elijah opens a present to find a comic book. 
In the present day he's the same age as David and owns and operates an art 
gallery made up exclusively of original comic-related art. We see him showing 
a piece to a customer describing the picture in the kind of detail that 
mueseum curators and art history teachers would use to discuss a Picasso or a 
Van Gough. Samuel L. Jackson co-stars as the adult Elijah in one of his best 
performances ever. He's deadly serious about comics being an artform to be 
appreciated and studied as any other and Jackson's words, especially as 
penned by Shymalan are quite moving. He's one of those characters whose 
intellect and deep philosophies make him seem dastardly. He points out small 
bits of truth and details others overlook, but other than having an unhealthy 
love for comics there's nothing physically threatening to him. 
David and Elijah meet and discuss the possibility that David might be some 
kind of super mortal. Elijah's theory is that if everything in the universe 
is balanced there must be someone out there who's the exact opposite of him 
and that person could be the real-life superhero humanity has been searching 
for ever since fairytales have been told. 
There's not much point of further elaborating on the plot. What makes 
"Unbreakable" so fascinating is how it tells its story of personal discovery. 
This is a character-driven story, therefore explosions and chases aren't 
necessary. Shymalan's direction is one of the most original methods I've ever 
seen, something so powerful and well-composed it rivals Stanley Kubrick and 
Alfred Hitchcock. This film is a visual feast for those who are looking c
losely. He makes great use of steadicam shots as well as crane shots and just 
plain old generic two-shots. Shymalan keeps the mix fresh, constantly 
experimenting and has such a great screenplay to accompany it that the 
slow-motion overly-dramatic sequences don't come off as trite and cheesy. His 
dialogue is also EXTREMELY low-key, mellow and passive. I'm sure that will 
put off many viewers but I found it to be a great mood enhancer, plus it is 
consistent. There's no bubbly cartoony lovable characters here, even the 
10-year-old son is an introvert - he's not running all over the place or 
playing video games, he honestly wants to take care of his father. Most child 
characters in a setting like this would brag about their father's super 
abilities and try to turn them into a comic book superhero, instead, Joseph 
just lives in awe of what his dad can do and obeys his orders. 
I remember the exact moment I realized this film was excellent. It comes just 
as the second act transitions into the third and it's clear to both us and 
David he is a super man of sorts, but what can and will he do with his 
"powers"? I asked myself, "How is this going to end?" and I had absolutely no 
idea. There's no nasty evil supervillain with magic powers for David to fight 
against, so how will the story climax? I was shocked when I realized I 
couldn't even guess at the answer and I was so psyched to find out. 
When you've got a movie with metaphysical philosophies and themes about the 
battle between good and evil it's probably going to end in a fantastic 
triumph. This film does just that as our hero maximizes the use of his powers 
to find out what he's needed to do. All heroes have one achille's heel and 
this story exploits that notion too, building terrific suspense with a real 
feeling that justice has been served. 
And that's not even the actual ending which will blow your mind. 
Take it from someone who's seen more than his share of movies and read more 
than his share of comics, "Unbreakable" is one of the most original and 
enjoyable works of fiction to come along in years. 
------------------------------------------------------------------------ 
You can also read this review at: 
http://www.epinions.com/mvie-review-2F0A-4B0B31B0-3A5A2A2A-prod3 
And other reviews on the same topic at: http://www.epinions.com/mvie 
Check out my profile page at: 
http://www.epinions.com/user-chad9976 
*****
Chad'z Movie Page is back! 
In-depth reviews of nearly all mainstream films playing at your local 
cineplex. There's also reviews of a few classic films and some of your 
personal favorites.

Title
Review for Hudsucker Proxy, The (1994)
** (out of 4 = fair)
1993, PG, 111 minutes [1 hour, 41 minutes]
[satire]
starring: Tim Robbins (Norville Barnes), Jennifer Jason Leigh (Amy Archer),
Paul Newman (Sidney J. Mussburger), produced by Ethan Coen, written by Ethan
and Joel Coen, Sam Raimi, directed by Joel Coen.
In many adventure and fantasy movies there is a tendency to rely too heavily
upon effects and gimmicks to make for an entertaining story. The same thing
happens in "The Hudsucker Proxy" except with satire and image. This film is
obviously a satire through mood and genre, but it's hard to tell what exactly
it's satirizing. It's essentially a live action cartoon, but a strange one at
that. 
We meet Norville Barnes (Robbins) who is fresh out of college and searching
for success. But he is stuck with an timeless dilemma: how to get a job
without experience and how to get experience without a job? 
The immediate outlook of the film doesn't seem like a comedy, but more of a
lighthearted, satirical story that is certainly curious. The characters don't
act like real people, but like parodies of parodies. The production design is
quite surrealistic, like a cross between the darkness of Gothic and the
lightheartedness of Bugs Bunny cartoons. Everything happens so quickly with
little explanation, it's hard to tell what's real and what's part of the
atmosphere.
We witness the president of Hudsucker Industries, the most important company
in the world, leap from the 44th floor (45th counting the mezzanine) to the
pavement below. The execs of the company are like those on commercials;
drone-like and organized like clockwork, which is somewhat humorous, but not
laugh-out-loud funny. They need a new leader, one that will be a total idiot
in order to drive down stock prices so they can buy it all for themselves.
Guess who's going to be their proxy?
At this point there is a lot of potential - the film could go on to be a
straight fish-out-of-water comedy, but instead it remains on course as a
decorative, highbrow, satire. Eventually we have many formulated characters:
Norville, the lowbrow, gullible manchild; Mussburger (Newman) the typical con
man in a world full of idiots; and Amy Archer (Leigh), the fast-talking,
feminist journalist.
It all seems to blend together within its context, but as a whole, the film
doesn't work. The settings, acting, and direction are all fine but the script
is just plain boring.
So what is the point of "The Hudsucker Proxy?" What are the points of the
things that are mocked? And why make it all so formulated and cliche?
Sometimes open-ended stories like this can be fascinating, but this was just
puzzling. 
please visit Chad'z Movie Page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz

Title
Review for Get Carter (2000)
The job of the film critic is to see a movie and write a review of it that 
tells you what it's about and why it's good or bad. I feel kind of 
embarrassed to admit this, but I after having seen "Get Carter" I really 
can't tell you what it's about although I could go on and on about how and 
why it's a bad movie. 
"Get Carter" falls into that category of movies that continue to be made for 
reasons unknown to anyone outside of a Hollywood executive board room. You 
might call them the "Steven Seagal/Mickey Rourke/Jean-Claude Van Damme/Wesley 
Snipes School of Mediocre Action/Crime Thrillers." You know - the potboilers 
that are heavy on fistfights, shoot-outs and car chases but really light on 
plot and character development. They have stories where the so-called hero 
just keeps running into characters who have some connection to one of the 
other characters who are all antagonists without a reason for being in the 
movie other than to give the protagonist someone to fight, chase or shoot at.
Sylvester Stallone stars as Jack Carter, a Las Vegas-based mob enforcer who 
returns home* for his brother's funeral. He believes his brother Richie was 
"taken out" and didn't die from a DWI accident. Carter's one of the most 
cliche bad-asses ever captured on celluloid. His face alone is pretty 
intimidating and there's quite a few scenes in which he leans on both regular 
citizens and criminal lowlives simply by staring them down and speaking with 
confidence in his "Rambo-on-testosterone-therapy" voice. Stallone's 
performance in this movie is so forced and unnatural he doesn't realize he's 
mocking himself.
The actual story involves Carter's investigation into his brother Richie's 
death. He's in a town that's not his but somehow the local top dogs know him 
very well. Mickey Rourke co-stars as one of these characters, a sort of crime 
boss who has something to do with running a porno web site and blackmailing a 
young Internet tycoon (played by Alan Cummings looking and acting a lot like 
Pee Wee Herman). There's also another plot involving Richie's mistress, a 
secret CD-ROM with some convicting and disturbing evidence on it and 
something terrible involving one of Carter's still-living relatives.
I'm rolling my eyes just thinking about trying to critique all this in a way 
that could be remotely comprehendible. I could just rip the screenplay to 
shreds, plus the direction or the editing or the production values but that 
would require discussion of nearly every scene in order to explain it all. I 
don't like to put spoliers in my reviews either intentionally or accidentally.
Yes, "Get Carter" is just that complicated and complex. And what's worse is 
that it's not this intricate to make it seem smart like "The Usual Suspects" 
for example - just the opposite. You get the feeling whoever wrote this 
script did it in short intervals spaced far apart and they probably didn't 
remember what had already happened and didn't figure out how each scene would 
lead in to the next one or how the major plot points would work towards the 
climax.
All you really need to know is that most of the film is just scenes of Carter 
tracking down one scumbag or supposed witness after another, asking them what 
they know, getting information and then realizing that if he wasn't a 
complete idiot he could have figured it out in the first five minutes. 
Although the supporting characters are equally stupid themselves since they 
tell him everything which comes back to haunt them in one violent way or 
another.
Making a movie entirely about criminals doesn't necessarily mean they have to 
be unlikable and cliche cutout characters. Mel Gibson starred in "Payback" a 
few years ago that had a story not unlike this one but had such a good 
screenplay you couldn't help but like him even though he was just as bad a 
guy as Jack Carter. 
So ultimately "Get Carter" fails for pretty much every selling point it has. 
Carter is not a likable character and you really don't care if he gets 
revenge or not. The action sequences are not at all exciting or original. The 
enemies and their massive conspiracy are not threatening at all (c'mon, you 
know who's going to win every brawl and shoot-out and car chase). In the end 
you don't feel nearly satisfied with the results. The filmmakers did a good 
job in doing everything as unoriginal as possible.
* the city is never mentioned by name but I assume it's Seattle since all the 
cars have Washington license plates and it's always raining.
You can also read this review at: 
http://www.epinions.com/mvie-review-3A4E-B9887A8-39E4970C-prod1
And other reviews on the same topic at: http://www.epinions.com/mvie
Check out my profile page at: http://www.epinions.com/user-chad9976
*****
Chad'z Movie Page is back! 
In-depth reviews of nearly all mainstream films playing at your local 
cineplex. There's also reviews of a few classic films and some of your 
personal favorites.

Title
Review for Forrest Gump (1994)
**** (out of 4 = excellent)
1994, PG-13, 142 minutes [2 hours, 22 minutes]
[lighthearted drama]
Starring: Tom Hanks (Forrest Gump), Robin Wright (Jenny), Gary Sinise
(Lieutenant Dan), Mykelti Williamson (Bubba), Sally Field (Mrs. Gump),
written by Eric Roth, produced by Wendy Finerman, Steve Tisch, Steve Starkey,
directed by Robert Zemeckis, based on the novel by Winston Groom. 
"Forrest Gump" is quite a magical movie. It has a charm I haven't
experienced since "Back To The Future" (not surprisingly both films were
directed by Robert Zemeckis). It's an enjoyable, and often touching story of
a slow man who somehow experiences every major American historical event from
the 1950s to the 80s.
Tom Hanks delivers an incredible performance as Forrest Gump, a man who
isn't too bright, but is certainly likeable. The story is told from a park
bench as he is waiting for a bus, and proceeds to tell strangers his life
story. Some of them don't seem to be interested in what he has to say, but we
certainly are.
Forrest was born mentally and physically challenged. And since this is a
story about a child who is different, he is ostracized by the other children,
expect for one sweet girl named Jenny.
The immediate chemistry between young Forrest and Jenny is very sweet. It's
hard to explain why the film is so touching so quickly. Maybe because there's
a real sense of innocence to it, that Forrest isn't quite clever enough to
figure out what's really going on, and the love he has for Jenny isn't
typical Hollywood stuff.
But the film is not an intense drama, it is lighthearted and has a
satirical, comical effect at times. For instance we learn how Forrest (played
by Hanks from age 17 up) has a gift for running fast, and this allows him to
succeed by playing football, even though he doesn't know the rules. When
Forrest scores a touchdown he keeps running back to the locker room until
someone tells him to stop. This kind of subtle humor is scattered throughout
the movie and makes it so charming and enjoyable.        
However, not everything is so cheery in this picture, as Jenny (played by
Wright from age 17 up) grows up to become a drifter. When Forrest is in boot
camp he finds out that she posed for "Playboy" and was expelled from college
for it. She then becomes a stripper of sorts, and Forrest comes to her
rescue, but is never really able to save her in the long run.
This was the only problem I had with the film, the Jenny character does not
seem to keep with the rest of the story. She and Forrest were best friends as
children and we see her always coming back to him, and then running away. As
Forrest proceeds to go through amazing situations such as fighting in Vietnam
and becoming a champion ping-pong player, Jenny falls into a life of drugs
and abusive relationships.
Special mention must be give to Gary Sinise who gives a great supporting
performance as Lieutenant Dan Taylor, who claims Forrest cheated him out of
his destiny when he rescued him from death in Vietnam. The chemistry between
the two is of absolute contrast, with Forrest being a naive optimist, and Dan
the realist pessimist who hates everything, but for some reason finds
friendship in Forrest.
Even in the midst of all these situations that are quite tragic, it still is
able to present them in a very lighthearted and high spirited manner, and
that's what makes "Forrest Gump" great. Maybe because Forrest is ignorant,
and if ignorance is bliss, we'll absorb this mindset and find it enjoyable.         
(10/30/96) (1/29/97) (6/13/97) [also by Zemeckis: "Back To The Future,"
"Back To The Future Part II," "Back To The Future Part III"]
please visit Chad'z Movie Page @
http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz/index.html

Title
Review for 2001: A Space Odyssey (1968)
2001: A Space Odyssey
Chad'z rating: **** (out of 4 = excellent)
1968, G, 141 minutes [2 hours, 21 minutes]
[science fiction]
starring: Keir Dullea (Dave Bowman), Douglas Rain (voice of HAL 9000), Gary
Lockwood (Frank Poole), William Sylvester (Dr. Heywood Floyd), written by
Stanley Kubrick, Arthur C. Clarke, produced and directed by Stanley Kubrick. 
"2001: A Space Odyssey" lives up to its name by taking a profound look at
mankind. It wonders what our significance is in the universe, and questions
how intelligent we really are. It uses invisible, but powerful forces to
manipulate plot, which in turn allows the viewer to use his/her own
intelligence to decide what themes and ideas are being portrayed.
The opening scene depicts a large group of apes at the dawn of time who
encounter a mysterious monolith that suddenly appears out of nowhere. When
they touch it they become just a little bit smarter as they learn to make
weapons and tools. Although this is blatant storytelling it is symbolic of
the entire film as it uses simplicity to make for powerful themes.
We then flash forward to year 1999 where we meet Dr. Heywood Floyd
(Sylvester), an American scientist  en route to the moon. Floyd leads a
scientific mission on the moon where they have discovered a monolith buried
40 feet below the surface. Here is where the aforementioned "invisible
forces" really come into play. The scientists realize the monolith was
deliberately buried, which also means some intelligent being put it there for
a reason. And just like those primitive apes, the scientists crowd around the
monolith in awe which emits a radio signal (another unseen force) towards
Jupiter. The reason is unknown, but the fact we know there is a reason at all
is a frightening in a way.
The story again changes as it skips ahead 18 months to the U.S.S. Discovery
1 on its way to  "The Jupiter Mission" to study a new monolith orbiting
Jupiter. The Discovery's crew is led by Dave Bowman (Dullea), and Frank Poole
(Lockwood), along with the artificial intelligence computer HAL 9000 (voiced
by Rain). Kubrick's storytelling establishes a very high-tech atmosphere
quickly as to make Bowman and Poole appear primitive and almost useless
compared to the machines and computers. They seem intimidated by HAL's
intelligence and capabilities.
Kubrick's film emphasizes the value of humanity by paradoxically
dehumanizing the characters. The storytelling is slowly paced but always
interesting to watch due to the detail and realistic atmosphere. When it
seems as if HAL has gone insane the mood becomes quite chilling especially
considering how gentle and humanistic HAL's personality is.
The last act ties all the plots together to make for an overall enigmatic
mood and theme. Bowman and Poole become victims of HAL's "breakdown," but
Bowman survives and then approaches the monolith orbiting Jupiter. What
follows is one of the most bizarre, yet most blatantly thematic sequence of
events I have ever encountered. It's a mind-blowing experience because of the
sense of the unknown and unexplained. It's poetic and philosophical due to
the fact there's no one correct answer.
What makes "2001: A Space Odyssey" such an excellent film is the fact that
not only does it epitomize filmmaking (good acting, superb effects, well
scripted, thematic, etc.), it makes for a theme about humanity that is
powerful no matter how you look at it.
Please visit Chad'z Movie Page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz - over 140
new and old films reviewed in depth, not just blind ratings and capsules.
Also, please check out The FIRST Shay Astar Web Page @
http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz/ShayAstar.html

Title
Review for Way of the Gun, The (2000)
Remember back in the mid 1990s when crime and macabre movies were all the 
rage? "Pulp Fiction" and "Fargo" both managed to get Oscar nominations for 
the Best Picture, and not surprisingly, a slew of rip-offs followed in the 
years thereafter. That fad seems to be over but here comes Christopher 
McQuarrie writing and directing "The Way Of The Gun" that at first glance 
looks like another of those wanna-be's but upon closer inspection doesn't 
look like anything comprehendable. It's a crime story so wrapped up in its 
own little world it has a claustrophobic atmosphere - a film that won't allow 
the story much room to expand outside its handful of characters and somehow 
still manages to turn a simple premise into something so complex its 
ridiculous. 
Complexity should come as no surprise to anyone who's familiar with 
McQuarrie, he wrote "The Usual Suspects," which has become a cult favorite 
despite little critical acclaim. That film had a great story and was well 
directed but had such an elaborate, confusing screenplay it leaves many 
viewers scratching their heads after repeated viewings. You have to wonder if 
McQuarrie really had everything mapped out or if he was going for the 
Hollywood idea that "if it's really confusing and about criminals and cops 
that makes it fascinating." With "The Way Of The Gun" McQuarrie seems to be 
capitalizing on the same idea, but this time the story is far less commercial 
- a shame because maybe that would have helped. 
The film tells the story of two drifters with no ambition and barely a reason 
to live but aren't hell-bent on death either (played by Ryan Phillipie and 
Benecio Del Toro). They get lucky when they hear about a scheme between a 
big-shot exec guy and his trophy wife who are going to have a baby through in 
vitro fertilization. They figure they can kidnap the surrogate mother (played 
by Juliette Lewis) and get a nice ransom. Along the way we continually learn 
of the shady dealings between the exec, his wife, their hired goons and the 
"bag man" (played by James Caan - the only actor in the film who looks like 
he knows what he's doing). The exec is some kind of money launderer so he 
obviously can't call the authorities for help. His goons and the bag man are 
on the kidnappers' trail and each make different offers to get the mother 
back. The exec's son is a doctor who also gets pulled into the fray and wants 
to make sure his patient is all right. Meanwhile each of these characters has 
something hidden up their collective sleeves and the double-crosses, secret 
love affairs and torrid pasts come as no surprise even though little of it 
has any relevance at all. 
McQuarrie doesn't know the meaning of the word simple. He seems to be more 
interested in showing us how clever he is than making a good movie. 
Everything has to be complicated and confusing, so much so that it's to the 
point of surrealism. Nothing is what it seems in this reality, it's one of 
those movies where you get dropped right into the middle of the criminal 
world and are expected to know most of the industry's rules and regulations. 
Every scene with Caan's character exemplifies this perfectly - the kidnappers 
already know who he is and even chat with him, getting into conversations 
about "the business" and how it works and we're hardly given a clue as to 
what they're talking about. 
These characters are probably supposed to be great criminal sketches but 
they're more like ideas ripped-off from sketches found in David Mamet's 
trash. No one here really acts like a real person, and the story is even 
further removed from reality. It's like a dream without any appeal. 
Take the opening scene for example; the Phillipe and Del Toro characters are 
in a parking lot across the street from a bar or a club counting their money 
and stuff. They sit on a brand-new Mercedes and the car alarm goes off, the 
owner is waiting in line and yells at them to get away from his car but they 
don't move. The guy and his loud-mouth, potty-mouth girlfriend and about 20 
other people cross the street and gang up on them. You'd think Phillipe and 
Del Toro are going to pull out guns and scare them away but they don't, 
instead Phillipe throws one punch and the two get beat down by a mob. There's 
a lot of things I didn't understand about this scene: first of all the owner 
of the Mercedes isn't some yuppie or old rich snob, he's like a hippie 
straight out of the 60s. Secondly, the two main characters seem to believe 
that they can actually take on the mob unarmed. Lastly, it serves no purpose 
in the long run because later in the film the two are packing more artillery 
than a small country's army. If they were suicidal they wouldn't have gone on 
the kidnapping job in the first place (and where they get all those guns is 
never explained either). 
There's a lot more I could pick apart about this film but that would be an 
exercise in futility. What it all comes down to is that nothing here is what 
it seems - which would be great if this movie were about pretty much any 
other story than what it is. Absolutely none of the characters are likable or 
believable. And it's all coated with a thin layer of black comedy which is 
good for a chuckle here and there but this film is definitely not a flat-out 
black comedy and its use of such seems like a desperate attempt to kill 
screen time. 
With any film you see, whether you like it or not, you can at least 
understand what the appeal was to it, why someone would want to make it and 
why someone would want to see it. I can't say either for "The Way Of The 
Gun," because it has very little going for it and I can't imagine anyone 
intelligently defending it. 
You can also read this review at: 
http://www.epinions.com/mvie-review-60AA-A67A22B-39D80838-prod5 
And other reviews on the same topic at: http://www.epinions.com/mvie 
Check out my profile page at: http://www.epinions.com/user-chad9976 
*****
Chad'z Movie Page is back! 
In-depth reviews of nearly all mainstream films playing at your local 
cineplex. There's also reviews of a few classic films and some of your 
personal favorites.

Title
Review for Nick of Time (1995)
*** (out of 3 = good)
1996, R, 89 minutes [1 hour, 29 minutes]
[thriller]
starring: Johnny Depp (Gene Watson), Christopher Walken (Mr. Smith), Marsha
Mason (Gov. Eleanor Grant), Charles S. Dutton (Huey), written by Patrick
Sheane Duncan, produced and directed by John Badham.
"Nick Of Time" might not be the greatest film ever made but it is definitely
a landmark in filmmaking as it takes place in actual, real time. It does
become the standard thriller it is trying to avoid, but it's always
interesting and fun to watch.
Criminals tend to be pretty dumb in the movies, but here we get a conspiracy
to kill a governor through a brilliant method - by blackmailing a common
person into committing the act for them. The only problem here is that the
people who want to assassinate this person are nearly all the members of her
security force and even her husband.
Johnny Depp stars as Gene Watson, an accountant who is about to board a
train with his young daughter when he is stopped by who he believes to be
police. These people turn out to be terrorists of sorts who threaten to kill
him and his daughter if he doesn't assassinate Gov. Eleanor Grant (Mason) in
90 minutes. Their calculated and precise method of operation is impressive,
and shows achievement on behalf of the film's writer, Patrick Sheane Duncan
("Circle Of Friends," "Mr. Holland's Opus").
The immediate sense of shock and fear displayed by Depp is sympathetic,
especially considering how vile Walken is as Mr. Smith - the man constantly
watching him. Smith almost has a supernatural presence because everywhere
Watson turns he sees him and cannot avoid him. In a way this makes the story
a little too sensationalized, but it does enhance the chilling, suspenseful
mood.
In the course of an hour and a half, Watson goes from ordinary John Doe to
Batman. The clock is constantly ticking and his mind is racing. If he kills
the governor he will probably be killed too, but if he doesn't he and his
daughter will both be killed. It's a no-win situation, but somehow Watson
keeps his cool.
Watson puts together a mini-conspiracy of his own, as he befriends Huey
(Dutton), a brave shoe-shine man, along with threatening one of Gov. Grant's
top aides, and even confronting the governor himself. All of the individual
scenes are quickly paced and detailed, and surprisingly enough, I didn't find
myself doubting the credibility.
Still, "Nick Of Time" is a good, solid movie that is unlike anything I've
seen in a long time. It's not the most realistic story, but it works for what
it is. Maybe it does become a bit cliche, but its overall originality and
actual breakdown work fine. 
Please visit Chad'z movie Page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz

Title
Review for Crow: City of Angels, The (1996)
1996, R, 90 minutes [1 hour, 30 minutes]
Starring: Vincent Perez (Ashe - The Crow), Mia Kirshner (Sarah), Richard
Brooks (Judah), Iggy Pop (Curve), produced by Edward R. Pressman, Jeff Most,
written by David S. Goyer, directed by Tim Pope.
The legend of the Crow states when someone dies a crow takes their spirit to
the realm of the dead, but if something went wrong in the land of the living,
a person can come back to set the wrong things right. That's a fantastic
concept, but "The Crow: City Of Angels" proves it's an idea that can only be
used once.
Vincent Perez stars as Ashe, a man who lives in an a futuristic version of
the Gothic city of the original film, only this setting is much more surreal
than Gothic. He and his son were killed when they witnessed a vile gang
killing, and much like the original, we are constantly shown flashbacks of
their execution. The problem is, as innocent as Ashe and his son may have
been, we don't learn anything about their characters. There's too much
implication of the good versus evil forces at work, and not enough detail and
depth to move us in any way.
A now adult Sarah (Kirshner) meets Ashe and explains he is an invincible
ghost who must get revenge. Perez makes for a convincing common man, but his
transformation into a vengeful, almost superhero-like man is not transitioned
well at all. He seems like Jean Claude Van Damme trying to imitate Brandon
Lee.
Richard Brooks co-stars as Ashe's arch nemesis Judah, who is some kind of
Sadomasochist drug dealer, who, much like Top Dollar, has a supernatural
presence to him. But Brooks is unconvincing, he is too cliche for his own
good, and the story isn't original or detailed enough to make us hate him.
Iggy Pop also co-stars as Curve, a typical villain who is more talk than
anything else.
Although the first film did not have a straightforward style to it, this one
is just poorly assembled to begin with. There are long durations between
scenes with important characters, endless supposedly evil rhetoric, overly
violent fight scenes that are not exciting, and a complete lack of plot. Ashe
is not as cunning as Eric Draven was, he seems to just stumble upon his
enemies.
The ending is so insanely strange (and just plain cheesy), there is no way
the sense of justice the film wants you to feel could possibly be felt. It's
hard to sympathize with characters who are just going through the motions.
"The Crow: City Of Angels" had a lot going for it. Its production design was
a bit too surreal, but certainly interesting to look at. The elements of
character, mood, and theme made the original excellent, this one simply apes
the mood and makes up the rest. 


Title
Review for Rounders (1998)
1998, R, 115 minutes [1 hour, 55 minutes]
Starring: Matt Damon (Mike McDermott); Edward Norton (Worm); John Turturro
(Kanish); John Malkovich (Teddy KGB); written by David Levien, Brian
Koppelman; produced by Ted Demme, Joel Stillerman; directed by John Dahl.
Seen September 13, 1998 at 4 p.m at Rotterdam Square Mall Cinema 6, theater
#2, with Chris Wessell for free using my Sony/Loews critic's pass. [theater
rating: **1/2: good seats, average sound, picture unstable]
        "Rounders" is exactly the kind of movie parents don't want their kids to see.
It's not that it's a drunken orgy of sex and violence, but because it's a film
that flat-out says you can make a career out of gambling. And to take make
things "worse" it proves this through its original, fascinating story.
        There have been countless crime films both past and present that evoke the
"noir" mood, that is, the dark, shady atmosphere where the vices of the world
become more fascinating on screen than they would in real life. This film
starts off in the tradiational noir style, introducing us to the underworld of
modern gambling where the stakes are high and so is the price for losing. Matt
Damon stars as Mike McDermott, a 20-something law student in present-day New
York City who tells us how the game of poker is REALLY played. Damon narrates
throughout the film, but the entire opening scene is voiced-over so perfectly
to completely and totally define the setting.
        Mike's about to go up against Teddy KGB (Malkovich), a Russian gangster who
looks like a serial killer. But then again, he practically is one and the film
does everything to convey that sense - the look in his eyes, his slow
movements, his intricate mannerisms - all combined with the classic noir
cinematography of isolated brightness within the darkness of the underworld
(literally). Damon in the flesh might seem a little out of place with his
expensive clothes and perfectly-groomed features, but his narration is what
brings it all together. He never sounds like he's reading from a script, nor
that he's trying to embellish anything, it just comes natural to him. The
screenwriters use the right words and phrases to describe the mood, from the
smell of the air, to the logic involved in reading the other guys' faces and
cards, and all without sounding remotely trite. 
        Immediately we get the sense that poker isn't for gamblers, but for near-
geniuses with nerves of steel. The game is a quiet war, with strategies just
as complex and the same sense of honor among the soldiers. The gangsters Mike
plays against are the same ones that might kill someone for scratching their
car, but when it comes to the game of poker, all respect is due to the winner
because he is truly the better man.
        The film does an excellent job in establishing its atmosphere during the
first act. It concentrates so much in this aspect that the background and the
progression of the story stumble a bit. We learn only a little about Mike,
both past and present. Presently we know he has a girlfriend named Jo
(Gretchen Mol) who he constantly argues with over his gambling. They go
through a few break-up/make-up cycles until Mike's childhood pal and fellow
rounder "Worm" (Norton) is released from prison.
        It's not at all surprising Worm owes thousand of dollars to the mob, but what
is surprising is how the film is able to take such a predictable element and
execute it the way it does. Technically, the plot isn't unlike many children's
sitcoms in which the "good" kid's "bad" friend gets the good kid in trouble
and yet the good kid remains friends with the bad kid. What this film does is
use a different medium to tell that story. Mike and Worm have been in over
their heads their entire lives, but both share a passion for out-thinking the
other player who is trying to do the same to them. Where as Worm prefers to go
the sleazy route of cheating (hence his jail time), Mike always takes the
cards he's dealt and works with them. Sometimes they pay off (i.e. his ability
to pay his way through law school on his gambling money), but other times they
don't (i.e. the fact he takes himself out of the game and works a steady job
after dropping $30,000 on a single hand).
        Once things start happening the film is able to expand and develop its plot
into an intricate web of detail and mood. Mike and Worm bob and weave through
all kinds of games at all kinds of places, from socialites' mansions, to
taking the tourists at Atlantic City, to outwitting the gangsters that control
it all. 
        Everything they come into contact with is a big poker game in that
everything's a battle against the cards destiny deals. One scene demonstrates
this perfectly in which Mike is told by a judge (Martin Landou, in a perfectly
cast and performed role) that destiny is everything and yet nothing at the
same time. Matt's good at gambling but he's also got potential to be a great
lawyer. He could go professional as either, but with one he could lose
everything or win big, but with the other there's stability but not much risk
involved. Can someone who's gambled his entire life really cash in his chips
and leave?
        If the film had been just a subtle lesson in poker-playing, then the ending
is our test. Everything is told from Mike's perspective, but we're finally
able to recognize some things on our own. This makes the final, against-all-
odds showdown seem like just that. It works just like the game it revolves
around - showing us some of the cards, but still evokes the element of the
unknown, and the consequences thereof.
        What separates "Rounders" from most other films about games is the fact the
challenge and the skills are more important than winning in the end.


Title
Review for Perfect Storm, The (2000)
Take all the action and adventure of a guy's summer popcorn flick and combine 
it with all the teary drama
of a sensitive, autumn Oscar-contender and that's what you've got with "The 
Perfect Storm." It's the story
of a small New England fishing boat and its scrappy crew who go out into 
uncharted waters and must race
two hurricanes back to the coast. 
The story is pretty predictable so it's up to the screenplay and the SFX 
department to make the film work
and they manage to pull it off pretty well. The first half is an enjoyable 
lighthearted drama that sets up all
the characters and their admirable qualities (in other words - blatant 
foreshadowing). The second half is
non-stop action as the crew must navigate through terrible weather in the 
middle of the ocean. There's also
a sub-plot involving the coast guard and how they rescue people in terrible 
storms like this. It has
absolutely nothing to do with the main story but it's a nice touch. 
Overall it's a touching movie in that "Titanic" sort of way. It's got 
something for everyone. 
Chad'z Movie Page is back! 
New reviews of the latest movies in easy-to-swallow capsule form with the 
trendy, Entertainment Weekly-style of letter grades instead of the old star 
system. Have I sold out? Visit my page and decide for yourself ;-)

Title
Review for Wild Wild West (1999)
Wild Wild West
Chad'z rating: ** (out of 4 = fair/below average)
1999, PG-13, 107 minutes [1 hour, 47 minutes]
[adventure/comedy/western]
Starring: Will Smith (Jim West), Kevin Kline (Artemus Gordon), Kenneth 
Branagh (Dr. Arliss Loveless), Selma Hayek (Rita Escobar); written by Jim 
Thomas, John Thomas, S.S. Wilson, Brent Maddock, Jeffrey Price, Peter S. 
Seaman; produced by Jon Peters, Barry Sonnenfeld; based on the television 
series `The Wild Wild West' created by Michael Garrison.
Seen July 7, 1999 at 8:20 p.m. at the Crossgates Cinema 18 (Guilderland, NY), 
theater #3, with Shawn O'Shea, for free using my Hoyts season pass [theater 
rating: ****: excellent sound, picture and seats].
        Have you ever stayed up really late on a week night and then when you 
went to work or school the next day the whole experience was like a haze? Or, 
have you ever taken an antihistamine and tried to concentrate on anything 
despite the drowsiness? That's exactly the feeling `Wild Wild West' gives off 
- a film that feels like the result of a collaboration of a bunch of people 
too doped up on allergy and cold medicine to care about what they're doing.
        Every summer we are bombarded with elaborate, big-budget, super-star 
flicks whose sole purpose is to fill up the cineplexes, sell a lot of 
t-shirts, fast food and other merchandise (here in New York there is even a 
scratch-off lottery game based on this movie!). Both critics and audiences 
have grown accustomed to seeing these works that tend to blend together after 
a while, so we try to keep our expectations low.
        And with with `Wild Wild West' it's no different consider what it has 
going for it: international superstar Will Smith in the lead role; director 
Barry Sonnenfeld who has always made good movies; the fact it's based on a 
popular old television series (that'll bring in the Baby Boomers); a 
marketing strategy promising action, comedy and special effects (that'll 
bring in the GenXers); and an overall feeling that anyone could like the 
movie, so what goes wrong?
        Actually, the real question should be, what goes right?
        The first example of the film erroneous ways can be found in the 
opening credits alone which show Andy Warhol-style pictures of the stars' 
faces and names over a generic Hollywood western theme. Not having seen the 
show the film was based on, I can't say if it's the same as the show's 
original opening, but what I do know is that in 1999 this sort of lead-in 
doesn't give one the feeling he or she is about to watch something exciting. 
Even the music is boring and vaguely familiar so in the back of your mind 
you're thinking `rip-off!'
        The story starts out with a scene of a scientist being killed by some 
kind of mysterious device and a typical old, ugly, redneck stands over him 
and says ignoranamous and stupid (you know, something they only say in bad 
westerns). We then cut to our hero, Jim West (Smith), who is messing around 
with a woman in a water tower, which of course proceeds to fall over and a 
scene of West single-handedly fighting off a bunch of generic bad-guy cowboys 
while still in the buff ensues. But this scene doesn't deliver much because 
it is so completely and fully predictable. Smith isn't outrageous here 
because he's doing his same old schtick, which at least works in other movies 
because he had smart dialogue and a good script to work with, here it just 
seems lame.
        It turns out West is some kind of important federal government guy, 
like a military intelligence officer or something (shows you how much 
importance is paid to details by the screenplay). Now, this is pretty amazing 
considering the fact the story takes places in the 1860s, just after the U.S. 
Civil War - would a black man really be in such an important position? But 
this factor is at least plausible compared to many of the other details and 
plot points to come.
        West is on the trail of General McGrath (Ted Levine), the evil 
ogre-like guy from the first scene, who has been kidnapping scientists all 
over the country. Also on McGrath's trail is Artemus Gordon (Kline), a U.S. 
Marshall who's somewhat of a mad scientist and inventor and likes to go 
undercover in drag (always a guarantee for comedy). The two come together 
early on in a saloon riot scene which tips us off to who the real villain is, 
and of course allows for some wild action and explosions, the introduction of 
the femme fatale (Hayek as Rita Escobar - a saloon dancer) and the main 
details of the plot.
        After West and Gordon meet with President Ulysses S. Grant, they find 
themselves in a forced partnership on a cross-country road trip to hunt down 
both McGrath and the really vile Dr. Arliss Loveless (Branagh - whose 
performance is so excellent it completely outshines everyone and everything 
else in the film). Loveless is behind the kidnapping of the scientists for a 
plot that's obviously sinister (aren't they all sinister? Villains don't 
usually have schemes meant to just annoy someone - they're always all or 
nothing). In fact, it's so sinister it involves taking over the entire United 
States, or at least getting Grant to surrender the country.
        You can pretty much tell where the story is going from here and I 
won't waste time by elaborating further since anyone who's seen the trailer 
or just the movie poster for knows what Loveless's big concoction is and that 
it's something our heroes will have to beat without any wizardry of their own.
        The problem with the film is how it carries out this plot through a 
screenplay so trite, so lame and so full of plot holes and missing details 
that it's difficult to understand how this could have been given the green 
light in the first place.
        Most of the scenes, and the film as a whole for that matter, play 
like something that would work in an animated feature, but not in this 
supposed `serious' live-action adventure story (serious in that it's not a 
straight comedy). Would West really be able to simply talk his way out of 
being hanged by a redneck mob? Are the inventions Gordon comes up with for 
comic relief or practical use? Would a nasty villain like Loveless pass up 
the opportunity for total victory just for a quick sexual stimulation? Why 
have a sexy female supporting character if she doesn't do anything else 
besides sit around and watch the men?
        Oh, we could answer these questions easily, which are all ideas the 
filmmakers don't want us to think about. Yet, even if we're to take 
everything that happens on the big screen just for its entertainment value, 
it's still nearly impossible to find much to enjoy. The action isn't 
exciting, the heroes aren't heroic, the villain is beyond cliche, the jokes 
are rarely funny and the ending is predictable.
        I'd like to believe that at some point `Wild Wild West' was and 
could've been exactly what it sets out to be. There's really nothing wrong 
with zany action, wild comedy and special effects within the context of a 
good story and a well-directed ensemble. Unfortunately, this film seems to a 
collection of mistakes meant to correct even worse mistakes.
---------------------------------
Please visit Chad'z 
Movie Page
 - over 220 new and old movies reviewed in-depth, not just blind ratings 
and blather capsules.
Member of The O.F.C.S. (Online Film 
Critics Society)

Title
Review for English Patient, The (1996)
** (out of 4 = fair)
1996, R, 160 minutes [2 hours, 40 minutes]
[drama]
starring: Ralph Fiennes (Count Laszlo de Almasy), Kristin Scott-Thomas
(Katherine Clifton), Juliette Binoche (Hana), Willem Dafoe (Caravaggio -
"Moose"), produced by Saul Zaentz, written and directed by Anthony Minghella,
based on the novel by Michael Ondaatje.
I walked into "The English Patient" expecting to see "an epic story of love
and war," and unfortunately, that's exactly what I got. This is one of the
most disguised films I've ever seen; a melodramatic soap opera pretending to
be a moving and touching film of grand proportions. It has very little charm,
characters without depth, and a very formulated, predictable, and boring
story.
Ralph Fiennes stars as Count Laszlo de Almasy, who is some kind of British
military intelligence officer fighting in World War II. As the film opens, he
is shot down in his biplane and burned very badly. He is taken in by a MASH
unit and later moved to a deserted house way out in the Italian countryside
where a nurse named Hana (Binoche) takes care of him and listens to his long
story of how he got to where he is now. 
One of the film's biggest flaws is present immediately, as it takes a long
time for this little amount of action to occur. It also feels the need to use
every overly dramatic and sappy device possible. Hana's entire character
allows for countless cliches: she has a heart of gold kisses wounded
soldiers; her friend is killed five seconds after she says "I love you" to
her; she actually says aloud why she cares for her patients. Even the fact
that Almasy's disfigured face is constantly shown is a bit melodramatic. We
feel sorry for him because of his appearance, not because of his character.
What makes for good love stories is characterization of the lovers, their
chemistry, and their situation. This film establishes none of these, instead
it just depicts a passionate affair we're supposed to care about. Through
constant flashbacks we learn Almasy was part of an Allied military troupe,
and from the moment Katherine (Scott-Thomas) (his friend's wife) appears, it
is obvious they will fall for each other. But there is no substance to their
so-called relationship. The dialogue is too poetic and overly romantic, and
therefore completely unbelievable because people don't talk so eloquently, so
Shakesperian-esque in reality.
The actual storytelling is very choppy: it skips back and forth between the
present and the past just as something starts to become interesting. And then
when Almasy's relationship seemed to be the driving force for the film, it is
nearly forgotten as the focus shifts to the nurse and her romantic encounter
with an Indian bomb defuser, and then to a Canadian spy named Caravaggio -
"Moose" (Dafoe). Some of the individual scenes showing the characters'
stories are interesting, but nothing comes together as a whole. 
Usually it is the action/adventure movies that contain the most unbelievable
events, but melodrama often does the same thing. Katherine and her husband
are involved in a plane crash, but miraculously only Katherine survives. Then
there is the typical scene where Almasy drags her to a cave (in the middle of
the desert) and promises to return with help. He survives a three-day walk
through the burning desert to an embassy of some sort, but is arrested when
he is considered insane. He then proceeds to single-handedly escape his
shackles, jumps off a speeding train, and then is able to find the exact same
cave. And I thought "Indiana Jones" was a bit over the top!
I walked out of "The English Patient" very frustrated and disappointed. The
film does have a good sense of style and production, but its plot is
shamefully exploitative and its storytelling is jumbled. I can usually detect
subtle-but-powerful emotions and plot devices, but I didn't see anything
remotely profound here.

Title
Review for Bulletproof (1996)
** (out of 4 = fair)
1996, R, 85 minutes [1 hour, 25 minutes]
[action/comedy]
starring: Damon Wayans (Rock Keats/Jack Carter), Adam Sandler (Archie Moses),
Kristen Wilson (Traci), James Caan (Frank Colton), written by Joe Gayton,
Lewis Colick, produced by Robert Simonds, directed by Ernest Dickerson.
I'm trying to decide which has more influence over me: a really good laugh
or a really bad story. I can't decide if I'd recommend "Bulletproof" for its
funny comedy or not recommend it for its mindless, action-driven story. Ah,
the old "cop-buddy-action-flick-with-a-humorous-undertone," we've seen these
before, and only a few of them actually work. What I don't understand is how
nobody can figure out that those were the exceptions, not the rules.
The story revolves around a pair of car thieves who have become the best of
friends over the course of a year (so we are told). One of them is actually
an undercover cop (Wayans as Rock Keats) and the other is an idiot hood
(Sandler as Archie Moses) who somehow has connections to a major drug lord
(Caan as Frank Colton). 
Right away we are inundated with cop movie cliches: lots of jargon and
rhetoric about a major dope deal going down (of course in a warehouse on the
docks with punks, machine guns, etc.). Of course, when the criminals become
suspicious of the Keats they find out he is actually a cop and of course
Archie feels betrayed and of course the cops bust in and a bloodbath ensues. 
Now our two main characters are at war with each other when five minutes
before they were best of friends. During the scene Archie accidentally shoots
Keats in the head, but it doesn't kill him (nah, gunshot wounds to the head
never kill anyone!). To make a long story short, Keats (whose real name is
Jack Carter) recovers, meets a cute woman, and is assigned to protect Archie
because he can turn states evidence against Colton, the most powerful drug
lord who also wants to kill him.
Sandler and Wayans make a pretty funny duo, I'll have to admit it, but why
put the two in a genre that doesn't fit them? Both of these actors have
starred in comedies up until this point, what are they doing shooting guns
and jumping from airplanes? The action scenes and the stunts in this movie
are just so cliche and recycled, even James Caan can't make for a remotely
convincing villain, and thus all we get is a big cartoon (although cartoons
can be funny).
There are more double crosses in this movie than I've ever seen. Naming any
of them would give away the entire story. By the end we get a lot of
bloodshed over nothing. There's not much here to make us really care about
what's going on.
For what it's worth, the funny parts of "Bulletproof" are really funny, but
the bad story and mindless violence is a real turn-off. The entire film has a
choppy surface to it, there's no depth to it at all. Mixing comedy with
action is a difficult process, why does Hollywood continually try it?
visit Chad'z Movie Page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz/index.html

Title
Review for Home Alone (1990)
**1/2 (out of 4 = OK)
1990, PG, 103 minutes [1 hour, 43 minutes]
[comedy]
starring: Macauly Culkin (Kevin MaCallister), Catherine O'Hara (Mrs.
MaCallister), Joe Pesci (Harry), Daniel Stern (Marv), written and produced by
John Hughes, directed by Chris Columbus.
"Home Alone" is probably every child's fantasy; defending his/her home and
family against bad guys by using the same techniques they see on their
favorite cartoon show. However, when we consider the fact the film is
centered around the 10-minute-long, slapstick-laced climax, we realize this
isn't intelligent film-making, but at least it's enjoyable to watch.
Macauly Culkin stars as eight-year-old Kevin MaCallister, who is currently
sharing his huge suburban Chicago house with 14 other family members. They
are all getting ready for their Christmas vacation in Paris, and the place is
insane with children and eccentric adults running all over the place. Since
Kevin is the smallest, he is of course the one always being picked on and
ignored by everyone, which eventually leads him to attack his brother during
dinner and then get sent to sleep in the attic as punishment. These opening
scenes are told in a lighthearted manner that somehow seem completely
plausible. It has a funny sense of realism to it, somewhat sit-com-esque, yet
it doesn't rely on cliches.
Cliches are the backbone of comedy and without them Hollywood might actually
have to grown a brain and think of other ways to be funny and tell stories.
Through a series of events that are both believable but cliche, Kevin winds
up being left home alone while the rest of the family flies to France in a
mad panic.
Children have active imaginations, they can think of things adults would
consider crazy, but in Hollywood they're considered genius. Most of the film
tells the story of what would happen when you leave an eight-year-old boy
alone in a big, rich house almost as if he was exploring it for the first
time. We see Kevin do things he's not supposed to do such as watch R-rated
movies, eat junk food, look through his brother's personal belongings, sleep
in his parents' bed, shave, do laundry, go shopping, etc. Then again, some of
his antics are quite funny, such as sledding down his living room stairs and
out the front door, or when he talks to strangers, and the many scenes
involving his phobias.
But the entire premise of the film revolves around Kevin battling the
bumbling burglars Harry and Marv (Pesci, Stern). This is why the film could
be labeled as a "cartoon," because the idea of a small child outsmarting
idiot crooks is nothing new, yet it does not seem trite at the time. Harry
and Marv seem believable because they don't stand out compared to the rest of
the film. Just considering Pesci as the character he plays is funny, as he
has played so many vicious gangsters and now he is being foiled and tortured
by a little kid.
Harry and Marv constantly keep an eye on Kevin's house, and when they
realize he's home alone, they plan to rob it anyway. But Kevin is clever and
plants booby traps that could actually work, but only with the help of a
multi-million dollar production crew. Some of his traps include: glue,
feathers, tar, nails, matchbox cars, lots of ice, smashed ornaments, cut
ropes, and a perfectly edited gangster movie.
For the most part, the slapstick scenes paid off for me, but depending on
your own cynicism it might be more distracting. The problem is this only
works once, so in retrospect in seems rather stupid and silly, and that is
why the film is simply OK instead of good.
Still, "Home Alone" is a fair family-oriented comedy with a lot of Christmas
nostalgia to it. It doesn't try to be something it's not, but it should have
tried harder to be itself. 
please visit Chad'z Movie Page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz

Title
Review for Lake Placid (1999)
Lake Placid
Chad'z rating: **1/2 (out of 4 = okay/average)
1999, R, 82 minutes [1 hour, 22 minutes]
[horror]
Starring: Bill Pullman (Game Warden Jack Wells), Bridget Fonda (Kelly Scott), 
Oliver Platt (Hector Cyr), Brendan Gleeson (Sheriff Hank Keogh); written by 
David E. Kelley; produced by David E. Kelley, Michael Pressman; directed by 
Steven Miner.
Seen July 18, 1999 at 5:20 p.m. at Crossgates Cinema 18 (Guilderland, NY), 
theater #15, with Shawn O'Shea for free using my Hoyts season pass. [Theater 
rating: ***1/2: very good picture and sound, okay seats].
Watching `Lake Placid' you get the feeling the entire film was 
written, produced, shot and edited in one day. It has a light, care-free 
attitude that it doesn't really want to be taken seriously (it better not) 
and that it's just what a bunch of big-shot Hollywood execs do on the weekend.
Let's look at the facts here - we've got a bunch of semi-big actors 
(big enough names for people to recognize, but small enough not to demand too 
much money) in a relatively low-budget, small-scale flick created and 
produced by trendy television and modern b-movie guys. You can tell they 
couldn't possibly expect us to take this seriously by releasing in the middle 
of a cut-throat summer movie season filled with mega-budget, blockbuster 
special effects and superstars. The running time is just barely over an 
hour... I guess they expect us to go see it while we wait for the next 
`Phantom Menace' showing.
Anyways, I'm not going to rip this film to shreds as many other 
critics have done. In fact, for a film that doesn't seem to have much effort 
put into it, it's actually not that bad!
I can't count how many times I and other critics have said the key to 
pulling off a horror flick as simple as man vs. beast, ghoul, monster, etc. 
is to keep the atmosphere lighthearted and dialogue witty. Once they stray 
into the so-fake-it's-totally-unrealistic-and-cheesy territory they'll 
usually lose us. Well, `Lake Placid' does dabble in that area both for campy 
humor and theme, but also to seriously push the story along.
It's about four characters and their hunt for a killer crocodile in a 
secluded lake off the coast of the Atlantic Ocean in Maine. It's a calm lake 
with no waves and the water is as black as night. 
`They wanted to name it Lake Placid, but they found out it was 
already taken,' says the local yokel sheriff, Hank Keogh (Gleeson) to New 
York paleontologist Kelley Scott (Fonda), who is sent up to the 
lake-with-no-name after a rare reptilian tooth is found in the body of a 
diver whose legs were bitten off by a mysterious creature in the opening 
scene.
That statement alone probably sounds pretty campy right? Well, it 
gets better (or worse), turns out Kelley agrees to go out into the wilderness 
just to get away from her boss who has just dumped her for her best friend. 
Not surprisingly, Kelley is a stuck-up bitch who can't stand nature and 
freaks out every time something involves hands-on work. Every horror movie 
has at least one screaming woman in it and there's plenty for Kelley to 
scream at here, such as when Keogh finds the head of a moose in the lake or 
during many scenes whereby the crew is out hunting for the monster and it 
suddenly sneaks up on them.
The other `crew' members are local Game Warden Jack Wells (Pullman) 
and international crocodile enthusiast Hector Cyr (Platt). These characters 
are exactly what you'd expect: Wells takes the situation seriously and acts 
like a dorky 8th grade boy calling Kelley `ma'am' every 10 seconds, and Cyr 
is really a nutcase who practically worships crocs and points out that they 
have been worshipped and feared by ancient civilizations and religions around 
the world. He has a slew of high-tech equipment which he failingly tries to 
convince Keogh and Wells will be able to subdue the croc enough for him to 
have it transported to safe captivity.
How did a crocodile end up in a lake in New England? The filmmakers 
never answer that question, only through lame one-liners or vague, unfounded, 
general rationalizations - the kind only eccentric movie characters can get 
away with saying (`Someone in Hong Kong probably flushed him down the toilet' 
- ugh!).
There isn't much to say about the plot other than the obvious - it's 
about a bunch of people trying to hunt down a killer crocodile while being 
scared out of their minds. And yessirebob all the horror cliches abound - the 
noise in the bushes that just turns out to be one of the other characters, 
the journey to the beast's home despite all common sense, the sex jokes and a 
mysterious sub-plot that doesn't have any significance until the end.
That sub-plot, about an old woman living in a cabin on the lake is 
really weird. Betty White co-stars as this woman who has a surprisingly foul 
mouth and makes a lot of really funny, albeit shocking remarks. This element 
single-handedly saves the film from being a complete waste of time and keeps 
the atmosphere light.
The ending itself is actually kind of suspenseful, much more 
thrilling than horrifying. There's even a surprise twist and the final shot 
is quite funny.
I have a feeling everything surrounding `Lake Placid' will also have 
that feeling of little-effort-but-in-good-spirits. Critics probably won't 
like it, but they shouldn't waste their time and energy bashing it either 
since it's one of the few non-blockbuster movies that is actually critic 
proof. People are going to see this thinking it's either scary or campy fun, 
but the truth is, it has only a little of both and too much of nothing else.
---------------------------------
Please visit Chad'z 
Movie Page
 - over 230 new and old movies reviewed in-depth, not just blind ratings 
and blather capsules.
Associate member of The O.F.C.S. (Online 
Film Critics Society)

Title
Review for Game, The (1997)
Chad'z rating: ***1/2 (out of 4 = very good)
1997, R, 128 minutes [2 hours, 8 minutes]
starring: Michael Douglas (Nicholas Van Orton), Deborah Kara Unger
(Christine), Sean Penn (Conrad Van Orton), James Rebhorn (Jim Feingold),
written by John D. Brancato, Michael Ferris, Andrew Kevin Walker, produced by
Cean Chaffin, Steve Golin, directed by David Fincher.
seen at The Glenwood Movieplex Cinemas September 25 at 7:20 p.m. with Jamie
S.
        Every thriller has those moments of revelations where the plot suddenly
twists and we realize something was just an illusion and/or there's some kind
of conspiracy going on. I think the idea behind "The Game" was to make an
entire movie of those kinds of moments. The net result is a wholly original
film that puts the "thrill" back in "thriller."
        The film opens with a moody flashback shot with a Super 8 camera of cheery
1950s childhood images, but the montage ends with a disturbing, Gothic-like
sequence. Another director might have went for a more realistic approach to
this flashback and the film as a whole, but Fincher uses sheer mood to tell
us all we really need to know. 
        The boy in the flashback was Nicholas Van Orton (Douglas), a rich San
Francisco investment banker who's the epitome of middle-aged rich guys in the
movies. He's the modern version of Ebeneezer Scrooge: cold, stern, selfish,
and basically unhappy. It's his 48th birthday, and he's depressed because
it's the same age his father was when he committed suicide. He's visited by
his cocky brother Conrad (Penn) who gives him a gift certificate to CRS -
Consumer Recreation Services. CRS is some kind of business-level,
role-playing company that provides "whatever's missing in your life," or at
least that's what CRS representative Jim Feingold (Rebhorn) tells Nicholas.
        After enrolling in CRS, Nicholas finds strange things start happening to
him, the kind of things that could only happen in psychological thrillers
like this. His television starts talking to him, he finds keys and gadgets
with "CRS" imprinted on them. Soon the occurrences become dangerous and it's
clear Nicholas is wrapped up in some kind of massive conspiracy. But what
does CRS want? We don't get an answer for a while, and the longer the delay,
the more the suspense builds.
        What's good about the film is the fact it's such an uncanny premise told in
such a mainstream, commercial manner. Yes, we do get chase scenes and
shoot-outs but not only are they exciting to watch, they're actually vital to
the story!
        The mid-section of the film is the best, full of situations that are
far-fetched but completely believable at the time. The CRS conspiracy is so
huge, not only does it toy with Nicholas's mind, but the viewer's as well.
It's as if everything is a dream, but the script is so fluid it has a
hypnotic effect. Douglas is perfect as a normal man trapped in extraordinary
circumstances, one can't help but  sympathize for him.
        Special mention must be made to Deborah Kara Unger as the sexy waitress
Christine who is somehow pulled into the fray. Of course it's the generic
case of the man and woman stuck with each other against their will, but
thankfully the two do not fall madly in love by the end.
        There's many more important aspects to the plot and individual scenes worthy
of attention, but I won't mention them for two reasons: 1) attempting to
describe, let alone list them all would be an exercise in futility; 2) it
would be an injustice to the film. In fact, the details are irrelevant
because this is not a film concerned with plot, but a story that uses classic
literary devices in a modern manner and it works.
        The ending is shocking and brilliant. No further elaboration is necessary.
        It's apparent from the get-go "The Game" was inspired by everything related
to the genre: from comic books and pulp magazines, to the films of Alfred
Hitchcock and the writings of Steven King. You almost never see films this
resourceful.
Please visit Chad'z Movie Page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz - over 160
new and old films reviewed in depth, not just blind ratings and quick
capsules. Also, check out The FIRST Shay Astar Web Page @
http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz/ShayAstar.html

Title
Review for Big Momma's House (2000)
Martin Lawrence stars as an FBI agent who must go undercover as a 350-pound 
southern woman in order
to catch an escaped bank robber by watching over the criminal's ex-lover (the 
woman's grand daughter). 
Another typical mainstream comedy that uses some shock humor, wacky slapstick 
and rapid-fire dialogue.
Lawrence is actually likable here, he seems so relaxed and confident in drag. 
The story is practically
irrelevant since it has so little to do with what actually goes on during the 
film. It's just Lawrence being
funny in any way he can and for the most part it works. What's more, the film 
actually has some heart to it
and doesn't come off as totally cheesy. 
Chad'z Movie Page is back! 
New reviews of the latest movies in easy-to-swallow capsule form with the 
trendy, Entertainment Weekly-style of letter grades instead of the old star 
system. Have I sold out? Visit my page and decide for yourself ;-)

Title
Review for Dr. T & the Women (2000)
As a film critic you're sometimes faced with the dilemma of giving a movie a 
good review even when you know you could fault it for many things. I'm in 
such a situation right now with this review of "Dr. T And The Women," a 
dramedy by veteran filmmaker Robert Altman. It's one of those films you enjoy 
watching at the time but afterwards you realize it might not have been as 
good as you thought. 
Normally I'd elaborate on what I mean when I use these amateur critic's 
phrases of mine, but I don't think it's necessary this time. Wouldn't you 
rather like to know what the film is about and what makes it good instead of 
another rhetorical rambling that sounds like something between a cross of a 
collegiate thesis and an excerpt from "Entertainment Weekly?" 
Here's the deal, Richard Gere stars as Dr. Sully Travis, or "Dr. T" as he's 
known among his patients and friends. He's a wealthy gynecologist in Dallas 
who runs his own practice that's so popular the women in the waiting room 
argue over who gets to go next. Dr. T has a beautiful wife, two cute 
daughters and a nice house in the suburbs. He plays golf and goes hunting 
with his three buddies whenever he can. He's got it all doesn't he? Or he 
would at least if odd things didn't keep happening to him. 
The first such incident comes early on in the film when we see his wife, 
daughters and their aunt shopping at a mall for daughter Dee Dee's wedding. 
Kate Hudson plays the bride-to-be, a Dallas Cowboy cheerleading-in-training 
who probably has gotten everything she's ever wanted. Tara Reid plays Connie, 
the younger sister who isn't such a snob and cares the most about her family. 
Laura Dern plays their passively alcoholic Aunt Peggy who has three little 
girls of her own and spoils all of them. Then there's Farrah Fawcett as Mrs. 
Katie Travis. She suffers a mental breakdown during the mall scene which 
lands her in a mental hospital for a rare mental disorder. 
Okay go ahead and make your jokes about how it must have been a stretch for 
Fawcett to play a headcase. But she's actually quite good in this role as a 
woman who reverts to the mindset of a three-year-old. She doesn't have much 
dialogue but she gives a good performance, especially in a scene later in the 
film when Sully comes to visit her and you don't know whether to laugh or 
cry. 
The movie mostly involves the women in Dr. T's life and there are A LOT of 
them. Besides his family there's also his patients, his staff and a woman 
named Bree (Hunt) who fascinates him for reasons he can't fully understand. 
Dr. T spends most of his time around women, in a very personal matter at 
that, the only thing he's seemed to learn is that they're all unique in their 
own way. 
If I was going to give this film a bad review this would be the part I 
criticize it for a semi-dramatic scene in which Gere delivers a line like 
that to Hunt while they're playing golf. But for some reason I can't hold Dr. 
T's naivety of the fairer sex against him.  After all, he's a doctor of the 
body, not of the mind. 
There isn't really a definite plot (this is an Altman movie we're talking 
about), it's mostly just an overlapping character study and Dr. T is the 
filter all of the characters go through. Looking at the movie poster you know 
it boasts some really big-name actresses and they all have their fair share 
of screen time and each character has importance in the big scheme of things. 
In an Altman film you sometimes wonder why he's spending so much time on 
characters just being themselves instead of working towards some goal or 
overcoming a conflict. I wondered this myself as the film reached the third 
act but was pleased with the results. Dee Dee's wedding serves as the boiling 
point where a lot of truths are revealed in a pretty funny way. That's when 
you think "Oh, okay, now I see where he was going with that."
However, what I DIDN'T understand was the actual ending sequence which has 
nothing to do with the wedding or any of the characters or stories that had 
come before. It's all about Dr. T but it's just so out of place it's rid
iculous. This is one of those endings that kind of freaks you out, not 
because it's a twist of the story but because it's so bizarre you know it 
must be some kind of brilliant allegory and you can't figure it out. 
For the most part "Dr. T And The Women" succeeds as an interesting and 
sometimes funny character study if nothing else. There's quite a few things 
that make you raise an eyebrow and if you're not easily amused you won't like 
the film as a whole (or at least not as much). Still, I enjoyed watching it 
and was genuinely curious about where it was going. 
------------------------------------------------------------------------ 
You can also read this review at: 
http://www.epinions.com/mvie-review-7DA9-1FD5BB3D-39EB8D43-prod3 
And other reviews on the same topic at: http://www.epinions.com/mvie 
Check out my profile page at: http://www.epinions.com/user-chad9976 
*****
Chad'z Movie Page is back! 
In-depth reviews of nearly all mainstream films playing at your local 
cineplex. There's also reviews of a few classic films and some of your 
personal favorites.

Title
Review for Before Sunrise (1995)
**** (out of 4 = excellent)
R, 1994, 101 minutes [1 hour, 41 minutes]
[romance/drama]
starring: Ethan Hawke (Jesse), Julie Delpy (Celine), written by Richard
Linklater, Kim Krizan, produced by Ann Walker-McBay, directed by Richard
Linklater.
Is it possible to fall in love in one night? Or in one minute? What about
love at first sight? I'm not sure about the latter two, but I do believe the
first notion, mostly because "Before Sunrise" proves it can happen. Finally,
a film has completely captured the essence of falling in love.
Ethan Hawke stars as Jesse, an American GenXer vacationing in Europe, who
meets a cute French girl Celine (Delpy) on a train to Vienna. The two hit it
off, and it is obvious they are attracted to each other. Just from their
glances and their immediate chemistry we can sense that attraction. When
Jesse must deboard for his stop, he manages to talk Celine into coming with
him by using the greatest "pick up line" I have ever heard (it really must be
seen to appreciate).
And so the two wander the streets of Vienna, encounter some locals, and tour
the city. But they do not get into any kind of conflicts, all they do is be
together and talk. At first, the awkwardness is evident, and their first kiss
is definitely uncomfortable, but after awhile they start to loosen up as they
get to know each other better. 
Linklater and Krizan's dialogue is fantastic, it is so realistic and
believable it's almost as if they had gone through the motions of these
characters and brought a tape recorder with them. Then wrote the screenplay
based on the tape. 
Because the atmosphere is so realistic, vivid, and believable we identify
with the characters and almost become them. I obviously identified with
Jesse, as I have gone through similar situations and could tell what he was
thinking. Hawke and Delpy's chemistry and individual performances are so
outstanding, I felt as if it was me who fell for Celine. I think women will
equally identify with Celine and fell for Jesse. Meeting a person you really
like is one of the greatest joys in the world, and this is an entire film
that plays upon that emotion. 
By the end of the night and the next morning the two have discussed many
topics, such as sex, religion, feminism, family, and everything in between.
When we realize they are probably never going to see each other again it's
realistic, but not fair. 
"Before Sunrise" is a wonderful story. The dialogue combined with the
chemistry between Hawke and Delpy is just so realistic and believable, you
feel like you're spying on two actual people. 
visit Chad'z Movie Page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz/index.html

Title
Review for Dazed and Confused (1993)
*** (out of 4 = good)
1993, R, 97 minutes [1 hour, 37 minutes]
[comedy]
starring: Jason London (Pink), Joey Lauren Adams (Simone), Milla Jovovich
(Michelle), Shawn Andrews (Pickford), Rory Cochrane (Slater), Adam Goldberg
(Mike), produced by James Jacks, Sean Daniel, Richard Linklater, written and
directed by Richard Linklater.
Richard Linklater is quickly becoming one of the most influential and
creative directors today. His debut film, "Slacker," was a surrealistic
journey through a strange Texas town which was more of an experiment in
dialogue rather than any type of commercial product. "Dazed And Confused" is
his second film, which plays more upon defining characters and presenting
teens as they really are.  It's not perfect, but it is original when compared
to most other movies of the genre.
There really isn't any one star of this movie as the focus of attention
never seems to last longer than a few minutes at a time (the same technique
used in "Slacker"). This time the camera does not wander too far, it finds a
bunch of characters and repeatedly comes back to them, showing them as a
collective group. 
The story takes place on the last day of school in 1976. All juniors who are
about to become seniors are getting ready to "initiate" the incoming
freshmen. The males make wooden paddles to whack the boys, while the females
round up all the girls and cover them in goo and force them to do humiliating
acts. The way this is told, so blatantly, as if this is socially acceptable
really freaked me out. Their attitudes were so intense, almost evil, it
borders on Sadomasochism, but maybe that is the point. Then again, after the
seniors whack the freshmen they invite them to hang out and party with them.
There are characters of all the typical high school cliques here: jocks,
nerds, sluts, princesses, drug users, and punks. But they're not really
fighting with each other, for once they all have something in common - they
just want to party and have fun. 
Meeting members of the opposite sex comes easily to almost all of the
characters There are a lot of scenes that have potential to build up
character and define a relationship, but Linklater doesn't spend much time
worrying about these characters' love lives. Teenagers fall in and out of
love so fast, and the story makes this obvious by ignoring it (what you don't
see is the most obvious I guess).
"Dazed And Confused" doesn't have the charm "American Graffiti" had, but I
admire its boldness in portraying suburban teens in such a pessimistic
manner. It could be seen as trying to make a condemning statement about their
lifestyles, but I think the message is open to interpretation.
please visit Chad'z Movie Page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz/index.html

Title
Review for Mission: Impossible II (2000)
Mission: Impossible 2 
Tom Cruise is back as super secret agent Ethan Hunt who must save the world - 
not from nuclear war or terrorists - but from a lethal man-made virus. An 
original idea to be sure, but the execution of the story is not. Instead of 
being too confusing like the last time, this time it's almost too simple and 
certain key plot points and sequences are waaaaaay over the top and 
unbelievable. Action filmmaker John Woo certainly puts a lot more energy into 
this film than Brian De Palma did in 1996. We can really buy Cruise as a 
genuine action performer (the long, drawn-out fight scene at the end is proof 
of this). 
Whatever you're expecting this film to be will, it WILL be, so enjoy the 
ride. 
GRADE: B 
------------------------------------------------------------------------ 
You can also read this review at: 
http://www.epinions.com/mvie-review-108E-40FDAAE-39D14D74-prod1 
And other reviews on the same topic at: http://www.epinions.com/mvie 
Check out my profile page at: http://www.epinions.com/user-chad9976 
*****
Chad'z Movie Page is back! 
In-depth reviews of nearly all mainstream films playing at your local 
cineplex. There's also reviews of a few classic films and some of your 
personal favorites.

Title
Review for Road Trip (2000)
Another Gen-X sexy summer comedy about obnoxious boys and the slightly 
smarter girls who try to tame
them. The story revolves around four college dudes from Ithaca University who 
must travel to Austin,
Texas in order to save one of the dudes' love life. 
The title says it all so there's not much need to list the funny, wacky and 
just plain insane pratfalls our
heroes will likely endure given the circumstances. This is a college movie so 
you can take a guess as to what
kind of humor is going on here. Does it work? Yes... if you're not easily 
offended! But it's unfortunate the
screenplay doesn't have much going for besides the jokes which makes the film 
one-dimensional. It's your
call. 
Chad'z Movie Page is back! 
New reviews of the latest movies in easy-to-swallow capsule form with the 
trendy, Entertainment Weekly-style of letter grades instead of the old star 
system. Have I sold out? Visit my page and decide for yourself ;-)

Title
Review for Wayne's World (1992)
Wayne's World
Chad'z rating: ***1/2 (out of 4 = very good)
1992, PG-13, 95 minutes [1 hour, 35 minutes]
[comedy]
starring: Mike Meyers (Wayne Campbell), Dana Carvey (Garth Algar), Tia
Carrere (Cassandra), Rob Lowe (Benjamin Oliver), written by Mike Meyers,
Bonnie and Terry Turner, produced by Lorne Michaels, directed by Penelope
Spheeris.
        "Wayne's World" is probably one of the most intelligent and creative
comedies I've ever seen, which is quite an accomplishment considering how
unintelligent the premise is. In short, this movie shouldn't be as good as it
is.
        The story revolves around Wayne Campbell (Meyers) and Garth Algar (Carvey),
two guys who are really quite enigmatic. They're late 20-something
"headbangers" who act like teenagers. They have their own cable access show
"Wayne's World," but both still live with their parents. Maybe this premise
seems a little cartoonish, even the first gag involves a vacuum placed on
Garth's head as a hair cutting device. It doesn't seem like it should be
funny, but Meyers and Carvey's improv is what makes the humor work. It's not
sight gags and slapstick (a la "Pee Wee Herman"), nor is it wisecracks and
one-liners, it's just a vivid establishment of an offbeat atmosphere.
        And it's that offbeat atmosphere is what makes the film great. The mood
constantly changes from straight comedy to offbeat satire, but it stays in
synch, much like John Hughes' great 80s comedies. For example, when Garth is
pushed around by a bully at a metal club, he goes back to his car and
retrieves a tazer while the theme to "Mission: Impossible" plays. Meanwhile,
when Wayne sees Cassandra (Carrere), a sexy, rockin' singer, the camera
remains on her while "Dream Weaver" plays.
        Since this is a commercial comedy there must be a plot to it. Rob Lowe
co-stars as Benjamin Oliver, a typical, smooth-talking television producer
who wants to buy "Wayne's World" and sell it to a sponsor, thus making it
completely commercial and highly profitable. Most of the first two acts
revolve around this plot, and although it does seem a little formulated, it
doesn't become the driving force of every little event.
        In fact, there isn't much direction to this film as a whole. It constantly
skips around from setting to setting: sometimes Wayne and Garth are partying
at the rock club; sometimes Wayne is wooing Cassandra; sometimes Benjamin is
plotting something sinister, and all yet they are all connected.
        By the final act, everything is going wrong for Wayne. He has been conned
out of, and then fired from his own show. He also loses Cassandra when he
suspects Benjamin of seducing her with opportunity. You know everything will
be resolved in the end, but the actual ending sequence is completely original
as it follows the cliches in a satirical manner.
        From start to finish "Wayne's World" is a great, funny parody. The jokes
always connect and never recycle themselves. The fact so much happens in this
film (and so little as a whole) without a trace of burnout is quite amazing. 
Please visit Chad'z Movie Page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz - over 140
new and old films reviewed in depth, not just blind ratings and capsules.
Also, check out The FIRST Shay Astar Web Page @
http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz/ShayAstar.html

Title
Review for Mask of Zorro, The (1998)
1998, PG-13, 136 minutes [2 hours, 16 minutes]
Starring: Antonio Banderas (Alejandro Murrieta/Zorro), Anthony Hopkins (Don
Diego de la Vega/Zorro) Catherine Zeta-Jones (Elena), Stuart Wilson (Don
Rafael Montero); written by Ted Elliott, John Eskow, Randall Jahnson, Terry
Rossio; produced by Doug Claybourne, David Foster; directed by Martin
Campbell.
Seen August 9, 1998 at 9:15 p.m. at Rotterdam Square Cinemas (Rotterdam, NY),
theater #3, by myself for free using my Sony/Loews critic's pass. [Theater
rating: ***: good picture, sound, and seats]
If there was any doubt that all Hollywood summer movies are lacking
originality, consider this: "The Mask Of Zorro," which takes place in the
mid-1800s, has an action scene once every 10 or 15 minutes, has a scene in
which a woman is stripped to her underwear while sword fighting, and ends with
an explosion so huge it rivals something from the "Terminator" films. Were
these events really typical of the time?
The film opens with a disclaimer quickly explaining the background of the
story. The villain, Don Rafael Montero (Wilson), is briefly described as being
some kind of corrupt leader from Spain governing the colonies of what is now
California. I may be wrong on this account, but the film's opening scene makes
the "logical" explanation to the story's background seem silly because when we
see Montero about to have three innocent men executed just to draw out Zorro,
that tells us all we really need to know.
Of course Zorro appears and a terrific scene of action and drama ensues and
it's actually exciting and suspenseful at the time. We're not concerned with
the story behind the action, as long as there is action. Montero is a classic
bad guy with his precisely-groomed mustache, slicked hair, fancy clothes,
crooked smirk, and of course a wicked laugh. Wilson fills the role nicely,
making Montero an easy-to-hate villain, so much so it's hard to tell if he's
over-acting or if the script is really so trite.
And yet the film's opening works due to its simplicity and over-the-top
action. The initial atmosphere is lighthearted enough to take the zaniness of
it all in stride, so when Zorro single-handedly defeats 20 armed men, we don't
notice how cartoony the violence is, or how the fighting is so obviously
choreographed, or why the guards in the tower wait until two kids drop a
statue on them before they start firing their rifles.
It's unfortunate the film could not have had such a breezy spirit during its
"serious" aspects. We learn the true identity of Zorro is Don Diego de la Vega
(Hopkins), who appears to be a man of some importance, which is why Montero
claims to have always loved de la Vega's wife (why don't heroes ever marry
ugly women to keep the villain from trying to steal them?). Tragedy instantly
strikes our hero and thus the film flash-forwards to 20 years later to provide
just the right subplots, themes, and new conflicts and characters to give
Zorro a reason to resurface.
The real reason for a new Zorro is the film's star, Antonio Banderas.
Banderas is a good actor and he certainly seems to be having fun here as
Alejandro Murrieta, one half of an infamous pair of sibling criminals. He is
approached by de la Vega to wear the mask of Zorro and once again fight
against the corrupt Montero who is using slave labor at a secret gold mine as
part of an elaborate conspiracy to buy California.
It is from here on that the story becomes little more than a series of scenes
stitched together to provide for action, undercover work, and a romantic
subplot between Alejandro and Montero's "daughter" Elena (Zeta-Jones). Minor
elements such as Alenjandro's attempt to steal a horse turn into elaborate
fight and chase scenes. In the spirit of "Indiana Jones" the action is mixed
with comedy and slapstick, which is appealing because of the cartoony nature
of it all. But the more dramatic scenes which further the plot are presented
as if they were Shakespeare (especially anything involving Montero's evil
schemes). 
Zorro is one of the most underrated and least utilized characters of 20th
century fiction. Although he isn't unlike Batman in his quest to fight for the
people, he doesn't have many gadgets and must rely on his own skills to solve
mysteries and win battles. Although these aspects of the character is played
up well, it's just about the only aspect the film focuses on. No background on
the character is given such as where he originated from, whether he is one man
or part of a secret society, where the original Zorro learned his skills, and
most importantly, why he risks his life to do the things he does. de la Vega
claims Zorro is a servant of the people, but not once do either men seem to
care for anyone other than themselves and their love for Elena.
Throughout "The Mask Of Zorro" I kept picturing the screenwriters arguing
over plots, scenes, and lines of dialogue. Perhaps they wrote in shifts
without regard to continuity, as there would be many good scenes in a row, and
then everything would go sour quickly. But in the end it is really the
Hollywood machine at blame for trying to fix something that wasn't broken.

Title
Review for Aliens (1986)
1986, R, 136 minutes [2 hours, 16 minutes]
starring: Sigourney Weaver (Ripley), Michael Biehn (Corporal Hicks), Bill
Paxton (Private Hudson), Paul Reiser (Carter Burke); written by James
Cameron, David Giler, Walter Hill; produced by Gale Anne Hurd; directed by
James Cameron; based on characters created by Dan O'Bannon, Ronald Shusett.
Seen Friday, November 7, 1997 on home video.
I'm not sure what the appeal to "Alien" was, and I'm even more perplexed
that someone thought it was worthy of a sequel. The "us-versus-aliens"
formula has been used many times before, but never as moronic as "Aliens"
uses it. It's just a disguised horror flick and an excuse for special
effects, not the exciting thriller it tries to be.
This film picks up where its predecessor left off as Ripley (Weaver), the
sole survivor from the first movie, is awoken from her "hibernation" 57 years
later (funny, but she didn't seem to age a day!). We know somehow Ripley will
end up going back to the alien planet, but the film doesn't provide much of,
if any, rationale as to why this will happen. The only attempts at
justification are provided through elements so generic they're pathetic.
First there's Ripley's constant nightmares, then the  executives who think
she's insane. But the same execs have a sudden change of heart when they
realize a team of investigators sent to the alien planet have not returned
and they want Ripley to "advise" a military rescue team.
Now, it's not that these reasons alone are silly, it's the way the film
presents them: with complete logic when they're no different than cliches
most horror movies use.  The fact that within a five-minute period, Ripley
goes from being adamantly opposed to going back, to being more than willing
to go says it all.
And so, after 20 minutes of ridiculous sci-fi and military jargon, Ripley,
along with a troupe of Marine Special Forces, head out to the alien planet to
save some humans and kick alien butt. That's not the most intelligent plot in
the world, but it can yield great camaraderie and pride when done right.
Cameron knows this, but he goes about establishing these sensations in the
wrong way by over-doing it. The Marines do have a sense of unity to them, but
they're so one-dimensional it's corny. All they do is crack on each other and
act like idiots - where's the unity in that? Their dialogue is also laughable
because they seem more like characters from the cartoon "G.I. Joe."
Finally, after an hour or so we get our first encounter with the aliens but
many of the marines are wiped out. It's not surprising the survivors all turn
into cowards after this point, which is probably intended as satire, but
turns out to be annoying (especially Bill Paxton's character, Private Hudson,
whose constant whining drove me nuts after 10 minutes). The battle scenes are
reason these films were made, but they're shot so poorly it's impossible to
tell what's going on. Tension is worthless if it's confusing.
>From here on the film just starts repeating itself: the Marines try to get
off the planet but are always prevented from doing so, in one way or another,
by the aliens. There's many scenes of the aliens closing in on the humans,
and then carnage ensues. Most of this is set up through cliches, such as the
Marines not being able to use their weapons in certain places, the aliens
suddenly jumping out of the walls, floors and ceilings, or the fact the
Marines always seem to corner themselves. There's also a sub-plot involving
the backstabbing exec Carter Burke, who should be an even slimier character
than the aliens, but isn't, due to the miscasting of Paul Reiser (!?) for the
part.
The ending not only clinches the predictable story, it symbolizes the entire
film. It's just one exhausting battle after another for no real reason. This
also demonstrates how the basic premise is the worst flaw: it's us invading
an alien planet and trying to exterminate them when they're not really a
threat to begin with. This would be like aliens coming to Earth millions of
years ago and fighting the dinosaurs.
There isn't much going for "Aliens" other than its special effects and
production design (which are excellent, I'll have to admit it), but that
doesn't make up for the mediocre story. Maybe if it had been scripted with
more wit, it would be worth getting excited over.
Please visit Chad'z Movie Page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz - over 170
new and old movies reviewed in depth, not just blind ratings and quick
capsules. Also, check out The FIRST Shay Astar Web Page @
http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz/ShayAstar.html

Title
Review for Coyote Ugly (2000)
There's been so many movies about dreamers who have to face reality and can't 
deal with it. "Coyote Ugly" is kind of the opposite - the heroine shoots for 
the stars and makes it without trying very hard. Original idea, but the 
story's execution is not. 
Piper Perabo stars as Violet - a young girl from New Jersey who writes songs 
but has a bad case of stagefright. She figures she'll succeed if she moves to 
New York City and gives a tape of her music to some producer there and things 
will happen. There's quite a few scenes of Violet getting rejected over and 
over and they're quite funny. You're either laughing at how naive she is or 
how naive the filmmakers are to think we'll sympathize with her. She's not a 
ditz, but it's really hard to believe anyone could think getting a record 
contract is as easy as walking into a building and asking the receptionist to 
give the company president a tape. 
Eventually Violet ends up getting an "audition" to work in the all-girl bar 
"Coyote Ugly." It's a wild bar with some very sexy barmaids who dance on the 
bar and set things on fire and spray the crowd with water and basically act 
like strippers only they keep their clothes on. Twice Violet screws up and 
twice she redeems herself to the amazement of Lil (Maria Bello), the owner 
and manager who's kind of a prick for the position she's in. 
The middle act of the film centers around Violet's work at the bar and her 
developing relationship with Kevin (Adam Garcia) - an Australian guy who 
keeps flattering and impressing her but never opens up about himself. The two 
make a cute couple until Kevin gets into a scrum at the bar trying to protect 
Violet from some drunken horny guys. 
That's the thing with romantic comedies - they just can't stay cute and 
funny, there has to be that element of drama that's rather unnecessary. More 
dramatic subplots keep popping up throughout the second half including a 
serious conflict between Violet and her father (John Goodman) and her attempt 
conquer her stagefright. Do I really need to elaborate on the third act and 
the ending? 
That's what bogs the movie down - we can see through it and easily make 
predictions. The characters need more background and color, the screenplay 
needs less plot cliches and more scenes of pure dialogue and direction needs 
more focus. What we end up with is merely satisfactory. 
------------------------------------------------------------------------ 
You can also read this review at: 
http://www.epinions.com/mvie-review-3CE5-1508DD89-39CFE751-prod3 
And other reviews on the same topic at: http://www.epinions.com/mvie 
Check out my profile page at: http://www.epinions.com/user-chad9976 
*****
Chad'z Movie Page is back! 
In-depth reviews of nearly all mainstream films playing at your local 
cineplex. There's also reviews of a few classic films and some of your 
personal favorites.

Title
Review for Wedding Singer, The (1998)
1998, PG-13, 96 minutes [1 hour, 36 minutes]
starring: Adam Sandler (Robbie Hart), Drew Barrymore (Julia), Christine Taylor
(Holly), Allen Covert (Sammy); written by Tim Herlihy; produced by Jack
Giarraputo, Robert Simonds; directed by Frank Coraci.
Seen March 7, 1998 at 10 p.m. at the Crossgates Mall Cinema 18 (Guilderland,
NY), theater #14, with my brother John using Hoyt's Movie Cash. [Theater
rating: ***1/2: excellent picture and sound, but seats could have been better]
        After a series of average mainstream comedies, the creative team of star Adam
Sandler, writer Tim Herlihy, and producer Robert Simonds may have gotten the
message that doing the same thing over and over again doesn't equal success.
With "The Wedding Singer" they seem to be taking a chance by slightly straying
from their usual schtick and venturing into the shaky waters of the romantic
comedy, and a "nostalgic" one at that.
        The year is 1985 and we meet our main character, Robbie Hart (Sandler), a
wedding singer with long curly hair who we later learn lives in the basement
of his sister's house and is engaged to his high school sweetheart. Other
characters are thrown into the mix such as: his co-worker and best friend
Sammy (Covert) who is a real ladies' man; Julia (Barrymore), a cute young
woman who has just started working with Robbie; and Holly (Taylor), Julia's
sister, co-worker, and shoulder to cry on. All of these characters have been
clearly set into the proper places in order to further the story and provide
for all the necessary comedic and thematic elements. But what's surprising is
how they all manage to work, probably due to the film's over-all sense of
grace under pressure.
        Setting up a story to a film such as this isn't too difficult of a task -
it's really just a matter of plugging in the characters and plot devices in
the proper places. It's not surprising that Robbie will be left at the altar
and that he will fall for Julia, who's engaged to a jerk she barely loves, and
this is where the conflict will occur. 
        If Sandler and company have truly learned from their mistakes, it shows right
away. Herlihy's dialogue is witty for such a mainstream film, and the story is
paced well to actually shape the characters, making them into real people and
not just pawns in a movie. We actually feel some kind of emotional connection
with Robbie, so that when he's crushed we can understand, and when he begins
to fall for Julia it's also sympathetic. This might also be due to the fact
that Sandler has matured a bit, as he's not playing a complete idiot who
constantly shouts and throws tantrums (a la "Bulletproof," "Happy Gilmore"). 
        Much of the story involves interaction between Robbie and Julia, and is
handled quite well. Where other films might have gone the sitcom route with
the characters madly falling for each other at first sight, or some other kind
of wacky plot, the script here is surprising in the way it handles the
unspoken attraction by actually having the characters restrain themselves.
Sandler and Barrymore may not have perfect chemistry, but they're placed in a
story good enough to give them some charm.
        The last act executes the story as one would expect, with a chase-after-the-
girl, showdown-with-the-boyfriend, and gratuitous celebrity cameo. But what's
surprising here is the chase evokes suspense, the showdown-with-the-boyfriend
is handled well, and the gratuitous celebrity cameo doesn't seem that
gratuitous.
        Criticizing mainstream films for being too cliche, repetitive, generic, etc.,
is starting to become a task just as repetitive as the films themselves. At
this point it's a given that most films will make the same mistake others
have, but if and when  filmmakers have learned from their mistakes, well,
that's something worth applauding and "The Wedding Singer" is a good example
of this. It's basically another commercial romantic comedy, but the motions it
goes through are unique enough to merit a recommendation. 
Please visit Chad'z Movie Page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz - over 190
new and old films reviewed in depth, not just blind ratings and quick
capsules. Also, check out The FIRST Shay Astar Web Page @
http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz/ShayAstar.html

Title
Review for Weekend at Bernie's (1989)
Weekend At Bernie's
Chad'z rating: **1/2 (out of 4 = OK)
1989, PG, 101 minutes [1 hour, 41 minutes]
[comedy]
starring: Jonathan Silverman (Richard), Andrew McCarthy (Larry), Catherine
Mary Stewart (Gwen), Terry Kiser (Bernie), written by Robert Klame, produced
by Victor Drai, directed by Ted Kotcheff.
Ninety-nine times out of a hundred the "live action cartoon" comedy doesn't
work. Now, "Weekend At Bernie's" is not that one hundredth film, it's more
like 99 1/2. The film's premise is jokes about a dead body, which makes for a
few good gags, but not that many.
Jonathan Silverman and Andrew McCarthy star as Richard and Larry, a pair of
20-something buds working as data processors at the generic huge insurance
corporation in New York City. Right from the get-go the paldom is interesting
with Richard as the uptight workaholic while Larry is the obnoxious slacker.
The chemistry between the two is the standard "odd couple" formula, and even
though this is obvious it didn't bother me.
Somehow the two stumble upon a scam to defraud the company. When they
approach their boss, Bernie Lomax (Kiser), he is so appreciative and happy he
invites them to stay at his vacation house in the Hamptons for the upcoming
Labor Day weekend. However, it turns out Bernie was defrauding his own
company and there is a cartoony mob involvement, and you can pretty much take
it from there.
And so the two head out to Bernie's vacation mansion only to find their host
dead of what they believe to be a suicide via drug overdose. Bernie was
killed because he was cheating with his fellow mobster's girlfriend. The
problem is the film is a too slowly paced and this subplot starts to detract
from the comedy. From here on we get a comedy about trying to make people
believe Bernie's alive. It's the hyperactivity between Silverman and McCarthy
that keeps the film from becoming a disaster of dumb sight gags.
The film does come back to the mob subplot as the two find themselves
running all over the place because they think the killer is after them. Even
though this is stupidity, McCarthy and Silverman are quite funny because of
their constant bickering and zany antics. The funniest scene occurs when they
try to get off the island via speedboat and Bernie's body ends up being
dragged and hits a dozen bouies. I was laughing hard at the time, but
thinking about it now, I don't understand what was so funny about it. The
ending is a cliche but it doesn't become overly annoying, which is how the
film acts as a whole. 
I'm glad "Weekend At Bernie's" didn't ask us to take it seriously, but it
didn't exploit that notion enough. 
Please visit Chad'z Movie Page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz - over 140
new and old films reviewed in depth, not just blind ratings and capsules.
Also, check out The FIRST Shay Astar Web Page @
http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz/ShayAstar.html

Title
Review for Chasing Amy (1997)
*** (out of 4 = good)
1997, R, 105 minutes [1 hour, 45 minutes]
[romantic comedy]
starring: Ben Affleck (Holden McNeil), Joey Lauren Adams (Alyssa Jones),
Jason Lee (Banky Edwards), Dwight Ewell (Hooper), produced by Scott Mosier,
written and directed by Kevin Smith.
Relationships and sexuality are issues that are very difficult to deal with
intelligently in the movies. Any movie can be a "romance," but what sets
apart "Chasing Amy" is the fact it is able to deal with these issues in a
funny manner and still be sympathetic. It's a bit bland on the surface, and
the subject matter is risque (but certainly original), the only problem is it
doesn't maximize its potential.
The film opens at a comic book convention in New York City where we meet our
main characters, Holden McNeil (Affleck) and Banky Edwards (Lee), creators of
the hit comic "Bluntman & Chronic." Much like Dante and Randal ("Clerks"),
and T.S. and Brodie ("Mallrats"), Holden is the smart, straight man while
Banky is the apathetic wiseass always ready with one-liners. 
Right from the get-go, Smith's uncanny dialogue about mundane topics crops
up as an argument about what exactly an inker is becomes violent! Another
offbeat scene involves the two heckling a black militant artist named Hooper
(Ewell), who explains, with complete logic, that the "Star Wars" trilogy is
really about "how the black man is oppressed, even 'in a galaxy far, far
away.'" 
Hooper's attitude turns out to be just an act. He's actually gay, but
figures this is the only way he can make it in the business. He introduces
Holden and Banky to Alyssa Jones (Adams), a fellow comic scribe who is cute
and hip, and there appears to be an attraction between her and Holden.
Smith's grasp of reality is impressive, no one is able to capture the feel of
"hanging out" as well as he can. When the two talk while playing darts in a
bar, both their dialogue and the atmosphere compliment each other. Because
they are not glamorous movie stars, it is their down-to-Earth attitudes and
overall plainness that makes the story so sympathetic.
And then just when we think this will become another romantic comedy, the
bomb drops - Alyssa is a lesbian.
Of course Holden is shocked and hurt, but eventually he is able to deal with
it and the two become good friends. This leads to some very insightful
conversations about human nature and sexuality. They discuss why they are
attracted to girls, and although it can become shocking at times, it really
is the truth. 
Unfortunately, as soon as the first montage of the two together occurs, it's
a very obvious where the film is going as Holden falls in love with Alyssa.
I've never doubted Smith's characterization before, but it seems a too
convenient that they fall for each other so quickly.
Banky becomes jealous of Holden and Alyssa's relationship and starts digging
up dirt on her. Holden learns of Alyssa's promiscuous past and doesn't know
how to deal with it, which causes much tension between the three main
characters. Then there are argument scenes that are melodramatic but have
elements of truth to them. Fortunately, as serious as the film becomes, humor
is used to keep the mood light and realistic - even Jay and Silent Bob (Jason
Mewes, Kevin Smith) make an appearance and give Holden words of wisdom.
Smith uses his characters, their relationships, and their problems to
symbolize the complexity of dating and sexuality in the 90s. People are not
as monogamous anymore, and everyone wants to experience as many things as
they can, but just don't want their partner to be as experienced as
themselves. There are also interesting observations, such as the fact that
being a lesbian is much more acceptable than a gay man.
The ending itself is probably the most unique and surprising element to the
film. I didn't find it believable, but I appreciated the originality.
"Chasing Amy" could have been just an offbeat romantic comedy or a
realistic-but-complex love story, but it becomes a bit jumbled when it tries
to be both. Still, its overall sense of originality is a more than welcome
change of pace. (5/20/97) [see also: "Clerks," "Mallrats"]

Title
Review for Senior Trip (1995)
z- [0] (out of 4 = beyond terrible)
1995, R, 91 minutes [1 hour, 31 minutes]
[comedy]
starring: Matt Frewer (Principal Todd Moss), Valerie Mahaffery (Miss Tracy
Milford), Tommy Chong (Red), Jeremy Renner (Dags), written by Roger Kumble,
I. Marlene King, produced by Wendy Grean, directed by Kelly Makin.
It's really sad that movies as bad as "National Lampoon's Senior Trip" are
made, let alone thought up. I can't image what went on during the pitch for
this movie, maybe the executives were temporarialy insane to approve
something this ludicrous. Everything in Hollywood is ripped off of something
else, but how low does National Lampoon have to be to rip off itself?
Watching teenagers get drunk, stoned, and have sex isn't funny.
There really isn't a plot here, only a simple and extremely predictable
story about a group of cliche, idiotic, high school slackers who crash the
principal's house for a party, and then proceed to drive from Ohio to
Washington to meet the president to tell him the education system "sucks."
But this movie doesn't even try to be anything original. It is the epitome of
bad, raunchy, semi-pornographic B-movies that are shown on cable at 3 a.m.,
but in this case it's with high school students and that only makes it more
sick.
The road trip and the brat pack of teens is a staple for Hollywood comedy,
but this film goes beyond the realms of good taste and offers shock value
comedy, while at the same time delivering childish, cartoony humor and
antics. Of course all the students hate their anal, geeky, dumbfound
principal, Mr. Moss (Frewer). All they want to do is get drunk, stoned, and
have sex with each other.         
Of course we get all the token characters here: Dags (Renner), the cool
leader; the pothead; the fat guy who will eat anything; the computer geek;
the slut; the kiss-up; some lesbians; and an insane kid obsessed with "Star
Trek." But it's not enough to just have these characters present, the film
goes as far as to essentially label them with arrows by the sheer appearance
of the characters alone. There is absolutely no subtlety here.
I don't know what went through the writers' heads while scripting this. Are
we really supposed to think only sex, drugs, and alcohol are funny? Are we
supposed to be curious about these characters and wonder how they will
interact with each other? Are we supposed to think teenagers interacting with
debutantes and getting them drunk and having a massive orgy is funny? I
appreciate a lowbrow joke now and then, but this is so low it's enough to
make you sick. It could be considered obscene, not because of its substance,
but because of its attitude - that it actually presents itself as something
to take seriously.
I shouldn't even begin to nitpick at all the fallacies to "National
Lampoon's Senior Trip," let's just say whatever could be bad about it is. In
fact "bad" isn't even a strong enough word, only "terrible" or even "vile"
would really be accurate. 
please visit Chad'z Movie Page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz

Title
Review for Fargo (1996)
**** (out of 4 = excellent)
1996, R, 98 minutes [1 hour, 38 minutes]
[crime/satire]
Starring: Frances McDormand (Marge Gundersund), William H. Macy (Jerry
Lundergaard), Steve Buscemi (Carl Showalter), Harve Presnell (Wade
Gustafson), Peter Stormare (Gaear Grimsrud), produced by Ethan Coen, written
by Ethan and Joel Coen, directed by Joel Coen.
If I had to choose one word to describe "Fargo" it would be difficult
(literally); it's difficult to classify its genre, it's difficult to describe
its plot, and most of all it's difficult to explain why it's such an
excellent film. The Coen brothers have once again captured that sense of the
surreal and this time have made it very mainstream, so that as strange as
this film becomes, we never question its logic.
William H. Macy stars as Jerry Lundergaard, a bad car salesman who is
desperate for money and is really pathetic because he is such a bad liar and
not very smart either. The story starts out simple enough as Jerry hires two
goons (in the most literal sense of the term) to kidnap his wife so that when
her father pays the ransom they can split it. Steve Buscemi is hilarious as
Carl Showalter, the slightly smarter of the two goons, while Peter Stormare
is also quite funny as nearly mute Gaear Grimsrud.
The film doesn't put itself forward as any kind of serious, disturbing tale
of greed and crime, but more of a lighthearted drama with overtones of
satire. For example, as Carl and Gaear drive, they have a funny argument over
where to eat. Gaear says, "We stop for pancakes," Carl tells him that they're
going to stop for a steak, but then slowly caves to his partner's demands
even though he hasn't said anything.
The story starts to get a little choppy and confusing concerning Jerry's
deals with his distributor and his father-in-law's investment into a parking
lot system he has organized. Meanwhile, the goons are having a bit of trouble
themselves when they are pulled over by a cop for not having tags on their
licence plates. The scene ends in a triple homicide, and we are then
introduced to Brainerd Police Chief Marge Gundersund, played perfectly by
Frances McDormand with terrific charm. She seems more like a housewife that
happens to be a police officer than vice versa. Marge starts to put the
pieces together with very little clues and it is quite interesting to watch
this type of a story element in a movie that is the furthest thing from a
Hollywood mystery.
>From this point on the plot becomes irrelevant and it is a complete and
total exercise in character study and storytelling. The atmosphere of the
mid-western setting is pure satire in and of itself, because everyone seems
so innocent and naive, saying "Yah" and "'The heck ya mean?" all the time.
Even Jerry's son has a poster of Whitesnake next to "The Accordion King." 
It is the storytelling process that makes the film so excellent. Yes, there
have been other films of more complex storyline involving detective work and
crime, et cetera, but here it is completely different because the story never
takes itself too seriously. 
"Fargo" is an example of great filmmaking in all aspects: original plot;
great acting; good scripting; and excellent direction that brings it all
together and makes it so breezy and enjoyable. This is one of those films
that you like even though you have no idea why.

Title
Review for Breakfast Club, The (1985)
***
1985, R, 92 minutes [1 hour, 32 minutes]
[comedy/lighthearted drama]
starring: Emilio Estevez (Andrew), Judd Nelson (Bender), Molly Ringwald
(Claire), Anthony Micheal Hall (Brian), Ally Sheedy (Allison), Paul Gleason
(Mr. Richard Vernon), produced by Ned Tanen, John Hughes, written and
directed by John Hughes.
"The Breakfast Club" is a film that is obvious in its intention to make a
statement about the caste system between teenagers, but it does so in a funny
and enjoyable way. The film has a substantial amount of sympahty because the
characters are realistic and believable. Even though it can go a bit over the
top, the script is chiseled with detail and flows very smoothly and you have
to respect that.
The story is very simple: five teenagers from a suburban Chicago high school
must spend an entire Saturday in the school library as a special form of
detention. Mr. Vernon (Gleason), the administrator, lays down the rules and
tells them they better think about what they've done. He's mean and knows he
is, but doesn't care. However, as much of a caricature as the character may
be, Gleason plays the role perfectly as not to make Vernon a simple
easy-to-hate villain nor any type of cartoony character. He simply embodies
everything about adulthood and authority.
As soon as Vernon leaves, 20 minutes of sheer character development through
conversation and arguments start up between the group. There is Andrew
(Estevez), the jock; Bender (Nelson), the punk rebel; Claire (Ringwald), the
princess; Brian (Hall), the brain; and Allison (Sheedy), the kooky loner.
Bender gets the ball rolling by purposely annoying the others. He may be a
punk, but he certainly is clever because he knows how to manipulate everyone.
And so we get conversations that are funny and insightful at the same time.
Hughes is a master of dialogue and although these kids are caricatures, their
conversations are familiar. They argue just because they are from different
"classes" and think they are better than each other.
The film is essentially divided into small interludes, and I was surprised
title cards didn't appear every little bit saying "Hour 1: Bickering," "Hour
5: Confessional." About halfway through the gang has gotten to know each
other pretty well and start to do things to break the monotony. Bender is the
most outspoken of the group as he represents everything teens are not
supposed to be, but when he leads the gang on a risky romp through the halls,
they go along just for the element of risk. Surprisingly, when they are
nearly caught, Bender sacrifices himself to save the others and is then
locked in a closet by Vernon. Maybe some of this sounds a little too
Hollywood, but because the film is so charming it makes sense at the time. 
The final act tries, perhaps a bit too hard, to become a real bonding
experience between the newly found friends. There are emotional breakdowns
(ever character cries at least once) as each admits what "crime" they
committed, and then they realize just how petty their differences are and
wonder why there has to be the caste system there is. 
As good and wholly original as the film remains throughout, the ending seems
a little off. Even though there isn't a plot, I couldn't help feeling
something was left unresolved.
"The Breakfast Club" constantly exhibits subtle elements that could have
been played upon more. Even though this film does have many transparent
elements to it, for the most part they are presented in an original, funny,
and interesting manner. The good points here far outweigh the bad. 
visit Chad'z Movie Page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz/index.html

Title
Review for Star Wars: Episode I - The Phantom Menace (1999)
Chad'z rating: ***1/2 (out of 4 = very good)
1999, PG, 131 minutes [2 hours, 11 minutes]
Starring: Liam Neeson (Qui-Gon Jinn); Jake Lloyd (Anakin Skywalker); Natalie 
Portman (Queen Amidala); Ewan McGregor (Obi-Wan Kenobi); produced by Rick 
McCallum; written and directed by George Lucas.
Seen May 19, 1999 at 5 p.m. at the Crossgates Cinema 18 (Guilderland, N.Y.), 
theater #1, with my brother John for $8.50. [Theater rating: ****: excellent 
seats, sound and picture]
(Critic's note: This review is the longest I've ever written and still only 
scratches the surface. I'd recommend this be read only by those who have seen 
the film as a form of critical analysis.)
        As my friend and fellow film critic Ted Prigge said in his review of 
`The Phantom Menace' - how do I even write this review? Never mind the fact 
that I've been waiting for a new `Star Wars' movie since I was seven years 
old. Never mind the fact everyone on the Internet had already dissected and 
discussed the movie before it was even released. Never mind that there's so 
much going on in this movie in terms of plot, action, special effects and 
long-term story that to analyze every aspect would take a lot of time and 
energy and still wouldn't cover everything.
        And also like Ted does in all of his reviews, I'll try to review this 
in a way different from my usual reviews and instead write as casually as 
possible as if I was talking directly to you, the reader.
        Before we can begin analyzing the specific aspects of the film, many 
of the most general and most significant factors must be considered (to get 
the specifics of the film, skip this and the next four paragraphs). As has 
been made obvious for the last several years, another trilogy of films will 
be produced to account for the [missing] initial three installments of the 
`Star Wars' series (the first of the films was actually episode four, not 
one). George Lucas, the creator of the series, has probably just assumed most 
people know the first-produced trilogy (`Star Wars,' `The Empire Strikes 
Back' and `Return Of The Jedi') is actually the second trilogy, 
chronologically. In media interviews in the past he has explained why the 
movies were made out of order, but I can't recall his reasons. With this new 
film he as writer and director has also assumed viewers are at least vaguely 
familiar with the storylines and significant plot points of the first trilogy 
(err... second trilogy... well you know what I mean). And in order for this 
review to be thorough many of those significant points must be mentioned 
which, unfortunately, may serve as spoilers so proceed with caution.
        [Critic's note #1: It is one my personal policy not to intentionally 
analyze spoilers because I would like my reviews to be able to make sense to 
the reader both before and after viewing the film reviewed, but it would be 
nearly impossible to do the film justice here without breaking the rule. 
Critic's note #2: Reviewing this film also breaks the universal critics' law 
of reviewing movies, which as Roger Ebert coined, `It's not what a movie is 
about, but how it is about it.' Because so many outside factors come into 
play in the film's plot and significance as part of a trilogy, and just 
considering modern society, it again would be difficult, if not impossible to 
simply review the film as a completely autonomous story.]
        First of all we have to catalog what we know about the film before 
even going into it. We know that young Anakin Skywalker will grow up to 
become the evil ruler Darth Vader who is also the father of Luke Skywalker, 
who will lead a successful revolution against him and his Empire. We know 
Obi-Wan `Ben' Kenobi was the trainer of Anakin in the ways of `The Force' in 
attempts to become a Jedi Knight, but would fail and thus Anakin would fall 
to the `Dark Side.' We also know something about `The Force' itself, that it 
is some kind of universal force which determines fate and can be manipulated 
by those whose minds are expanded enough to believe in it and feel it (the 
Jedi). 
         What we don't know for sure is the history of the ruling of the 
galaxy, which is most likely much longer and more complex than any government 
we have had here on Earth. To me, this was one of the most fascinating 
aspects of the first three films because there seemed to be a subtle, 
definite order to all the complexity. 
        Also, it seems that we're supposed to be familiar with a few other 
details about the story which have come out of the thousands of comic books 
and paperbacks published in the years since the movies ended. Most notably, 
details regarding the Emperor from `Empire' and `Jedi,' and that he was once 
a senator and his last name is Palpatine. For those who haven't kept up with 
all the `Star Wars' paraphernalia over the years, there is still a way to 
know these details simply by recognizing an actor (or his voice at least).
        With `The Phantom Menace' being the first chapter of a long saga, one 
would assume the basic groundwork would be laid, including the history behind 
all the major factors of the series, especially `The Force' and the Jedi 
Knights. Unfortunately, this film does more of the opposite as it simply 
builds on top of what must be a history so long and detailed it could never 
be explained.
        I didn't liked that aspect to this film and is one of the reasons it 
falls just short of greatness. If you're going to tell a story from the 
beginning - tell it from the beginning (is it possible that after this 
trilogy is complete there could be another trilogy of episodes -1 through -3 
to clarify the back story even further?).
        But I digress. I've said so much and yet I haven't even touched on 
the specifics of the film itself. All these necessary `disclaiming' elements 
should go to show just how vast the story of the `Star Wars' series is and 
this individual film itself.
        What we get here is a movie not unlike any of the other three we've 
come to know and love since the late 1970s. Its similarity to the other films 
helps to keep the spirit of the series familiar, but at the same time seems 
to be a flaw in the filmmaking process itself since it sometimes rings of 
unoriginality.
        The basic story is rather sorted, complex and even confusing at 
times. We're told that an army known as `The Trade Federation' has set up a 
blockade around an seemingly insignificant planet called Naboo. We're not 
given too many details to clarify the back story of what the federation is 
and what their purpose is, instead the film opts to get its story moving 
quickly. 
        We're introduced to two Jedi, the master Qui-Gon Jinn (Neeson) and 
his apprentice Obi-Wan Kenobi (McGregor). The two are acting as ambassadors 
of some sort in hopes of ending the obvious hostility between the federation 
and the planet's queen, Amidala (Portman). The leader of the federation, an 
alien called Viceroy, is following the orders of a strange, mythical 
character - an older human man whose face and body are covered and shadowed 
by the black robe and hood he wears. He is referred to as Lord Sidious but 
considering his appearance, and especially that creepy evil voice of his, he 
is a obviously one of the most significant characters in the series.
        Sidious communicates to Viceroy only through digital transmissions 
and never in person. Clearly his actual whereabouts are something he wants to 
keep secret because that would also reveal his identity (which is never 
openly revealed in the film, but should be clear to most viewers. I have a 
feeling we'll delve into his background in the next two films).
        The film doesn't have one specific plot and works in the same manner 
as the other films in the series where as what we get is one mini-plot and 
adventure on top of another. There are so many of these 
mini-plots-within-plots in this film I would not describe them all because it 
is what gives the movie its hook. The other films have relied on this type of 
storytelling, but because of the limits of the technology at the time, the 
films' screenplays were also limiting.
        The sense of limitlessness here is what gives `The Phantom Menace' 
its unique traits.
        As we already know, the film takes place at least a generation or two 
before the original `Star Wars' trilogy which means a lot of the background 
which was unclear and/or unexplained may be cleared up here as it is the 
beginning of the vast epic story. And here the most significant storyline is 
that involving the discovery of 10-year-old Anakin Skywalker (Lloyd), by 
Qui-Gon Jinn and his introduction to the Jedi Council.
        To briefly summarize the story, Jinn stumbles upon Skywalker in an 
attempt to buy parts for Queen Amidala's spaceship which was damaged in 
efforts to free her from the federation. Their meeting on Tatooine is mostly 
chance but of course Jinn chalks it up to the will of the Force. Jinn can 
feel that Skywalker has a great natural power in the Force, and through 
another sub-plot involving a bet on Skywalker in a fantastic race he will 
enter, more and more details of his significance begin to reveal themselves.
        This also provides for a new elaboration and explanation of the Force 
which has never been mentioned before. In fact, it seems to be something so 
important it is upsetting it has never been mentioned before. The element 
seriously undermines the mystical aspect of the Force and transforms it into 
something more physical and scientific which is completely unnecessary.
        By the film's third act all the major significant elements become 
tied together in a rather familiar execution of the plot. It's funny how the 
reality of the `Star Wars' world seems so embedded in mythology, New Age-like 
philosophy and religion and yet the solution to all the major conflicts in 
the series has been violence.
        Not that this technique hasn't been used in movies and in real-life 
situations countless times throughout history. And at least it's all in the 
spirit of the ultimate powers of good versus evil in a fun and exciting 
matter. It does border of the cartoonish sometimes, but that's just the film 
appealing to our inner child, which is the basic reason the entire saga 
exists and has become such a big part of our modern society.
        `The Phantom Menace' delivers exactly what you'd expect from a `Star 
Wars' film which is why it succeeds as well as it does but is always why it 
never truly achieves greatness. So many things in the film we've seen before 
and done with more heart because the filmmakers concentrated just a bit more 
on story and character because they were limited. But this film is far from 
bad because it at least embraces the spirit of sheer fun at the movies.

Title
Review for True Lies (1994)
True Lies
Chad'z rating: *** (out of 4 = good)
1994, R, 141 minutes [2 hours, 21 minutes]
[action/comedy]
starring: Arnold Schwarzenegger (Harry Tasker), Tom Arnold (Gib), Jamie Lee
Curtis (Helen Tasker), Art Makik (Aziz), produced by James Cameron, Stephanie
Austin, written and directed by James Cameron.
Of all the genres to mix comedy with, action has the most potential because
everything is so over-the-top anyway, it wouldn't be any more unrealistic if
a few jokes and gags were thrown in. This is the appeal and them of "True
Lies:" it purposely exaggerates to amaze us, even if it does get a little
cliche and cartoony at times.
We meet Harry (Schwarzenegger) and Gib (Arnold), two U.S. spies just doing
their jobs of trying to stop international terrorists. The opening scene
immediately establishes the film's lightheartedness and satirical nature, as
Harry speaks Arabic while the subtitles say "'Where's the John?' (in perfect
Arabic)." Meanwhile, Gib waits in "the van" making lots of wisecracks and
one-liners that aren't just recycled sit-com stuff, but truly original and
funny jokes (you don't see stuff like this in a Van Damme flick). Suddenly we
get one of those typical Schwarzenegger scenes where he runs from and
single-handedly disarms 50 terrorists using his bare hands. Yes, we've seen
this before, but this film doesn't make the mistake of taking itself too
seriously, and thus, it's fun.
The basic plot involves Harry and Gib's pursuit of an Arabic terrorist named
Aziz (Makik) who has access to nuclear warheads. But the story skews off on a
huge tangent when Harry realizes his wife Helen (Curtis) is having an affair
with a man claiming to be a spy. What makes this such a coincidence is the
fact Helen herself, nor their daughter know Harry is a spy and not the
computer salesman he claims to be. 
This sub-plot allows for good characterization and some great comic relief
(due mostly to Bill Paxton as Simon, Helen's pathetic suitor), but after a
while the main plot seems to be forgotten about. This is my only real problem
with the film, because its high-tech spy stuff and action had been great, but
the tangent is goes off on lasts entirely too long. Eventually it does come
back to the terrorist-chasing aspect and does so by diving head first into
it, which is somewhat forgivable.
The final act is the action and suspense-driven story you'd expect the film
to become. Getting into the details would be pointless, because much of it is
predictable, but at least it's fun. The film makes no apologies for its
existence and this is why we get nuclear explosions, fantastic car chases,
people dangling from helicopters and airplanes, and gunfights and fist fights
galore.
Special mention must be made to the camaraderie between Schwarzenegger and
Arnold. They're just another "odd couple" or even "cop buddies," they're just
two talented actors in fun, original film.
"True Lies" is the action movie for people who don't like action movies.
It's the movie equivalent of cherry cheesecake, but with reduced fat.
Please visit Chad'z Movie Page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz - over 140
films critically reviewed in depth, not just blind ratings or quick capsules.

Title
Review for Home Alone 2: Lost in New York (1992)
** (out of 4 = fair)
1992, PG, 120 minutes [2 hours]
[comedy]
starring: Macauly Culkin (Kevin MaCallister), Joe Pesci (Harry), Daniel Stern
(Marv), Brenda Fricker (The Pigeon Lady), written and produced by John
Hughes, directed by Chris Columbus.
The idea of a small boy somehow separated from his family at Christmas, and
then proceeding to befriend a misunderstood person, outsmart adults, and
torture criminals in a cartoonish style is an idea that can (and should) be
used once. "Home Alone 2: Lost In New York" is such a retread of the original
it is one of the most predictable films I've ever seen. This story tries a
too hard to be a lighthearted family movie and thus becomes very corny and
sappy.
The film basically starts out the same as the first one, with the house full
of people running all over the place, preparing for a family Christmas
vacation in Florida. We get a lot of the same jokes with Kevin (Culkin) being
dumped on and his mischievous antics, most of them provided by his Talkboy
tape recorder (one of the most blatant plugs I've ever seen). 
The funniest moment occurs near the beginning when Buzz, (Devin Ratray)
Kevin's oldest brother, embarrasses him during his solo at a Christmas
pageant, to which Kevin retaliates by punching him which causes a domino
effect knocking the entire 100-kid choir off the stage. Perhaps this is just
foreshadowing the jokes to come; lots of slapstick we've seen before that
don't often work.
Through a series of cartoony coincidences and cliches, Kevin ends up on the
wrong plane bound for New York City while the rest of the family heads to
Orlando. But he is even more clever this time and proceeds to check himself
into the Plaza Hotel.
Most of the film is plotless, it is just the adventures of Kevin alone in
New York with a lot of money (he had his father's wallet with him) and a wild
imagination. The problem is it's just too dumbed down, and that's saying
something compared to the original.
Those idiot criminals Harry and Marv (Pesci, Stern) are back, and proceed to
run into Kevin again (and again...). They are planning to rob a toy store,
and tell him all the details, which of course he captures on tape. In fact,
the Talkboy plays act as as an important source for plot and jokes. It allows
Kevin to constantly fool people, but I found it impossible to believe no one
realizes what they are hearing is a tape.
Of course there is the token scene where Kevin and his house of tricks (this
time his uncle's abandoned for renovation townhouse) nearly kill Harry and
Marv, but that's the entire premise of making and watching these films. I
found myself laughing, but only a little bit. After a while the slapstick
seemed just too painful and too fake to watch.
"Home Alone 2" doesn't work as a comedy, although I'm sure kids will like
it. From beginning to end it is filled with cliches and complete retreads of
all the jokes that worked in the original. Incredible coincidences and
outrageous slapstick comedy are devices that can only work once (if at all),
but Hollywood thrives on sequels. 
please visit Chad'z Movie Page @ http://members.aol.com

Title
Review for Nutty Professor II: The Klumps (2000)
Eddie Murphy is back as that fat scientist Prof. Sherman Klump who's trying 
to exorcise the remains of his
alter-ego Buddy Love. And since he's a nutty professor he concocts a formula 
that kind of acts as a Buddy
Love enema (eww), but somehow ends up bring Love to life as an entirely 
separate person. There's also a
plot about Love's attempt to steal Klump's latest gene-bending formula but 
that's something of a minor
issue with this film. 
As the title states, this movie is about the Klump family and Murphy plays 
all of them with total
commitment and hilarity ensues. Oh, it's not the smartest script in the world 
but I do have to admit it's got
great characterization. I won't elaborate any further here, since there's 
about six different characters who
are all integral to the story and everything. This movie's a pure summer 
comedy and that's certainly what
we get. 
If you've seen the commercials and previews that have been in very heavy 
rotation for months and
months now you know this is really envelope-pushing comedy (at least of a 
PG-13 movie). Does it work?
For the most part yes. There isn't a lot of really graphic, raunchy stuff to 
speak of, most of it is implied
and/or exaggerated to the point of being cartoony and silly. It sometimes 
makes you wince but you're still
laughing. And it's all brought together by a fairly good story not meant to 
be taken all that seriously.
Believe me it could've have been much worse (i.e. the first movie). 
Chad'z Movie Page is back! 
New reviews of the latest movies in easy-to-swallow capsule form with the 
trendy, Entertainment Weekly-style of letter grades instead of the old star 
system. Have I sold out? Visit my page and decide for yourself ;-)

Title
Review for Stargate (1994)
Stargate
Chad'z rating: ** (out of 4 = fair)
1995, PG-13, 119 minutes [1 hour, 59 minutes]
[science fiction]
starring: James Spader (Dr. Daniel Jackson), Kurt Russell (Colonel O'Neil),
Jaye Davidson (Ra), produced by Joel B. Michaels, Oliver Eberle, Dean Devlin,
written by Dean Devlin, Roland Emmerich, directed by Roland Emmerich.
        It's hard to find a good sci-fi movie these days. Even with all the
technology capable for special effects, you hardly ever see wholly original
concepts. "Stargate" is somewhat original in its most basic form, but the
actual script itself is formulated, cliche, and boring. It's just another
case of unused potential.
        The story revolves around Dr. Daniel Jackson (Spader), a geeky archaeologist
whose expertise is needed by the military because it will help lead them to
inter-dimensional travel (ooookay!). The problem is nothing is explained
clearly, especially why the military chose Jackson, and why they think they
can (or would want to) travel to another dimension. 
        Kurt Russell co-stars as Colonel O'Neil who, along with Jackson, leads a
typical military bratpack through an ancient Egyptian artifact known as the
"Stargate." But once they make it through they realize they can't get back!
The group splits up, some go exploring and some stay behind. Soon they meet a
group of primates who and are being oppressed by some higher power in a
pyramid. Does this sound wacky enough for you? Stuff like this works fine in
a Marvel comic, but not in a movie.
        The film does have an interesting theory about Egyptian mythology. It goes
so far to justify it by making it "real" in this other dimension. Apparently
Ra (Davidson), the sun god, came to Earth but was outcasted and now rules
this dimension. O'Neil says something to the effect that Ra still poses a
threat to Earth and that is why they are there - to kill him.
        Most of the film is a bad rip-off of the "Indiana Jones" films and just
about every sci-fi movie and comic book ever. We get a lot of rhetoric that
seems to justify all the unnecessary violence and bizarre storyline and
mythology, but just considering the basic elements, it's too stupid to take
seriously. The attempts at humanism and characterization? Forget about it. 
        The entire third act seems a hell of a lot like "Return Of The Jedi," with
the little people revolting against the evil oppressive government, the crude
leader single-handedly defeating enemies twice his size, and of course the
"super suspenseful" countdown ending.
        Emmerich and Devlin probably grew up on sci-fi and adventure and wanted to
make those kinds of films. The problem is "Stargate" is just that - more of
the same. All they need to do is just not try so hard. 
Please visit Chad'z Movie Page - http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz
E-mail: ChadPolenz@aol.com
(C)1997 Chad Polenz

Title
Review for Fools Rush In (1997)
** (out of 4 = fair)
1997, PG-13, 108 minutes [1 hour, 48 minutes]
[romantic comedy]
starring: Matthew Perry (Alex), Selma Hayek (Isabel), Jon Tenney (Jeff),
written by Katherine Reback, Joan Taylor, produced by Doug Draizin, directed
by Andy Tennant.
As good as Hollywood is at making movies and television programs, when they
combine the two it never works. "Fools Rush In" is a mediocre romantic comedy
that acts like a 2-hour sitcom, complete with predictable jokes, zany
overacting, and gags that don't work. 
Matthew Perry stars as Alex Whitman, an architect from New York who is
transferred to Las Vegas for a "temporary" project. I think Perry is the
funniest cast member on "Friends" but this film proves he is only capable of
playing one character - young yuppie slackers who spew forth wisecracks and
one-liners at every given opportunity. Sometimes characters like these can be
funny, but Perry's performance is so dry and the script is so shallow we
never get a sense of his character.
And then there is Selma Hayek as Isabel Fuentes, a sexy Mexican-American
straight of the stereotype vaults. She claims to be a devout Catholic but is
quite a hypocrite; one minute she is swimming in sin (premarital sex,
drinking, etc), and the next she is wrapped in charity and tradition (going
to church, confession, family gatherings). She believes fate controls every
action of life, and when she meets Alex, she says destiny brought them
together and it appears as if she is about to marry him. Justification for
love through fate is one of the worst cop-outs, films like this use it to
make up for lack of chemistry.
Alex and Isabel have a one-night stand only to meet three months later and
find out she's pregnant with his child. Then there is the awkward moment, the
fighting, the chase scene, and finally the realization they're perfect for
each other. If this wasn't predictable enough, there is even a
fish-out-of-water scene as Isabel drags Alex to her weekly family gathering,
saying he is her boyfriend of two months (which makes no sense because if she
sees her family every week, wouldn't the boyfriend issue have come up
already?).
For some strange reason the two decide they are in love and get married at a
typical Vegas chapel, and now they can finally be together and get to know
each other. This idea of a reverse romance story is pretty creative, but the
film doesn't know how to use it in any original manner at all.
The final act really lost me, it makes the mistake (nearly all romantic
comedies make) of splitting the lovers up and concentrating more on drama
than comedy. But these two are so incompatible, so selfish, and so shallow,
it's hard to care if they make up or not. Of course we get the
Cinderella-type ending and everything's just peachy by the closing credits.
"Fools Rush In" seems like a date movie for the sake of making a date movie,
and therefore all the jokes and plot devices are plugged in. It had a lot of
good ideas, but it's just too much of a drawn out sit-com to be taken
seriously. 
(2/28/97) (6/13/97) [see also: "Singles"]
please visit Chad'z Movie page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz/index.html

Title
Review for Dr. Strangelove or: How I Learned to Stop Worrying and Love the Bomb (1964)
Dr. Strangelove, Or: How I Learned To Stop Worrying And Love The Bomb
*** (out of 4 = good)
1964, not rated, 93 minutes [1 hour, 33 minutes]
[satire]
starring: Peter Sellers (President Merkin Muffley, Captain Lionel Mandrake,
Dr. Strangelove), George C. Scott (General Buck Turgidson), Sterling Hayden
(General Jack D. Ripper) Slim Pickens (Major T.J. "King" Kong), written by
Stanley Kubrick, Terry Southern, Peter George, produced and directed by
Stanley Kubrick, based on the novel "Red Alert" by Peter George.
"Dr. Strangelove" probably holds the record for the longest and strangest
title in movie history, and in a way it's symbolic of the contents. This is a
story of the end of the world, but a funny and thematic one at that.
The plot is a bit difficult to follow at first, but it is full of subtle
themes and moods. Sterling Hayden co-stars as General Jack D. Ripper (wonder
if that name is symbolic?), who has gone insane and ordered a nuclear attack
against Russia. Peter Sellers plays three supporting roles, one is that of
Captain Lionel Mandrake, a British military officer working with Ripper.
When he tries to talk Ripper out of his insane actions, it has such a
satirical, almost cartoony affect, it's funny but a little scary considering
how serious the mood is.
George C. Scott also co-stars as General Buck Turgidson, who is quite a
character to behold. We first meet him when his secretary (and girlfriend)
relays a phone conversation between him and an admiral while he is in on the
toilet! This isn't hysterically funny, but it's just the thought of the
situation that is humorous.
Other sequences like this crop up throughout the film, such as Turgidson
being called by his girlfriend in the Pentagon War Room to discuss their
relationship; the funny phone conversation that ensues between President
Muffley (Sellers) and the premier of Russia in which Muffley nonchalantly
says they are about to start a nuclear war accidentally; and of course Dr.
Strangelove (Sellers), the mad scientist.
The film does have a suspenseful aspect to it, as we wonder if the Air Force
troupe we have been following since the beginning will carry out their orders
since they don't know what is going on. This bunch is led by the eccentric
Major T.J. "King" Kong (Pickens), who seems more like Elmer Fudd or Yosemite
Sam than any kind of military leader. In fact, by the end of the film Kong
rides a nuclear bomb like a bucking bronco - how off the wall is that?
"Dr. Strangelove" will go down in history as the best satire of the Cold
War. Its strong point isn't the humor, but the theme, which comes across very
clearly of the defining mood. Who else but Stanley Kubrick could make nuclear
Armageddon so lighthearted?
please visit Chad'z Movie page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz/index.html

Title
Review for Patriot, The (2000)
Mel Gibson stars in a really long, epic drama about a man who leads a 
revolution against the evil British
empire. A man who's a great fighter and leader but whose family life has been 
hell and is ready to die for
his beliefs. 
No, I didn't copy that line from a review of "Braveheart," that's an accurate 
plot description to the latest
wannabe blockbuster from Roland Emmerich and Dean Devlin - the guys behind 
"Independence Day" and
"Godzilla." This film also tries to appeal to our patriotism with the big 
common enemy being the British in
the late 18th century during the American Revolution. It doesn't pay off very 
well here because the
screenplay langer on and on about Gibson's family life and the depressing 
hardships they must endure due
to the war. 
There's a lot of "Gone With The Wind"-like melodrama combined with some 
"Braveheart"-like battle scenes
but neither are nearly as good. More concentration of the Americans' overall 
strategy is needed to clarify
the screenplay and the human drama is laid on too thick. This is one of those 
films designed to kiss-up to
the Academy (not unlike "Gladiator") that leaves us little guys out in the 
cold... sort of. One more cut and
this could have been a great flick, this cut is just all right. 
Chad'z Movie Page is back! 
New reviews of the latest movies in easy-to-swallow capsule form with the 
trendy, Entertainment Weekly-style of letter grades instead of the old star 
system. Have I sold out? Visit my page and decide for yourself ;-)

Title
Review for Kingpin (1996)
** (out of 4 = fair)
1996, PG-13, 113 minutes [1 hour, 53 minutes]
[comedy]
starring: Woody Harrelson (Roy Munson), Randy Quaid (Ishmael Boorg), Vanessa
Angel (Claudia), Bill Murray (Ernie McCracken), produced by Brad Krevoy,
Steve Stabler, Bradley Thomas, written by Barney Fanaro, Mort Nathan,
directed by Peter and Bobby Farrelly.
"Kingpin" tries to cash in on the elements that worked in the Farrelly
brothers' first film, "Dumb And Dumber," this time with the generic sports
plot (the underdog versus the champion), and it doesn't work because it goes
overboard. The film focuses too much on plot rather than on jokes, and the
jokes we get are in questionable taste.
There isn't much to a comedy like this, it recycles every comedy formula: 1)
the underdog versus the world, 2) the idiots in the real world, 3) the
bombshell, 4) the road trip, 5) the monetary deadline, 6) and the villain.
The film stars Woody Harrelson as Roy Munson, a young bowler from Iowa who
attempts to make a career out of hussling bowlers along with the man whom he
narrowly defeated, Ernie McCracken (Murray). A lot of cartoony jokes and
storylines start to form, such as Munson being too stupid to notice what is
going on around him, and Ernie as the typical, wise-cracking antagonist. When
Ernie leaves Roy to a mob of angry gamblers, Roy finds himself deprived of
his bowling hand and of course his life is shattered. 
Fast forward to the present day as Roy is doing whatever he can to make ends
meet, even going so far as to sleep with his absolutely disgusting landlady
to avoid rent payment. Here the tone of the movie is set - we're going to get
a lot of poo-poo jokes that are original, but disgusting at the same time.
You laugh but you feel guilty afterward. 
One day Roy meets an Amish man named Ishmael (Quaid), who is the talented
prodigy with great potential, if only he'd let Roy coach him. And so Roy and
Ish start their cross-country journey from Pennsylvania to Reno to the
million dollar bowling tournament, because "the bank" has threatened to
foreclose on the Amish if they can not come up with $500,000. 
>From here on the story goes through the motions and only exists to make for
jokes - some funny, others not, which wouldn't be so bad if the pacing was a
little faster. We get many jokes about both male and female genitalia,
typical cartoony slapstick, and one-liners, but they are all pretty much
connected by the fish-out-of-water story. The jokes start to get a little too
lowbrow, relying on locker room humor and male fantasy jokes.
Guess how "Kingpin" ends? Actually, one element to it is surprising, but the
rest is pretty standard. Yes, this movie does yield some big laughs, but not
all big laughs. It concentrates too much on plot and comedy suffers. 
please visit Chad'z Movie Page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz

Title
Review for Con Air (1997)
1997, R, 115 minutes [1 hour, 45 minutes]
starring: Nicholas Cage (Cameron Poe), John Cusack (U.S. Marshal Vince
Larkin), John Malkovich (Cyrus "The Virus" Grissom), Ving Rhames (Nathan
"Diamond Dog" Jones); written by Scott Rosenberg; produced by Jerry
Bruckheimer; directed by Simon West.
Seen Friday, November 21, 1997 at 8 p.m. at the SUNY Morrisville STUAC Little
Theater (Morrisville, N.Y.) for $2, by myself. [Theater rating: **1/2: small
screen, worn film, good seats, average sound]
I think there's only one way to make an action film successful, and that is
to not present the story as something to take seriously and to incorporate a
sense of satire. In its most basic form, "Con Air" is just as mindless and
over-the-top as every other action blockbuster, but it follows this rule
perfectly and thus it works.
The film opens with a painfully generic scene we've seen countless times
before. The main character, Cameron Poe (Cage), a military officer, returns
to his Southern home to visit his pregnant wife, but gets into a bar-room
brawl that ends up sending him to prison. Although this might not be the best
way to set up the story, it's forgivable because it only lasts about 10
minutes. This is minimal storytelling, but at least it's not disguised
storytelling.
After seven years, Poe is released and sent home on a routine prisoner
transfer flight, but considering the movie's title, there isn't anything
"routine" here. And so, after the plane takes off all Hell breaks loose and
the prisoners, as lead by the vile Cyrus "The Virus" Grissom (Malkovich), and
Nathan "Diamond Dog" Jones (Rhames), manage to break free of their shackles
and over-power the guards through some violent, but surprisingly believable,
means. 
What's original is the fact the prisoners are quite clever and often funny.
They're not easy-to-hate villains as they have individual personalities. We
do get some one-liners here and there, but the things they say are pretty
funny. Also, they don't just blow away the guards and fly to freedom, they
have an intricate, detailed plan that doesn't require jargon and rhetoric to
be explained.
Once the film really gets in gear, it develops a tense atmosphere. Poe is a
likable character and we're hoping he'll return home safely, but the way
things go it doesn't seem like this will happen. The  scenario gives the film
a unique twist as we're almost hoping the prisoners will outsmart the
authorities, because if they don't, Poe will be shot down with the rest of
them.
Of course, in a movie like this there has to be the
other-hero-who-no-one-believes-has-figured-out-what's-really-going-on-until-it
's-too-late, and that character is U.S. Marshal Vince Larkin (Cusack).
Through a very uncanny method, Poe manages to get a message to Larkin about
the situation, but no one believes him and he has to take matters into his
own hands. It's surprising seeing Cusack here, but I believe his presence
just reinforces the satirical atmosphere. He manages to bring life to the
character, while adding suspense to the story, and yet he doesn't upstage
Cage (unlike the rivalry between Cage and Connery in "The Rock"). 
The majority of the film consists of the action it promises and delivers
well. The story isn't concerned with a general plot, but with many individual
sub-plots that each have their own build-ups and payoffs. This allows for
lots of shoot-outs, explosions, and out-running of fireballs, but the pacing
flows smoothly and the story always remains interesting. The satire is
consistent and provides for a  "self-aware" atmosphere, so we get lines like:
"I'm going to save the day;" "Somehow they managed to pack every freak in the
world on this plane;" and (after seeing a Corvette dangling from the plane by
a rope) "On any other day that might seem strange."
I'll admit "Con Air" isn't the most intelligent film ever made. Sometimes
the action is exhausting and the cliches are lame, but for the most part it
is enjoyable - and isn't that all we really want in a movie?

To receive Chad'z movie reviews directly, send e-mail to ChadPolenz@aol.com
with "subscribe" in the header.

Title
Review for Mission: Impossible II (2000)
Tom Cruise is back as super secret agent Ethan Hunt who must save the world - 
not from nuclear war or
terrorists - but from a lethal man-made virus. An original idea to be sure, 
but the execution of the story is
not. Instead of being too confusing like the last time, this time it's almost 
too simple and certain key plot
points and sequences are waaaaaay over the top and unbelievable. Action 
filmmaker John Woo certainly
puts a lot more energy into this film than Brian De Palma did in 1996. We can 
really buy Cruise as a genuine
action performer (the long, drawn-out fight scene at the end is proof of 
this). 
Whatever you're expecting this film to be will, it WILL be, so enjoy the 
ride. 
Chad'z Movie Page is back! 
New reviews of the latest movies in easy-to-swallow capsule form with the 
trendy, Entertainment Weekly-style of letter grades instead of the old star 
system. Have I sold out? Visit my page and decide for yourself ;-)

Title
Review for Memphis Belle (1990)
**1/2 (out of 4 = OK)
1990, PG-13, 107 minutes [1 hour, 47 minutes]
[war/lighthearted drama]
starring: Matthew Modine (Dennis), Tate Donovan (Luke), Eric Stoltz (Danny),
Sean Astin (Rascal), Billy Zane (Val), written by Monte Merrick, produced by
David Puttman, Catherine Wyler, directed by Michael Caton-Jones.
I don't have high praises for "Memphis Belle," but I don't have a complete
negative attitudes towards it either. It's a film that tries to present
itself as a World War II adventure, but it stumbles a bit by over-emphasizing
its drama.
Movies about gangs of buddies, especially military buddies, usually have a
great sense of paldom and the crew of the Memphis Belle certainly display
this. There is Dennis (Modine), an uptight Captain; Luke (Donovan), an
easy-going lady-killer; Rascal (Astin), a hyper wiseass; Danny (Stolz), a
tender Irish guy; Clay (Harry Connick Jr.), a singer;  Jack (Neil Giuntoli),
a tough guy; Eugene (Courtney Gains), a devout Catholic; Phil (D.B. Sweeny),
a scared loner; Val (Zane), a slick pseudo doctor; and Virge (Reed Diamond),
a generic suburban guy. 
Pairs of friendships within the group form, and it works pretty well here,
even though it is through the use of cliches. When you have so many
characters at the same time it's hard to get a good sense of each one's
personality, and this is the only problem with the film. It's hard to tell if
it's supposed to be a dramatic, moving story about these realistic men, or is
it an innocent adventure story? 
The story tells of the crew's twenty-fifth and final mission, which makes
almost the entire film seem like one long ending instead of a whole story.
The first act starts to define the characters, saying where they're from and
what they're going to do when they get home. But we learn little about their
actual combat missions, it's as if making it this far is a walk in the park. 
Most of the film takes place inside the plane while flying over Germany to
bomb a munitions factory. There are some pretty cool air battle scenes, but
they're not overly exciting or intense. It's not like "'Top Gun' set in
1943," although I think that's supposed to be the premise. There isn't much
to describe in terms of plot or events, it's basically a portrait of a
typical air raid during WWII.         
"Memphis Belle" is almost two hours, but it seems to go by rather quickly,
probably because it has such a simple plot. I liked what I saw but it could
have been better.We get a nice adventure, but that's it, something's missing
here. 
Please visit Chad'z Movie Page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz

Title
Review for Christmas Story, A (1983)
*** (out of 4 = good)
1983, PG, 94 minutes [1 hour, 34 minutes]
[comedy]
Starring: Peter Billingsley (Ralph Parker), Melinda Dillon (Mrs. Parker),
Darren McGavin (Mr. Parker), Jean Shepherd (Narrator), written by Jean
Shepherd, Leigh Brown, Bob Clark, produced by Rene Dupont, directed by Bob
Clark.
Truly great Christmas films have much nostalgia to them. "A Christmas Story"
is definitely one of the best because it will remind anyone of their
childhood - begging their parents and Santa Claus to bring them something
they wanted so bad. This is a story of one boy's dream of the Ultimate
Christmas Present. 
The story revolves around Ralph Parker (Billingsley), a boy in fourth grade
in 1950s middle America, where everything is alright and where "Leave It To
Beaver" might take place. This movie uses a technique that isn't used
anymore: an older man (Shepherd) narrating his childhood. The approach works
well as we can get inside Ralph and know how he thinks and feels. 
Ralph wants to a Red Ryder BB gun for Christmas. Of course Ralph's parents
and other adults are worried. "You'll shoot your eye out" is what the entire
world seems to be telling him, but he doesn't give up. When asked to write a
"theme" for class, he writes about how happy getting the gun would make him
and how he'll be careful. There is a great scene where he imagines he gets
the paper back and the teacher gives him an A with a thousand pluses on it,
while the other children applaud him and carry him like a king. This is great
storytelling because all kids (well... at least boys) have these kinds of
fantasies, but so few films play upon them so well.
But the film is not just about the want for that gun, it's about being a kid
in America. We see Ralph and his friends constantly daring each other, one
such incident leading to a tongue frozen to a flagpole - that's so true!
There's also his little bratty brother always falling behind and whining
(isn't that all little brothers exist for?). There are even two bullies who
torment Ralph and his friends.
Somehow Ralph survives Advent, but then gets himself into big trouble when
he uses "the F word." I've never seen a kid suck on a bar of soap in a film
before, and it's the little things like this that make this film so accurate
in its depiction of adolescence. Is there any way Ralph will get that BB gun
now?
"A Christmas Story" is not a landmark in film history, but it is a good
movie. The atmosphere, the acting, and the directing all add up to a good,
quality family movie that isn't cliche, cheesy, or even preachy. Overall, it
is one of the most original Christmas movies ever.
visit Chad'z Movie Page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz/index.html

Title
Review for Citizen Kane (1941)
****
1941, not rated, 119 minutes [1 hour, 59 minutes]
[drama]
starring: Orson Welles (Charles Foster Kane), Joseph Cotton (Jedediah
Leland), Dorothy Comingore (Susan Alexander), Evertt Sloane (Mr. Bernstein),
written by Orson Welles, Herman J. Mankiewicz, produced and directed by Orson
Welles.
We have all been told money, wealth, and fame do not necessarily lead to
happiness, but time after time, we have ignored that message. "Citizen Kane"
is a powerful story of a man whose intentions were good, but as hard as he
tried, couldn't accept the fact money isn't everything.
Although the film does not tell a straight, linear story, it isn't difficult
to follow. It makes excellent use of the medium of cinema: the acting is
outstanding; the design is beautifully detailed; and the direction that
brings everything together is perfectly construed. In fact, it's difficult to
critically review it for chance of leaving out the smallest of the film's
important elements.
The film opens in an enigmatic manner as the camera pans through a
Gothic-like mansion. The word "Rosebud" is whispered. Suddenly we see a news
serial which gives a brief overview of a newspaper tycoon named Charles
Foster Kane (Welles). When the serial ends there is a scene of several
reporters discussing it. They agree they must find out more about Kane,
because as much information there is about him, no one knew who he really
was.
Welles and Mankiewicz's script is well paced and chiseled with detail. The
story is not linear, but the arrangement and composition is brilliant. The
story is told from the perspective of a reporter (Alan Ladd) who tracks down
all the important people in Kane's life. He wants to know what Kane meant
when he uttered "Rosebud" as he died. This makes for a sense of mystery and
suspense, because we are just as curious as the reporter. 
As interpretations of Kane are given, clues appear subtilely, which are
later recognized through other narrations and flashbacks. The film's
attention to detail and plot structure is intricate, yet the storytelling is
so breezy. The film's ability to do both and do them so well really makes it
a masterpiece. 
As a young man, Kane was arrogant and brash because he never had to worry
about money. He is also hypocritical: he pledges honesty to his readers, but
the paper is mostly gossip and editorials; he is married, yet he is
enthralled by showgirls. His life is obviously metaphoric of many ideas, but
it would be impossible to list and describe them all. 
The film was shot using a deep focus process which allows everything that
appears on the screen to remain constantly in focus. Welles uses the approach
to add to the rich atmosphere: the looks on people's faces; the objects on
the walls; and entirely separate actions that either influence or represent
other themes within the film.
The mysterious reporter never does find out the meaning to "Rosebud." Only
we, the viewers, realize what the term meant through brilliant, classic
irony.
"Citizen Kane" works on many levels: as a touching drama; as a perfectly
scripted and well acted story; as a timeless social commentary; and as a
breakthrough in cinematic design. Everything that could be great here is.
visit Chad'z Movie Page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz/index.html

Title
Review for Beavis and Butt-head Do America (1996)
*** (out of 4 = good)
1996, PG-13, 81 minutes [1 hour, 21 minutes] 
[animated - comedy]
Featuring the voices of: Mike Judge (Beavis, Butt-Head, Mr. Anderson, Mr. Van
Driessan, Principal McVicker), Robert Stack (ATF Special Agent Flemming),
Bruce Willis (Muddy), Demi Moore (Dallas), produced by Abby Terkuhle, written
by Mike Judge, Joe Stillman, directed by Mike Judge.
>From the concept alone "Beavis And Butt-Head Do America" sounds like it
would be the stupidest thing ever made (and it pretty much is), but it's
still good. 
The film wastes no time in showing us just how dumb B&B (both voiced by
Judge, among other characters) are when we see the living room window has
been broken, the TV is missing, footprints lead out the door, and somehow the
two are unable to figure out what happened to the magical box. "This sucks
more than anything that has ever sucked before" says Butt-Head. It's this
kind of exaggeration of the characters' idiocy that makes for the offbeat
comedy.
As the two look for another TV they somehow stumble upon Muddy (Willis), a
typical villain who mistakenly thinks they are hitmen he hired to "do" his
wife Dallas (Moore). Of course they misinterpret his words and think they're
"finally gonna score." So the film essentially becomes a "road trip" and
"fish-out-of-water" comedy, and it actually works.
In the spirit of "The Naked Gun" and "Dumb And Dumber," the jokes here are
quick, weird, and close together. It would take too long to give examples of
specific jokes but they all pretty much revolve around the concept that they
are too dumb to understand anything. When they act in the way they think is
appropriate it's just so insanely stupid it's hilarious.
The two travel with a senior citizens tour bus from Texas to Las Vegas to
Washington, D.C., causing mass hysteria in the process because unbeknownst to
them, they are carrying a government-made virus that Muddy's wife Dallas
sewed into Beavis' shorts. Robert Stack co-stars as the voice of the
investigator, Agent Flemming, using much of the same serious-but-funny
attitude he displayed in "Airplane!" and constantly ordering cavity searches.
It's that mix of the serious, the idiocy of B&B, and the overall satirical
theme of the movie that makes it good. This animated film is much funnier and
better made than many live action comedies that rely on cliche after cliche
to tell a story and make for gags. I'll have to admit there's nothing cliche
to this movie. It's unlike anything I've ever seen before.
I'm sure there's a case waiting to be made that Beavis and Butt-Head are not
simply moronic cartoon characters, but a genius, comedic manifestation of
American apathy, especially that of Generation X. Why would two,
weird-looking teenage boys obsessed with television, pornography, and
bathroom functions be so appealing? I can't answer that question, but what I
do know is they are funny because they are so weird and stupid. It takes a
lot of talent to create, and write for characters this stupid because they
live in their own reality, and a detailed one at that.
visit Chad'z Movie Page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz/index.html

Title
Review for Adventures of Rocky & Bullwinkle, The (2000)
I remember an old episode of "Dr Katz: Licensed Therapist" where Dr. Katz 
told Ben, "Puns aren't really good or bad, they're just puns." I think "The 
Adventures of Rocky & Bullwinkle" is just one big argument that puns are, in 
fact, good. 
How this film ever got the greenlight is pretty amazing. It's obviously 
intended to be a "family" film but most little kids these days have probably 
never heard of Rocky and Bullwinkle and most adults who are old enough to 
remember them would probably dismiss the notion of seeing this in theaters 
and instead just wait for video (besides, their kids are probably kicking and 
screaming and dragging them to the "Pokémon" movie). It's a shame because 
anyone who's not seeing this now is really missing out. 
Think of it as a G-rated version of "Austin Powers." There's a lot of wacky 
cartoony humor and puns and play-on-words as well as some really sly jokes 
that are quite the zinging [political] commentaries. The story tells of the 
cartoon villains from the old 1960s TV show (Fearless Leader, Boris & 
Natasha) who make a deal with a Hollywood producer to make a movie and when 
the contract is pulled out of the cartoon world the characters come with it. 
"We're attached to the project" says Fearless Leader (Rober De Niro) who then 
admits it's a bad pun but it works for the sake of the movie. 
And that's the comedy stylings at work here - verbal and physical puns and 
parodies all over the place. It's all tongue-in-cheek, winking-at-the-camera 
comedy and it works very well. Every character's name is like this such as 
our co-star Karen Sympathy (Piper Perabo) who is a rookie FBI agent assigned 
to get Rocky & Bullwinkle out of the cartoon world and into the real one to 
help stop Fearless Leader's devious scheme to hypnotize the world with his 
own TV network that broadcasts shows so bad they turn all viewers into 
mindless zombies. 
See? Isn't that funny, witty comedy? The film makers could have just done 
something more mainstream and predictable and have Fearless Leader do 
something Dr. Evil/James Bond villain-style such as something with hostages 
and blowing up stuff. The fact they chose to use this method for the plot as 
well as jokes upon jokes is pretty uncanny. Of course there's also the common 
"Rocky & Bullwinkle" plot of Boris & Natasha trying to destroy moose and 
squirrel which occupies the first half of the film. Jason Alexander and Rene 
Russo are fantastic as these classic baddies and the script and props really 
enhance the cartoony atmosphere. It's funny, but not silly. 
Now it really wouldn't do the film justice to list just a few examples of the 
jokes and hope that would reflect the entire movie - every one is a little 
different from the last one. Taken out of context they might not work, but 
within the movie it's funny. 
Chad'z Movie Page is back 
after heavy renovation. Reviews of ALL mainstream movies playing today! Surf 
on over to my web page today and take the poll on which is the better way to 
rate movies.

Title
Review for Angus (1995)
** (out of 4 = fair)
1995, PG-13, 87 minutes [1 hour, 27 minutes]
[comedy]
starring: Charlie Talbert (Angus Bethune), George C. Scott (Grandpa Ivan),
Chris Owen (Troy), Kathy Bates (Mrs. Meg Bethune), written by Jill Gordon,
produced by Charles Roven, Dawn Steel, directed by Patrick Read Johnson.
        Although "Angus" isn't a very good movie, I have to admit it surprised me.
This is another comedy about the strict class system between teenagers, and
at first it doesn't follow the mold and shows a lot of promise.
Unfortunately, by the second half, not only did it start to plug in the
cliches, but did so in a very poor manner.
        Movies about young teens going through puberty are always about members of
the either the lowest or highest subdivision. Charlie Talbert makes a good
debut here as Angus "Bofoon" Bethune, who is the typical fat kid who is also
the class brian and is constantly taunted because of his weight and
overachievement. 
        The introduction was quite interesting in the way it sets up this character.
Through multiple flashbacks, we see him constantly punching the snotty kid
who's always picking on him. It seemed as if this time the underdog would
reign supreme. But this is a mainstream commercial comedy, so what are the
chances of that?
        Whenever you have movies about the class loser there must always be the
typical supporting characters. There is Troy (Owen), the obnoxious, shrimpy
sidekick; Mrs. Meg Bethune (Bates), Angus's widowed mother who smothers him
with love and food; and Grandpa Ivan (Scott), who is the lovable old man who
gives Angus two words of wisdom: "Screw 'em."
        It takes the movie a while to establish some kind of a plot, which was
forgivable at first, but later became extremely distracting. The popular jock
who had been at war with Angus since childhood fixes the election for prom
king and queen so that Angus will wind up with his girlfriend (who is the
most popular girl at school, and whom Angus also happens to have a crush on
since age five). This embarrasses Angus beyond belief, and most of the film
shows his struggle to prepare himself for the dance even though he doesn't
want to go.
        The second and third acts started a snowballing effect of incidents that
were not only unnecessary but done in such a transparent way as to be very
preachy and make for a sappy mood. Grandpa Ivan seems to be Angus's unwitting
role model, he constantly gives him advice and tells him to break the norm
but Angus doesn't listen. The chemistry between Talbert and Scott is quite
interesting in and of itself (is this really Buck Turgidson from "Dr.
Strangelove"?). I could not believe it when the film would sink so low as to
have the grandfather die on his own wedding day! The fact there is no real
sense of loss only makes it worse.
        The theme of "being yourself" seems to be prevalent in all such films. We
know one of two resolutions to a story like this will occur. Either the bully
will learn to accept Angus for who he is, or through an overdone, climatic
encounter the rest of the class will accept Angus and it will be the bully
who is the odd man out. Either way, there's unnecessary violence, profanity,
and a completely predictable, ironically poetic ending.
        "Angus" would work fine as an "After School Special" but it is not
acceptable as a feature film. Although the characters do seem realistic and
have depth to them, they are stuck in a lame story broken down by a
screenplay with a case of confused identity. (4/6/97) (5/21/97)
visit Chad'z Movie Page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz/index.html

Title
Review for Jerry Maguire (1996)
***1/2 (out of 4 = very good)
1996, R, 138 minutes [2 hours, 18 minutes]
[romantic comedy]
starring: Tom Cruise (Jerry Maguire), Renee Zellweger (Dorothy Boyd), Cuba
Gooding Jr. (Rod Tidwell), Bonnie Hunt (Laurel Boyd), produced by James L.
Brooks, Cameron Crowe, Richard Sakai, written and directed by Cameron Crowe.
Single mothers, "Scrooge"-like characters, cocky athletes, and love: what do
all these things have in common? They're all very difficult to work with in
the movies. "Jerry Maguire" is a funny and charming movie that not only uses
all of these tricky devices interchangeably, but uses them well. So well in
fact, it makes for a very serious story that, ironically, remains
lighthearted throughout.
Tom Cruise stars as Jerry Maguire, a successful sports agent who resembles a
modern day Ebeneezer Scrooge. He handles nearly 100 clients at SMI - a large
sports management firm, but it is obvious his vision has been blurred by
dollar signs. When one of his clients is injured, he tries to console his son
through the same hyperbole he uses to promote the child's father. After an
extremely rude response from the kid, Jerry is knocked off his ego cloud and
realizes what he has been missing: people. And so Jerry has a fantastic
revelation and writes a mission statement about how the business has been
corrupted by greed. 
What's so refreshing about this film is the fact that Cruise is able to
carry this character as well as he does. Of course characters this likable
can't be surrounded by sharks, and thus Jerry is fired because he dares have
a conscience.
 But this isn't a straight character drama, it's really a love story, and
this is blatantly foreshadowed, but in one of the sweetest and charming ways
I've ever seen. Renee Zellweger steals the show as the cute but lonely
Dorothy Boyd, a secretary at SMI who develops a secret crush on Jerry. She is
a single mother, but at no time does the film portray her as a victim because
she is hard working and dedicated. As Jerry gives a humorous goodbye speech
to the entire company, she risks everything and goes with him, not so much
out of attraction (because she knows he is engaged), but because she has been
hypnotized by his charm (as we also have been hypnotized by Crowe's story).
Jerry breaks up with his fiancee at the NFL draft, and everything starts to
head south. The only ray of sunshine is the fact that now he and Dorothy can
get together, but the film takes a longer route than necessary to make this
happen. There is a lot of awkward situations, but eventually the two realize
they're perfect for each other.
Although this is one of the most original movies I've seen, it makes a few
unnecessary errors during the last act. Jerry and Dorothy have great
chemistry and seem so right together, but they rush into marriage mostly to
prevent from breaking up. At the same time, Jerry's only client, Rod
Tidwell's (Gooding) contract becomes very important to the plot of the film,
and Jerry's success is riding on Tidwell. I can't believe Crowe uses the
sports cliffhanger and the poetic makeup speech in such close proximity (or
at all for that matter), but at least we get a happy ending.
Special mention must be made of Jonathon Lipnicki as 6-year-old Ray Boyd;
he is quite possibly the cutest and funniest kid I've ever seem.
"Jerry Maguire" could have been a perfect movie had it not become so serious
towards the end, but nevertheless it still remains in a high class for its
originality and charm.

Title
Review for American Werewolf in Paris, An (1997)
1997, R, 98 minutes [1 hour, 38 minutes]
starring: Tom Everett Scott (Andy), Julie Delpy (Serafine), Pierre Cosso
(Claude), Vince Vieluf (Brad); written by Tim Burns, Tom Stern, Anthony
Waller; produced by Richard Claus; directed by Anthony Waller; based on
characters created by John Landis.
Seen December 18, 1997 at 7:30 p.m. at the Rotterdam Square Mall cinemas
(Rotterdam, NY), theater #1, with Chris Wessell for free (promotional advanced
screening passes). [Theater rating: ***: good seats, sound, and picture]
        Movie producers are often in no-win situations. When they do the same things
over and over again we complain about their lack of originality. However, when
they try to shake things up, the results are often sloppy. Perhaps the reason
"An American Werewolf In Paris" succeeds is because it does both of these at
the same time without even trying. The result is a genuinely interesting,
charming B-movie on a grand scale.
        The film starts out in the spirit of bad horror movies by introducing us to
three typical friends, Andy (Scott), Brad (Vince Vieluf), and Chris (Phil
Buckman) who are college-age Americans traveling through Europe. Within the
first few minutes generic characterization is unveiled, and it's no surprise
two of the guys are jocks while the other is a geek. We they spot a sexy
French babe on a train, the discussion of sex and who has and who will
accumulate the most "points" comes up. It's no surprise Andy, the dorky one,
is way behind on points and falls in love with the girl at first sight.
        Campiness, combined with blatant foreshadowing, is the icing on the horror-
film cake, and we get a good, tasty helping of that here. For example, the
buddies' dialogue and actions are cartoony, and Andy's crush on the French
girl seems significant, yet it works because everything's so lighthearted and
appealing. There's a scene in which the guys sneak up to the top of the Eiffel
Tower to bungee jump off it, but bump into the same girl up there. When she
attempts to leap to her death, Andy ends up saving her through a fantastic
action sequence. Yes, the situation is quite silly in premise, but the
atmosphere it lighthearted enough to make it all work. Even the slapstick gags
that ensue right after the serious scenes don't seem out of place and are
actually very funny.
        Through a series of events which could best be described as "movie events for
the sake of a movie," Andy finds his dream girl, learns her name is Serafine
(Delpy), and manages to get a date with her even though his friends think
she's insane. The first act revolves almost entirely around this plotline, but
does drop hints of something supernatural going on. And it is because of this
factor that the film's transition from the lighthearted to the grim and gritty
works. 
        As the second act develops, the mood continues to get darker and darker,
while the screenplay gives the main characters just the right amount of depth
and puts them in particular situations to keep everything well-paced. When the
guys go to an underground party (literally) hosted by Serafine's caretaker,
Claude (Cosso), the true nature of the film is revealed. It's clear from the
get-go who the  werewolves are (and "good" and "bad" werewolves at that),
who's going to become a werewolf, and who's going to die. 
        We get the dark, Gothic scenes set in the sewers with the werewolves jumping
out of the shadows, and scenes of the werewolves attacking crowds of trapped
people. But surprisingly enough, there is authentic tension to these scenes
and little gore. The true horrorific elements come through the shots of the
people running for their lives as seen through the werewolves' eyes, and the
aftermath scenes of police putting body parts into evidence bags.
        As the film passes its midpoint, it undergoes many changes as the story
actually has a focus and the satirical elements are brought back into play and
perfectly synchronized with the more intense aspects. What's most remarkable
is how the story and its polarized atmospheres are able to further each other.
This is perfectly illustrated through the basic plot and it subplots and how
they work together. Andy and Serafine are trying to stop Claude's werewolf
cult from slaughtering innocent people, but Andy's "undead" victims keep
harassing him and create for a paradox that's both comical and serious at the
same time, but it all comes together in the end.
        It's funny how certain things can be seen as enhancements to some and flaws
to others, and "An American Werewolf In Paris" is based on this principle.
Although it does have problems, it should be appreciated for its ability to be
consistently entertaining and original.
Please visit Chad'z Movie Page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz - over 180
new and old films reviewed in depth, not just blind ratings and quick
capsules. Also, check out The FIRST Shay Astar Web Page @
http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz/ShayAstar.html
To receive Chad'z movie reviews directly, send e-mail to ChadPolenz@aol.com
with "subscribe plan#_" in the header (plan 1 - new releases, plan 2 - all
movies reviewed).

Title
Review for X Files, The (1998)
Chad'z rating: **1/2 (out of 4 = okay/average)
1998, PG-13, 122 minutes [2 hours, 2 minutes]
Starring: David Duchovny (Special Agent Fox Mulder), Gillian Anderson (Special
Agent Dana Scully), Martin Landou (Dr. Alvin Kurtzweil), William B. Davis (The
Cigarette-Smoking Man); written by Chris Carter, Frank Spotnitz; produced by
Chris Carter, Daniel Sackheim; directed by Rob Bowman; based on the television
series created by Chris Carter.
Seen June 20, 1998 at 12:00 a.m. at Crossgates Cinema 18 (Guilderland, NY),
theater #1, with Chris Wessell using Hoyt's Cinema Cash. [theater rating: ***:
good sound and picture, average seats]
        Most movie versions of TV shows are usually based on old, canceled series,
not on-going ones. Therefore, "The X-Files: Fight The Future" poses a dilemma
since it's not so much inspired by the popular show, as it is an extension of
it. Not being a fan of the show, am I qualified to view the film fairly, since
I have little background on the basic scenario? Yes I am, because as a film
critic I must remain unbiased before viewing anything, and in this case my
unfamiliarity allowed me to see the film completely within its context. What I
saw was a terrific thriller trapped behind a confusing, sloppy script.
        The story is basically self-contained, but many of the details are rooted in
the series, which allows the film to take certain liberties it probably
wouldn't have (or shouldn't have) had it been a completely original concept.
For example, the basic essentials such as characterization of the two leads
are virtually non-existent, nor much of, if any, definition of the "X-Files"
division itself. It's difficult to sympathize for characters we are never
formally introduced to while working for a covert operation we're not given
any background on. FBI special agents Fox Mulder (Duchovny) and Dana Scully
(Anderson), are presented as though we're already familiar with them, and
their initial case involving the bombing of a federal building seems like just
another episode in their continuing adventures.
        But it wouldn't be a movie if something unusual didn't happen to shake things
up. The first two scenes sketch out the  supernatural elements at play. These
scenes depict some kind of alien encounter with earthlings over time,
portrayed in a generic manner. We get slimy, violent creatures jumping out of
shadows, loss of innocent humans, and a subtle establishment of how powerful
the extra-terrestrial is (its virus lives on thousands of years after its
death). The scenes are shot well enough to be suspenseful, but it's really no
different than countless other sci-fi movies, especially the "Alien" series.
        Mulder and Scully manage to safely evacuate a building from a terrorist bomb
(which is discovered in the typical "accidental" manner), but instead of being
rewarded, they are separated because they've learned there's a connection
between the alien's revival and the bombing. Here, the script is crafted in
such a way that we are able to put some of the clues together ourselves,
instead of having the characters figure it out through coincidences and lucky
breaks. It's clear a conspiracy is unfolding, which creates for a good sense
of mystery, and it's not too difficult to follow.... at first.
        More characters and plot elements begin to crop up as the film shifts to the
second act. As is the case with all conspiracy stories, a shady character must
come into play to provide our heroes with insights and tips they wouldn't and
couldn't have gotten anywhere else. Martin Landou co-stars as this film's
rendition of that character - Dr. Alvin Kurtzweil, a man with conspiracy
theories so fantastic he must be either a raving lunatic or a genius.
Kurtzweil is Mulder's "Deep Throat," always providing him with clues in dark,
steamy, wet alleyways, about the alien project and a plot to take over the
world. Kurtzweil's theories and the clues he drops are interesting, but
described in such vague manners the story quickly becomes hard to swallow and
very confusing. The characters can't keep track of who's who and what's what,
so how can we be expected to?
        The great thing about conspiracies is the fact they can be woven with such
intricacy and yet still make sense in the right hands. It is in this aspect
that the film is severely flawed, since there doesn't seem to be any motive
behind it all. We do encounter the people behind the massive plot Mulder and
Scully are trying to break, but the villains just aren't vile enough. They
supposedly wield tremendous global power, but how they got that power and how
they use it is never explained. At times they are afraid of being exposed by
Mulder and Scully, and yet they clue them into the big scheme. None of the
conspirators have genuine emotion, they seem to be simply going through
motions they cannot explain, resist, or justify.
        Surprisingly, as complex as the story is, the film still manages to work at
least as a big-budget popcorn flick. The various sub-plots allow the film to
focus more on individual scenes and conflicts rather than the final payoff.
The result is back-to-back chase scenes, hiding scenes, scenes of miraculous
revelation, and the special effects to tie them all together. On the surface
they suffice simply as of-the-moment thrills, but upon closer inspection they
really aren't anything intelligent. All the time the film spends on having
Mulder and Scully run and hide might have been better used to develop the
story instead of the superficial action.
        And perhaps this is why the film falls just short of greatness. It keeps us
guessing with its complex story, but it still feels the need to dumb itself
down with melodrama. The final act clinches this as it's a life-or-death
situation for both of the characters that involves act after act and feat
after feat of sheer luck and coincidence. The climax doesn't have nearly the
impact it should as it's really just an exaggerated version of the mini-
climaxes that occur throughout the film. And in the end almost nothing seems
to have been resolved, it's as if the entire story existed for the ending. In
fact, when the closing credits began to roll, someone in the audience yelled
out, "That's it?!"
        It's clear "The X-Files: Fight The Future" was made with the right intention,
that is, to be a good movie. The film is full of possibilities, original
ideas, and an overall sense of depth, but why does it feel the need to cop-out
when it comes to executing its resources?


Title
Review for Secrets & Lies (1996)
Chad'z rating: ***1/2 (out of 4 = very good)
1996, R, 142 minutes [2 hours, 22 minutes]
[drama]
starring: Brenda Blethyn (Cythia), Marianne Jean-Baptiste (Hortense), Claire
Rushbrook (Roxanne), Timothy Spall (Maurice), produced by Simon
Channing-Williams, written and directed by Mike Leigh.
Films about families tend to be overly dramatic because very bad or very
good things are always happening to the characters. "Secrets & Lies" is an
exceptional drama about a shaky family who is suddenly thrown an even
stranger problem than they are used to. Surprisingly enough, this is not a
sappy story of tragedy, it is an exercise in characterization as it shows
realistic people dealing with problems you never see in the movies.
The basic story is of a black woman named Hortense (Jean-Baptiste) and her
search for her natural mother who turns out to be white. But the film is not
just about Hortense's search, it is really about her mother Cythia (Blethyn)
and her already rocky relationship with her family.
Cythia is a middle-aged factory worker in London who shares a small flat
with her daughter Roxanne (Rushbrook). The two really do seem like mother and
daughter as they constantly fight with each other, but always seem to work
things out. We learn a lot about their characters from their conversations
and arguments. They so much more believable than other film characters
because they're not talking about those pesky aliens or natural disasters.
We also meet Cythia's brother Maurice (Spall) who is a professional
photographer, and Leigh goes out of his way to establish this character and
his importance. There are some humorous scenes involving Maurice at work, and
they are interesting to watch simply for the dialogue. Maybe the film spends
a little too much time on Maurice's job and his relationship with his wife
and sister, but at least it done for the sake of characterization and not
melodrama.
Not much of a plot begins to develop until the second half of the film, but
at no point does the story become uninteresting - time just seems to fly by.
Hortense tracks down Cythia and gives her a call, but of course neither are
able to deal with it. The two meet in person and a real sense of tension and
uneasiness can be felt. Even though we might not be able to relate to these
characters personally, the atmosphere has been so well defined you know what
the characters are thinking. 
It is obvious the story is leading up to a boiling point, and this of course
happens in the final act. Cythia and Hortense become the best of friends but
the other family members suspect something funny is going on. Maurice throws
a small party for Roxanne's 21st birthday and Cythia brings along Hortense,
saying she is her friend from the factory. The scene in which Cythia finally
tells the family the truth is one of the most tense moments I've ever
endured. It's not so much about race relations as it family relations, but
the race issue can't be ignored. I can't help but wonder if the family's
reaction would have been different if Hortense was white?
"Secrets & Lies" is a good film that presents a situation unlike anything
I've ever seen. It shows just how important the family is and how petty some
of our differences can be. 
Please visit Chad'z Movie Page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz
E-mail: ChadPolenz@aol.com

Title
Review for Casino (1995)
***1/2 (out of 4 = very good)
1995, R, 179 minutes [2 hours, 59 minutes]
[crime/drama]
starring: Robert De Niro (Sammy "Ace" Rothstein), Joe Pesci (Nicky Santonio),
Sharon Stone (Ginger), James Woods (Lester), produced by Barbara DeFina,
written by Martin Scorsese, Nicholas Pieggi (based on his novel), directed by
Martin Scorsese.
Las Vegas is all about greed, everyone knows that. It was founded by
gangsters in the 1930s and continued to be run by organized crime for about
40 years. "Casino" is a good crime film that pulls no punches in its
depiction of Las Vegas as seen through the mafia. We get a lot of complex
criminal operations with families, honor, etc., but underneath it all lies a
typical soap opera. Even the criminal element can't get away from melodrama.
Robert De Niro stars as Sammy "Ace" Rothstein, a typical 1970s "Family Man"
who turns his attention to Las Vegas. His problem is he doesn't know who to
trust or what to do. He seems to want to run a legitimate business, but he
still must respect his elders through charitable, yet illegal, donations. He
meets a woman named Ginger (Stone), who, much like him, is a master swindler
and gambler - who says opposites attract? Eventually they marry but Ginger
never seems to truly love Sammy. She is perhaps an even better con artist
than he and manages to swindle $2 million in cash and thousands of dollars in
jewelry from him because he trusts her.
One of the passive themes of the film is love and trust, especially when it
comes to organized crime. Which is more important, loyalty to the mob or
one's lover? However, this is only implied as such, there is not enough
detail put into the relationship between Sammy and Ginger. At first they are
in love, but then their lives fall apart because Ginger still is a loose
cannon and is swindling her husband's money. She becomes an alcoholic and a
drug addict, letting her own life be ruined even though she has everything
she needs.
 Of course there's Joe Pesci as the stubborn and vicious crime boss Nicky San
tonio, who moves to Las Vegas and tries to take over a city that is not his.
Meanwhile Sammy is trying to run a reputable casino, but has constant clashes
with Nicky are affecting his personal and professional life.
It certainly is interesting to watch how the mafia ran Las Vegas and the
attitude they had, but at times it becomes too confusing and too detailed for
its own good. Then again, the details make the story very suspenseful, and
almost scary in a way.
"Casino" works well as a crime film and a straight drama, although it does
become somewhat melodramatic at times. Even a great director like Scorsese
probably wouldn't intentionally include standard, dramatic elements just to
tell a story.  I've got no problem with drama, it's melodrama that bothers
me.
visit Chad'z Movie Page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz/index.html

Title
Review for Book of Shadows: Blair Witch 2 (2000)
"The Blair Witch Project" was one of the most innovative and effective films 
I've ever seen. It proved to the world you don't have to spend a lot of money 
to make a good movie. If I was a professor of film studies at some 
prestigious university I'd show it to my students as an example of 
creativity. I'd also show my students the sequel, "Book of Shadows: Blair 
Witch 2," to warn them of the perils of Hollywood. It's an unnecessary sequel 
to a big hit that doesn't nearly live up to the original. It does so in such 
an all-around cliche way it's funny and sad at the same time. 
The fact this movie was ever made is kind of surprising to me. The original 
story did have a lot of ambiguity to it and the finale was open-ended so that 
every viewer had his or her own theory as to what happened. "Book Of Shadows" 
doesn't pick up where that movie ended, in fact, it doesn't even take place 
in the same reality as the original. It's about the phenomenon of the movie 
in the "real" world and about "real" people taking a supposedly fictitious 
story a little too seriously. 
That's what the plot revolves around - five 20-something-year-olds who flock 
to the woods where the movie was filmed because they believe, or at least 
WANT to believe the legend of the Blair Witch is real. What's strange this 
time around is that the movie employs the use of having the actors use their 
real names even though they're clearly in a fictional movie. There's really 
no point to that. 
* Jeff is the neurotic tour wrangler who lives near the supposedly haunted 
woods and sells homemade memorabilia of the movie through his web site. He 
was once in an insane asylum and his mental instability continually crops up 
throughout the movie. 
* Erica is a self-professed witch who is furious at the success of "The Blair 
Witch Project" because she believes it continues the centuries-old stereotype 
and image of a witch as a mean old lady who casts black magic spells and eats 
children. She says real witches don't believe in heaven or hell or God or the 
devil, "I believe in nature."
* Kim is a total Goth chick who has apparently listened to one too many 
Marilyn Manson records. She's a freak, she knows it and she's proud of it. 
It's her way of rebelling but she doesn't have much of a spiritual side. 
She's along for the ride mostly because she has nothing better to do. 
* Stephen and Tristen round out the group as the only two "normal" people. 
They're lovers who are co-writing a book about group fear and how myths and 
legends still effect people today. 
The five take a tour of the woods and camp at the site of the demolished home 
of the hermit from the Blair Witch mythos. While there they run into another 
tour group and almost get into a brawl with them over who gets to sleep at 
the site. They spend the night partying pretty hard for a bunch of strangers 
who don't know each other and when they wake up they find their stuff's been 
severely messed with, some of it even destroyed.
We're also shown in bizarre music video-like sequences that the other group 
was murdered in their sleep just like the story of "Coffin Rock." The five 
head back to Jeff's spooky home - an abandoned warehouse in the middle of the 
woods - with lots of video equipment and the like. They review Jeff's tapes 
to see if they can figure out what happened and one by one they start to go a 
little mad. 
Here's where "Book of Shadows" distinguishes itself, where it becomes what it 
is and that is kind of a cross between "The Shining" and "Scream." It's clear 
something happened to them that night in the woods and they've been touched 
by the witch. They all suspect the others are keeping secrets and that 
everyone is out to get them when they turn their backs. Tristen all but 
suffers a mental breakdown as does Erica who then disappears. Jeff and Kim 
then suspect Stephen of purposely getting rid of her. Meanwhile they watch 
the tapes of the night's events to discover some hidden footage of them 
commiting wanton acts of carnality 
There's a lot more detail to the story than this but we don't have to analyze 
all of it to critique it. This is a mainstream horror movie so of course 
Jeff's warehouse is pretty fantastic and detailed. The art direction is moody 
and intimidating to complement the story and the atmosphere. If it weren't 
blatantly obvious this was a manufactured horror movie it would have worked, 
instead, it just seems forced. 
The screenplay does a fine job in getting each of the characters' motivations 
down but the editing process and the direction kind of botch it up. 
Throughout the entire film we're constantly cutting, unexpectedly, to 
flashbacks of Jeff in the insane asylum or to each of the characters sitting 
in a police questioning room being asked about a heinous act they committed. 
In a better screenplay and in a better editor's hands this technique would 
have been much more effective, but here these intercut scenes are more 
confusing than anything else, not nearly as intense and suspenseful as they 
should be. 
The actual supernatural elements are just plain silly when you put them into 
perspective. To make a long story short our protagonists are framed for mass 
murder by an unseen force who can manipulate videotapes. Either that or 
they've all just gone nuts and we're seeing things through their eyes. I 
think the movie options for the former theory and when those scenes of the 
hidden videos occur they are quite creepy. We're just as shocked as the 
characters are to see themselves committing the things they did. But then you 
have to wonder why would the spirit of the Blair Witch be so interested in 
messing with these kids' heads in a way that not only scares them to think 
they could have done such things but is also captured on videotape? 
The answer is because this is a Hollywood spin on an indie idea and they 
screwed it up. The original "Blair Witch Project" was so horrifying because 
of its simple and ambiguous elements, like the monoliths from "2001: A Space 
Odyssey." What you don't see is frightening, but if they give you modern 
clues to their existence something isn't right. The idea a supernatural force 
could be terrifying through modern technology is certainly a scary one - the 
way this movie plays out that idea it is not. 
The ending of this movie surprised me and left me wanting more. But that's 
what separates "Book of Shadows: Blair Witch 2" from the original - this one 
mistakes cliffhangers for brilliant ambiguity. 

*****
Chad'z Movie Page is back! 
In-depth reviews of nearly all mainstream films playing at your local 
cineplex. There's also reviews of a few classic films and some of your 
personal favorites.

Title
Review for Boys and Girls (2000)
>From all the publicity and promotions for this movie you'd think it was going 
to be this year's "American
Pie" but just because it has Jason Biggs in it doesn't make it so. This is 
far from the zany, outrageous
comedy you think it's going to be, it's more of "When Harry Met Sally" at the 
teenage level. 
Freddie Prinze Jr. and Claire Forlani star as two friends who met each other 
as children, bump into each
other in high school and bump into each other A LOT in college. They spend a 
lot of quality time together
and have great chemistry for a couple who are just friends (think "Will & 
Grace" without the gayness). The
film plays like a senior thesis on relationships and a lot of time is spent 
dissecting basic human attraction. 
At times the movie goes overboard and becomes really sappy (especially at the 
end), but it's a teenage
romantic comedy so there's not many big surprises here. A good date movie but 
needs more laughs. 
Chad'z Movie Page is back! 
New reviews of the latest movies in easy-to-swallow capsule form with the 
trendy, Entertainment Weekly-style of letter grades instead of the old star 
system. Have I sold out? Visit my page and decide for yourself ;-)

Title
Review for Chicken Run (2000)
Every once in a while a so-called children's movie comes along that's NOT 
some wicked preachy/ goofy
musical/promotion for a line of toys and video games. That's what "Chicken 
Run" is - a beautifully
animated lighthearted comedy that will pretty much be considered a kid's 
movie but you don't have to be
eight years old to like it. 
Instead of employing computer animation this movie instead uses the seemingly 
forgotten art of
claymation. Not that there's anything wrong with cartoon and computer 
animation but this gives the film a
refreshing appeal in today's movie market. 
The story revolves around a large group of chickens on an egg farm in 
England. The story is told from the
chickens' point of view so of course we sympathize with their plight of 
trying to escape. They are lead by
Ginger, who dreams of freedom but whose repeated escape attempts always fail. 
One day an American
rooster named Rockey Rhodes ends up in the pen with them and claims he can 
teach them to fly out of
there. 
For the most part, the "story" is predictable, but the way it's told has such 
a smooth style it's very
enjoyable. There's a lot of comedy here, both the generic slapstick but 
there's a lot of layers to satire that
appear upon closer inspection. It's not the most thematic movie ever made, 
but there's nothing wrong with
it either. 
Chad'z Movie Page is back! 
New reviews of the latest movies in easy-to-swallow capsule form with the 
trendy, Entertainment Weekly-style of letter grades instead of the old star 
system. Have I sold out? Visit my page and decide for yourself ;-)

Title
Review for Gone with the Wind (1939)
Chad'z rating: **** (out of 4 = excellent)
1939, G, 222 minutes [3 hours, 42 minutes]
starring: Viven Leigh (Katherine Scarlett O'Hara-Hamilton-Kennedy-Butler),
Clark Gable (Captain Rhett Butler), Olivia De Havilland (Melanie Wilkes),
Leslie Howard (Ashley Wilkes); written by Sidney Howard; produced by David O.
Selznik; directed by Victor Fleming; based on the novel by Margaret Mitchell.
Seen July 8, 1998 at the Crossgates Cinema 18, (Albany, NY), theater #7, at
8:15 p.m. with my mom using Hoyts Cinema Cash. [Theater rating: ***1/2: very
good sound, picture, and seats]
        It's very rare that any medium of entertainment can give one an authentic,
vivid sense of reality and life. All stories are about select moments of time
and places in the characters' lives, but only the truly great ones are able to
define their realities well enough so the audience can experience it just as
the characters do. Therefore, "Gone With The Wind" deserves accolades for its
ability to tell the epic story it does, in such a crafted, intricate, and
entertaining manner. It's a crowning achievement, not only in filmmaking, but
for storytelling itself.
        The film takes place in Georgia before, during, and after the Civil War. This
plays a major factor in the film's success. To use such a historic setting
presents many possibilities and problems since no one was alive at the time to
verify its accuracy. It might also seem cliche, boring and other such deterent
factors to potential viewers. Can a story set so long ago be relatable now?
The film confronts all these problems, paradoxically, by not cronfronting
them. It doesn't simply plug in the "right thing" at the "right time," it
creates an entire reality where everything makes sense and said concerns are
irrelevant.
        Building a strong foundation is important to all forms of media, without
which, what is there to build on? We're given some backstory here and learn a
little about our characters, especially our main character, Scarlett O'Hara
(Leigh), a beautiful Southern Belle with a will of steel, a cunning wit, and a
tremendous sense of liberty in such an oppressive time. She knows how her
society works, wherein everything she does can and will play a role in the
shaping of her life and those around her. 
        Right from the beginning we realize how determined she is to have her way no
matter what the consequences may be. Being the most sought-after woman allows
her to manipulate men (and their women) to ensure she gets her way, whether it
be obvious (i.e. who will be the one to get her food), or subtle (i.e. getting
married just to spite someone). The man she claims to love is Ashley Wilkes
(Howard), a modest gentleman who does not seem to have the same passion for
her as she does for him. He isn't so arrogant and demanding as Scarlett, in
fact, he's engaged to a woman with a personality much more like his. Her name
is Melanie (De Havilland), and she is one of the sweetest, kindest, and most
likable characters one will ever see. She and Scarlett become very dear
friends, but she never suspects the jealously Scarlett has for her, and the
love she has for her husband. Her meekness is both her strongest and weakest
characteristic - it defines who she is, but doesn't give her much emotional
self-defense.
        Acting a catalyst to the love triangle, and to the story as a whole is the
daper, stong-willed, cunning, cocky Southern business and military man Captain
Rhett Butler (Gable). He's quite a character all right - everyone listens to
what he has to say even though he's got a bad reputation. Butler makes no
apologies for his vast amount of money nor his behavior. He tells everyone the
much-needed truth in the rigid caste-like society where freewill doesn't seem
to exist, everything is done out of honor and tradition. For example, in his
first appearance Butler tells his fellow Southerners there's no way the South
could defeat the North if war were to break out. This angers them, not for his
lack of faith, but because he has the gall to say it aloud and boastfully at
that. "Do we have ammunition factories? Do we have food? Do we have a navy?
All we have is tobacco." All true statements and yet the South still insists
he's wrong.
        Butler is a shifty character to be sure, but he takes such pride in his
arrogance it's appealing. Scarlett notices this too when she first sees him,
and from the look Butler gives her, we know he's not going to stop until he
has her. But Scarlett can't get past her need for Ashley, and during a scene
which sets the stage for the grand story, Butler learns of this and continues
to throw it back at Scarlett forever.
        And so the story goes on, with Scarlett being thrown obstacle after obstacle
in her life. The conflicts she must overcome range from taking care of her
entire family to finding a proper husband, especially after she is "marked"
for life when her first husband dies. This gives the film many opportunities
to bring in more characters into the epic story. Some are vital for only a few
scenes, but their true signifcance will endure throughout the film. In most
films only a few characters exist for support in background, but this film is
more realistic and believable as it incorporates a supporting cast the size of
a small town and everyone has signficance. Even people in the background seem
more than just extras wandering the set. The costuming design is outstanding
so that the film makes for a real sense of time and place. The filmmakers
could have easily set more scenes indoors and narrowly focused to avoid having
to show the outside, real world, but these types of simple approaches are
never taken.
        The first half of the film depicts the traumatic experience the South faced
at the last days of the Civil War. Fleming is able to convey the horror of it
all by painting an image of destruction and letting the viewer decide just how
bad it is. One scene has Scarlett working as a nurse at a military hospital
while we hear a soldier in the background screaming, "No! Not my leg! Don't
cut off my leg!" Another scene shows her simplying trying to cross a street,
but as the camera pulls back, we see that her path is blocked by hundreds of
wounded soldiers, but it is their moaning that's more graphic than all the
bloody gore could ever be.
        As the second half begins, the film concentrates more on Scarlett as a
completely independent woman who single-handedly takes care of her family and
Melanie just to spite the tyrany of the North. She manages to resurrect the
family plantation, but all the willpower she has can't help her when she must
pay exuberhant taxes set by the North after the South's ultimate defeat. This
brings Rhett Butler back into the picture and thus begins their torrid love-
hate relationship.
        Most of the second half of the film is somehow related to the relationship
(or lack thereof) between Rhett and Scarlett. Each uses the other for personal
gain, but at the same time they still feel an intimate connection with each
other. Scarlett continues to use her manipulative powers over men to get what
she wants and because Rhett can't help but want her more every time she tries
to one-up him such as marrying another man and taking over his business.
        They say opposites attract, but the conflict between Rhett and Scarlett goes
way beyond opposing personalities, it borders on magnetic polarization. They
need each other and know this, yet they never seem truly happy together.
Perhaps they mistake love for passion, and the film leaves it up to us to make
this call. Both have things the other wants and vice versa, but when they
compromise, is it just to get their own way or because they actually care for
each other. Love and the perception of love are two completely separate things
and throughout the final act of the film, we're left wondering if Rhett and
Scarlett ever truly loved each other and why. Gable and Leigh do have great
chemistry, always leaving the viewer wondering which emotions were authentic
and which were manufacture. All? None? Either way is possible and it's a
mystery that cannot be solved even upon repeated viewings.
        It's safe to say most of us won't live such overly dramatic lives as those in
"Gone With The Wind," but it's still a masterpiece for its ability to give us
a sense that we've just experienced a life's worth of joy and pain.


Title
Review for Boogie Nights (1997)
Chad'z rating: ***1/2 (out of 4 = very good)
1997, R, 152 minutes [2 hours, 32 minutes]
starring: Mark Wahlberg (Eddie Adams/Dirk Diggler), Burt Reynolds (Jack
Horner), Julianne Moore (Amber Waves), Heather Graham (Rollergirl); produced
by Paul Thomas Anderson, Lloyd Levin, John Lyons, Joanne Sellar; written and
directed by Paul Thomas Anderson.
Seen Saturday, November 1, 1997 at 3:15 p.m. at Mohawk Mall (Schenectady, NY)
for $4.25 by myself.
There's been a number of epic, "The Rise and Fall of..." films released in
the last few years. It's a formula that's guaranteed for success if the
characters are developed well enough so that when they "fall" it's effective.
Most films using this formula are about low and/or high class criminals, but
what makes "Boogie Nights" so original and daring is the fact it's about
people who produce pornography. Yet this isn't a film about freedom of speech
and ethics (a la "The People Vs. Larry Flynt"), it's just a detailed study of
characters most mainstream films wouldn't dare deal with.
I'm sure everyone has wondered make kind of people are involved in the porn
industry. Are they sick and twisted or are they everyday people? Are they
exploiting their wild sexuality with porn, or does porn make them sexually
wild? It's a classic case of "the chicken and the egg," and the film leaves
it up to us to answer those questions.
This idea is perfectly illustrated through the main character, Eddie Adams
(Wahlberg), a busboy who's very well-endowed and doesn't consider himself a
stud, or at least realize he is and what he could do. He is approached by
Jack Horner (Reynolds), an adult filmmaker who takes his profession seriously
and knows Eddie could be a major star. Eddie comes from a dysfunctional
family, and when his mother kicks him out, he takes up Horner's offer not
knowing whether he'll enjoy it or not.
Although Eddie (who changes his name to Dirk Diggler) is the film's
protagonist, Horner is the catalyst around whom everything revolves. The film
takes place in the late 1970s and early 80s when porn was moving from
theaters to home video, but Horner insists on shooting all his movies on film
since he considers it an artform. This fact on its own makes it seem as if
Horner is one sick puppy, but within the film's context it makes sense
because we get to know him well enough to understand his rationalization, yet
we're not asked to condone or condemn him.
In fact, that idea symbolizes the film's usage of characterization and
theme. It delves deep into the industry, creating for an extremely
nihilistic, almost anarchic lifestyle (it's surprising this wasn't rated
NC-17). Many of the "actors" are drug addicts who do it for the money, while
others are seemingly normal people who just happen to be porn stars. The
business is such a part of their daily routine and their overall lifestyle
there's almost no distinction between the characters' personal lives and
professional lives. For example, consider the starlet Rollergirl (Graham) who
is called by that name at all times because nobody even knows her real name.
Or Amber Waves (Moore), a starlet who tries to be something of a mother to
the actors - someone they can look to for support.... among other things.
The first half documents the rise of Diggler from a nobody to a somebody,
and in the process does a good job in defining atmosphere and character. But
history proves fame can be taken away just as quickly as it was given, and
this happens here as Diggler (along with some of his co-stars) becomes a drug
addict. At first, he was coerced into drug use, but eventually he seemed to
genuinely enjoy it - so whose fault is it?
By the two-thirds point the film becomes more of a straight crime story
showing Diggler's attempts to get by using any means necessary. At the same
time, Horner starts losing his edge because he's so adamantly opposed to
switching to the mass market appeal of VHS home video ("Like any amateur can
just pick up a camera and make a movie!?"). I didn't like the gloomy
direction the story takes at this point. I felt as if I had seen most of it
before, in films such as "Trainspotting," "GoodFellas," and "Casino." The
story wanders a bit more than it needs to and I found myself becoming a
little restless. However, the ending is clever and poetic.
There's much to commend "Boogie Nights" for, mostly for the chance it takes
in telling the story it does, but also for its use of open-ended themes so
everyone will leave without feeling as if they'd been preached to, just
intellectually stimulated.


Title
Review for Flubber (1997)
1997, PG, 93 minutes [1 hour, 33 minutes]
starring: Robin Williams (Phillip Brainard), Marcia Gay Harden (Sara Jean
Reynolds), Jodi Benson (voice of Weebo), Christopher McDonald (Wilson Croft);
written by John Hughes, Bill Walsh; produced by John Hughes; directed by Les
Mayfield; based on the screenplay "The Absent Minded Professor" by Bill
Walsh.
Seen December 2, 1997 at 6:50 p.m. at The Glenwood Movieplex Cinemas (Oneida,
NY), theater #3, by myself for free (free pass). [Theater rating: ***: good
seats, sound, and picture]
There are many philosophies as to why we are so fascinated with cartoons.
They provide a method of total escapism in which anything will work within
their context, from the outrageous slapstick of Looney Tunes to the intensity
of Japanimation. Watching "Flubber" really clinched this idea for me, because
it's just a live action cartoon that presents itself as a regular comedy. It
proves how painfully unfunny all those gags and slapstick would be in
reality, and how important it is to actually have a story.
The film wastes no time in establishing its lighthearted, cartoony
atmosphere. We meet Medfield College chemistry professor Phillip Brainard
(Williams), the typical, supposedly likable mad scientist. Within the first
10 minutes we get at least a half dozen jokes about how forgetful he is.
Phillip's memory loss seems less like a cartoony gag and more like a real
case of Alzhiemer's Disease - isn't this rather lowbrow comedy? He starts
teaching chemistry after walking in on a nude figure drawing class (an
inappropriate joke for a kids' movie if I ever saw one). We learn he has
stood his up fiancee, Sara (Harden), twice at the altar simply because he's
forgotten. Sara claims to love him, but says if he forgets the wedding again
she'll stop loving him (a sign of childish attitude the film denies it has). 
But even cartoons must have conflicts to resolve, and it's no surprise the
major conflicts here are related. Christopher McDonald does and even worse
version of his usual villain shtick as Wilson Croft, a scientist who not only
wants to steal Phillip's ideas, but his woman too. What's worse is that Sara
actually seems interested in him! Wilson works for a rival college that wants
to buy out Medfield, which is going broke, unless Phillip can invent
something to save the day.
One of the first rules of filmmaking is to make sure the title has something
to do with the film. The flubber is played for gags after it is introduced,
but is all but forgotten about thereafter. It's obvious Phillip is going to
accidentally invent flubber, a flying rubber compound that yields tremendous
energy, and the promotions make the flubber look realistic and funny.
Unfortunately, the flubber, like all the special effects in this film, looks
very fake and unconvincing.  Flubber also seems to have intelligence and a
personality, and by the time it performs a song and dance routine, you give
up wondering how life could spontaneously come to an inanimate object.
Most of the film wanders aimlessly as it relies on the flubber to make for
the comedy (since Phillip's absent-mindedness is forgotten about) and somehow
push the story along. But it's clear how weak this premise is from the get-go
and the film just gets worse. All the jokes involve people getting hit by
fast-moving, flubber-powered objects including: bowling balls; flying cars
that don't fly well; and a basketball team capable of jumping 100 feet into
the air. It's all presented with complete logic, and no one believes flubber
exists even when they see it with their own eyes. During the basketball
scene, the coach for the rival team actually says, "I think they might be
cheating," to which the referee replies, "There's no rules about jumping too
high."
"Predictable" doesn't begin to describe the motions the film goes through,
especially after the halfway point. And it's not how terribly contrived the
plot is, it's the way it's broken down scene-by-scene, with absolutely no
transition. Not only that, but all the actors here, especially Williams, seem
bored to tears. I'd say 80 percent of all the scenes were shot with a
bluescreen, so it's almost forgivable when you realize they're talking to
nothing and interacting with nothing.
It's safe to say everything that could be bad about "Flubber" is. The only
original element the film has is the world's first romance between a machine
and a human. But this aspect is quite twisted if you think about it, and,
like the rest of the film, you won't.

Title
Review for Heavy Metal (1981)
** (out of 4 = fair)
1981, R, 90 minutes [1 hour, 30 minutes]
[animated - fantasy]
Starring the voices of: Richard Romanus (Harry Canyon), Susan Roman (Girl,
Satellite), John Candy (Den, Desk Sergeant, Dan, Robot), Harold Ramis (Zeks),
produced by Ivan Reitman, written by Dan Goldberg, Len Blum, directed by
Gerald Potterman, based on characters and stories created by Cornelius Cole,
Richard Corben, Juan Gimenez, Angus McKie, Dan O'Bannon, Thomas Warkentin,
Berni Wrightson.
The fantasy genre often deals with mythological themes like the ultimate
battle between good and evil, but it hardly ever presents them in relatable
terms. "Heavy Metal" is an anthology of about a half dozen stories all
somehow connected by a symbol of "the ultimate evil in the universe," but
it's too strange and poorly assembled to appreciate. 
The evil symbol is a green orb that talks in a menacing voice, speaking in
allegories and villainous cliches - oooh scary. The orb is somehow bounced
around the universe and through time and affects the people it interacts
with. 
The first story takes place on Earth in the 21st century. A girl who knows
too much is hunted by evil goons who want the orb so they can control the
world. Harry Canyon (Romanus), a taxi driver rescues the girl, has a one
night stand with her, and then finds himself tangled up in the mess. At first
this story seemed pretty interesting, but like all the other short tales,
this one is over just as it showed potential.
One of the next tales is of Den (Candy), a geeky kid from Earth who finds
himself on another planet, with the body of Hercules fighting against two
evil cults. The animators must never have seen what a real woman looks like,
because the women are usually naked and have double D breasts and 12-inch
waists, and of course they all succumb to the men's desires. Now I know why
they call it fantasy!
The next four tales involve an intergalactic murder and a naked goddess of
some sort. They all seem to be excerpts from larger stories, so when we drop
in on them, it's nearly impossible to tell what's going on. The actual events
and dialogue are just too surrealistic to comprehend and there doesn't seem
to be a point to anything.
None of the stories are deep enough to make us care about the characters,
there is absolutely no back story behind any of the tales and thus they are
too strange and at times just plain boring. If they want to make a moving
story about the battle between good and evil why not make it just one whole,
straight story?
"Heavy Metal" started out well but became too weird and stupid for its own
good. The actual production of the film is poor: many scenes are colored in
an extremely flat manner giving no three dimensional illusion; the line art
is also ugly, flat, unrealistic, and disproportioned; even the sound quality
is low. Art is in the eye of the beholder, but there is a difference between
good and bad movies and this is not a good one. 
Please visit Chad'z Movie page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz

Title
Review for Scary Movie (2000)
The title is no misnomer, what's so scary about this movie is that with all 
the easy targets for a zany spoof
comedy available and the backing of a major studio this is all they could 
come up with. 
Directed by Keenan Ivory Wayans and written by Wayans among six or so other 
writers, this outrageous
comedy takes aim at the 90's horror movie genre and hits below the belt.... 
waaaay below the belt. You've
probably never seen so many lowbrow sex and genitalia jokes crammed into one 
movie before. The
comedic elements at play here at the over-the-top gags and really cruel black 
comedy that are so extreme
the film often comes off as a pure B-movie. It's a miracle the film avoided 
the NC-17 rating. 
Be that as it may there's still some laughs to be found here, especially if 
you see it in a crowded movie
theater. It's the kind of comedy where the jokes work once and are powered by 
a big audience (if you catch
it on video in the fall you probably won't laugh at all). See it on the 
weekend for a good time for 90
minutes, but you won't exactly be enlightened or bettered in anyway by doing 
so. 
Chad'z Movie Page is back! 
New reviews of the latest movies in easy-to-swallow capsule form with the 
trendy, Entertainment Weekly-style of letter grades instead of the old star 
system. Have I sold out? Visit my page and decide for yourself ;-)

Title
Review for Your Friends & Neighbors (1998)
1998, R, 100 minutes [1 hour, 40 minutes] 
Starring: Ben Stiller (Jerry), Amy Brenneman (Mary), Aaron Eckhart 
(Barry), Catherine Keener (Terri); produced by Steve Golin, Jason 
Patric; written and directed by Neil LaBute. 
Seen September 5, 1998 at 10 p.m. at the Sony Nickelodeon Theaters 
(Boston, MA), theater #2, with Matt Perreault for free using my 
Sony/Loews critic's pass. [theater rating: **1/2: okay seats, sound, and 
picture] 
Modern society is now inundated with more sex and sexuality than it ever 
has been before, from teenage sitcoms to NC-17-rated films about 
fetishes. The biggest debate of the subject is whether or not it affects 
reality or just reflects it. "Your Friends And Neighbors" takes a 
different approach as it's a film that revolves almost entirely around 
sex and how can be used for both pain and pleasure even within a small 
circle of friends. 
One of the most important aspects of the film that most be noted and 
analyzed before the film can really be dissected as a whole is 
writer/director Neil LaBute's basic setup and some of the unique methods 
he employs to tell the story. Firstly, and most importantly is the fact 
the script tells a rather complex, detailed story of lust, betrayal, 
arrogance, hypocrisy, greed, and just plain stupidity between six 
different characters (three men, three women), without hardly any 
supporting characters, (a few have a line or two), mostly extras. 
Everything they do will somehow affect another character and ultimately 
come full-circle back to themselves, whether it be positive or negative. 
But to just state this is arbitrary, and explaining and criticizing the 
process is difficult. LaBute's ability to tell his story through a few 
characters is a remarkable feat, but what's specifically impressive is 
the fact the characters' names are never revealed until the end credits 
roll. For the sake of this review, I will describe the characters and 
refer to them as their main characteristic. Another interesting 
accomplishment is the fact every scene takes place inside with limited 
focus. We're always able to tell where the characters are (someone's 
home, the gym, a restaurant, hotel room, etc.), but what the city they 
live in, what year it is, what the society is like, etc. is relatively 
unknown. The film is a complete character study with the tight, intense 
drama of the theater. 
No one plot dominates the story, which makes the first act a bit tedious 
for its lack of background. We're simply dropped in on the characters' 
lives and are expected to figure out the rest. The characters are a 
group of middle-class white people who are all successful at what they 
do, but they're only concern right now seems to be their sex lives. 
First there's Barry (Eckhart) and Mary (Brenneman), a married couple who 
are going through a dry spell not unlike many other couples in other 
situations who don't know what they're problem is. Barry is kind of a 
dorky businessman who loves his wife, and the sex they have, but doesn't 
have a lot of ambition - he just follows everyone else. Mary is a writer 
of some sort, but lacks aggression and emotion like her husband and is 
the meekness character, but ironically, doesn't hesitate to commit 
adultery just to feel something. LaBute's script does a good job in 
characterizing Mary and Barry as individuals, but is very light on 
chemistry and connection between the two. Obviously, this is the theme, 
which is enhanced by the actors' good performances, but at the same time 
seems just a bit hollow. 
Another couple is Jerry (Stiller) and Terri (Keener) who live together 
and seem to have been involved with each other for a long time, yet they 
constantly argue over anything and everything. Their sex life is also 
fraught with problems and for some reason they continue to do it 
throughout their infidelitous relationship. If only one aspect of the 
film could use improvement, it would be this area. It's natural for a 
married couple to become bored with each other, but why would two people 
who can barely stand each other continue to have sex and live together? 
What did they ever see in the other person to begin with? LaBute never 
really answers, but since the film is more concerned with the payoff 
than the process, it still makes for good drama, tension, and manip
ulation so intricate and deceitful it's fascinating. 
Two other characters act as catalysts, Cary (Jason Patric) and Cheri 
(Natassja Kinski). Cary is an arrogant, hostile sex-maniac who defines 
the word "bastard." Somehow he is able to bend women to his will, either 
through charm or just attitude, into getting his way. He's the kind of 
guy everyone should stay away from as we realize he's secretly 
perverted, but somehow Barry finds comfort in his company, although 
Jerry is always nervous around him. Patric gives an outstanding 
performance, so much so that we want to know more about him despite how 
intimidating and unlikable he is. Cheri is a character LaBute uses as a 
catalyst to see how the other characters react to her. She works in an 
art museum and at some point throughout the film, each character will 
engage her in almost the exact same conversation and her reaction is 
always different, from becoming involved in a relationship with one, to 
brushing it off as small talk with another, to being outright appalled 
by yet another. She's a sweet woman, perhaps the most normal of any of 
the characters, and although her symbolism is obvious, her role as the 
outsider is the most relatable. 
I will not reveal who cheats on who and how each character is 
specifically affected by the others' action, as that's the hook of the 
film. The first two acts begin to set up the characters and each's 
scenarios, but it's often difficult to tell what they will do about it 
and with whom. The result is sometimes surprising, other times 
predictable, but the actual course of actions is always fascinating. For 
a while everyone has their fun, but ultimately each character's guilt, 
attitude, or ignorance will disserve them. 
One of the most important things to note is how realistic the story is 
supposed to be. Since the characters only interact with each other there 
isn't much pop culture references, as almost everything has a deeper 
philosophy behind it. Are we to assume that these people are, as the 
title states, our friends and neighbors? I don't know of anyone going 
through the same situations as these people. Often times the film is not 
unlike a network melodrama, other times situations are like those not 
seen outside a porno movie. But what this film does have that the others 
don't is repercussions in the end. Although the film creates its own 
reality, it goes to show that even the immoral aren't immortal. 
In what way "Your Friends And Neighbors" is supposed to work is open to 
interpretation. It definitely has a lot to say about the price that 
comes with infidelity, but it could have been even better had it 
expanded on that theme more specifically. Still, it's an accomplishment 
in film-making because it has put a timeless theme into a modern 
perspective. 


Title
Review for Forget Paris (1995)
*** (out of 4 = good)
1995, PG-13, 101 minutes [1 hour, 41 minutes]
[romantic comedy]
starring: Billy Crystal (Mickey), Debra Winger (Ellen), Joe Mantegna (Andy),
Cythia Stevenson (Liz), written by Billy Crystal, Lowell Ganz, Babaloo
Mandel, produced and directed by Billy Crystal.
What is it about Europe that makes people fall in love with each other? Not
too long ago a wonderful film called "Before Sunrise" depicted a young couple
meeting in Europe and falling in love. By the end they had to go their
separate ways but no one wanted them to. "Forget Paris" wonders what would
happen if they had stayed together... and were older... and if it were a
comedy.
Billy Crystal stars in this film he also wrote, produced, and directed about
an NBA referee named Mickey who finds himself stuck in Paris, looking for his
father's coffin after the airline that shipped it there lost it.
Mickey meets the airline's customer service manager, Ellen (Winger), a
beautiful brunette who happens to be an American living and working in Paris.
They are immediately attracted to each other, but neither can come right out
and say it. This typical plot device works well here because of Crystal and
Winger's great chemistry. There is a scene that perfectly defines the  "don't
let her get away!" element.  It's difficult to make an audience think this,
and when Mickey and Ellen do get together it is quite satisfying. These two
people seem made for each other, and it appears as if everyone will live
happily ever after...
The two fall in love, move to L.A. and get married, but they have some
problems. Mickey travels constantly because of his job, and this affects
their relationship. There are some hysterical scenes in which Mickey takes
out his angst on the giant NBA players. It's very funny to watch this small
man get into a shouting contest with David Robinson and Charles Barkley, and
the fact the players can act doesn't hurt a bit. I only wish more there had
been more scenes like these.
Mickey and Ellen's marriage seems to be crumbling before their eyes and they
can't figure out what to do. They know they love each other and they don't
want anyone else, but because they are separated so much it takes its toll.
Crystal is able to keep a good balance between the comedic aspects and the
lighthearted, but realistic drama. No one over acts here, and the script
doesn't allow for any quick fixes.
Eventually Mickey takes time off from work, but Ellen's cranky, senile
father (William Hickey) moves in and hilarity ensues. The in-law friction
could be seen as a typical comedy device but it is believable here. But
things never seem to be as good as the should be, which makes us sad because
we actually care about these characters. They seem like real people who are
meant for each other, not just two characters in a movie. 
When Mickey and Ellen try to have a baby it doesn't work because of
fertility problems. There is a hysterical scene in which he must give a sperm
sample, and all I can say is, it takes a squad of police cars to safely
deliver his sample - a funny exploitation of the male code. 
Describing and critiquing the ending (and entire last act) would be rather
pointless. It's predictable, but it's sweet.
"Forget Paris" doesn't have the charm of "Before Sunrise" but it is still
funny. We laugh, we cry, we get a fairytale ending, but the process involving
in telling this story is entertaining and that's what counts. 
(7/18/96) (1/29/97) (6/13/97) [see also: "Before Sunrise"]
please visit Chad'z Movie Page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz/index.html

Title
Review for Black Robe (1991)
**1/2
1991, R, 101 minutes [1 hour, 41 minutes]
[drama]
starring: Lothaire Bluteau (Father Laforgue - "Blackrobe"), Aden Young
(Daniel), Sandrine Holt (Annuka), August Schellenberg (Chomina), produced by
Robert Lantos, Stephanie Reichel, Sue Milken, written by Brian Moore (based
on his novel), directed by Bruce Beresford.
"Black Robe" is one of those "period piece" movies that is so blatant in its
efforts to be a powerful, symbolic drama you feel bad if you don't like it.
The themes to this film are quite evident, but then again, so are the flaws.
Lothaire Bluteau stars as a Father Laforgue, a 17th century French priest
who wants to travel to the Americas to witness to the "poor savages." It's
difficult to understand his motivation because the manner in which he carries
out his mission is not very productive, positive, nor sympathetic. 
He takes with him a young apprentice named Daniel (Young), and the two
travel with a small tribe of Algonquin Indians from Quebec to a mission in
Huron. Not much happens in terms of plot development, so essentially what
Beresford is trying for is characterization and themes as he shows the impact
the Indians and the white men have on each other.
The Indians refer to Father Laforgue simply as "Blackrobe." This is symbolic
of the role of his character, with black being an absolute negative color,
and robe as in "of the cloth." Blackrobe repeatedly tries to witness to the
natives but with little success. They are just as close-minded as he is when
it comes to theology and who is actually "right." 
The film doesn't do a good job in justifying its existence - is it supposed
to be a historically accurate portrayal of the events, or is it a story of
tolerance? At one point it almost becomes a sappy love story and at another
point it borders on the adventure genre. We get a story with a lot of
apparent truth and accuracy to it, but what is it building up to?
The only time the film becomes somewhat interesting is during a battle scene
in which Blackrobe's clan is attacked by another tribe and many are brutally
killed (except for the main characters of course). One guaranteed method of
bringing people of differences together is a common enemy, and that cliche
comes into play here. Chomina (Schellenberg), one of the Algonquin leaders
that had been guiding Blackrobe, is captured and tortured along with our
heroes. There's that moment of "Lets put our differences aside and work
together to kick their ass!" But it's too late, the characters aren't
interesting enough to really care about  what happens to them.
Blackrobe does make it to the Huron mission, and the Indians there beg him
to baptize them, only because they think by doing so it will stop the illness
that is plaguing them. When the leader of the tribe asks Blackrobe if he
loves them, he thinks about all the Indians he has encountered, both good and
bad, and replies "yes" but not enthusiastically. 
There's many smaller themes and conclusions that can be drawn from "Black
Robe," but as a whole it seems empty. It just needed work on its
characterization and actual storytelling style.
visit Chad'z Movie Page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz/index.html

Title
Review for Ladybugs (1992)
*1/2 (out of 4 = poor)
1992, PG-13, 91 minutes [1 hour, 31 minutes]
[comedy]
starring: Rodney Dangerfield (Chester), Jonathon Brandis (Matthew), Jackee
(Julie), Ilene Graff (Bess), written by Curtis Burch, produced by Albert S.
Ruddy, Andre E. Morgan, directed by Sidney J. Furie.
"Ladybugs" is a typical comedy that relies on three supposed guarantees: the
pathetic team who beats the champs; cross dressing; and the presence of
Rodney Dangerfield. This picture doesn't play like a comedy for children, so
who is it aimed at? And why is it told like a 91-minute sit-com instead of a
feature film? 
Rodney Dangerfield stars as Chester Lee, a total schmuck working at a huge
corporation. He obviously doesn't have a lot of self esteem and thinks he has
to kiss up to get ahead, which he does by volunteering to coach the company's
girls' soccer team. What a shock to learn Chester and his assistant Julie
(Jackee) know absolutely nothing about the game, and the players seem to know
even less. I didn't laugh, but for some reason it didn't annoy me that much.
Chester's fiancee Bess (Graff) thinks he got a promotion in addition to the
coaching position, and of course she has a slacker for a son who is doing
poorly in school and is kicked off the sports teams. Jonathon Brandis is a
nice surprise as Matthew, who agrees to dress up as a girl named Martha to
help out Chester (probably because the girl he has a crush on plays on the
team - what original story ideas!).
What we get is just another retread of the "underdog sports team" mixed with
some cross dressing. Unfortunately, the film isn't smart enough to play upon
the drag aspect. In fact, it downplays it so heavily it's totally
unbelievable. Could it be any more obvious Martha is a boy? He only wears a
girl's wig, without any makeup, and they don't even give him falsies. Brandis
doesn't bother to mimic a girl's voice either. Then there is a pointless
scene where Chester and Matthew shop for a dress, but for what reason? Martha
is only seen on the soccer field, why would they buy a dress for her?
Just when we think the Martha character is going to be useful, she
disappears, and the story wanders aimlessly looking for a new plot to pick up
on. When Bess discovers what's really going on she breaks up with Chester,
and the relationship is forgotten about and the film focuses on the soccer
team and the tension between Chester and his boss.
This film could've been less bad had it been the cliche sports comedy, but
it feels the need to go off on tangents that are completely unnecessary (and
bad at that). There's just too much of a sit-com feel here, especially during
the so-called serious moments, and all the confusion between the characters.
I've seen worse movies than "Ladybugs," but for some reason it contained
some sort of bizarre charm, so even when it turns sour it doesn't seem as bad
as it is. Dangerfield finally gets his respect in the end, but at what a
price. 
please visit Chad'z Movie page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz

Title
Review for E.T. the Extra-Terrestrial (1982)
***
1982, PG, 115 minutes [1 hour, 55 minutes]
[science fiction]
starring: Henry Thomas (Elliot), Dee Williams (Mary), Robert MacNaughton
(Michael), Drew Barrymore (Gertie), written by Melissa Mathison, produced by
Steven Spielberg, Kathleen Kennedy, directed by Steven Spielberg.
It's difficult to make a movie that can put itself forward as a "family"
film and actually be enjoyed by everyone in the family. "E.T." succeeds in
that area because it has a little bit of everything to it; comedy, science
fiction, and an overall warm and fuzzy feeling. However, it does stumble a
bit as it tries to carry three genres simultaneously. Nevertheless, the net
result makes up for any problems.
The film starts out like any science fiction story with an alien ship
landing in a forest clearing near the typical American suburbs. No details of
the aliens are given, we are only shown movement through the trees and bushes
which builds great suspense. Suddenly a few trucks arrive and men search the
area hoping to find something just as the spaceship takes off, accidentally
leaving one of their own behind.
We then cut to a typical suburban setting with a group of kids playing and
trying to one-up each other. Kids, especially siblings, are always fighting
with each other, which can make for great comedy when done right. Elliot
(Thomas) is a young boy trying to fit in with his older brother and his
friends, when they send him out on an errand, he notices something weird
going on in their shed. He uses a clever method to get the alien to follow
him back to his room.
After Elliot starts to get to know "E.T.," and introduces him to his brother
Michael (MacNaughton) and sister Gertie (Barrymore), the film almost becomes
a straight comedy. There are many funny scenes that take place when Elliot
and E.T. start to share the same mentality. As E.T. rummages through the
fridge and drinks soda and beer, Elliot starts to get drunk and belch while
in school. There is also the use of the joke where the mother, Mary
(Williams), is always in the wrong place at the wrong time and if she would
only turn around she would see E.T. 
The second act is certainly the best as there is an easy going atmosphere to
it. Michael and Gertie talk and act how real kids would in the situation.
They constantly bicker and never seem to become smart all of a sudden, most
films wouldn't know to use details like these.
The only problem is the fact that the family is being watched by government
scientists who use sneaky methods to spy on them. Almost no details are given
about these secret characters, because their faces are never shown, and their
actions seem to be depicted in such a blatant "bad guy" labelling manner. The
mood constantly switches from comedy to lighthearted drama. E.T. has magical
powers of sorts, but at the same time he seems rather stupid. Mixing magic
and children always makes for melodrama, and that happens here when E.T.
makes Elliot's bike fly, but this detracts from the credibility (if he could
fly, couldn't he just fly home?).
E.T. and Elliot seem to be dying, and when the scientists walk into the
house wearing astronauts' suits, the credibility factor continues to drop.
The mood seems to change on a dime, and the ending is a little too much of a
Hollywood-style fairytale.
"E.T." is the kind of innocent film that could have a profound message, but
doesn't realize how much potential it has. (2/1/97) (6/11/97) [also by
Spielberg: "Indiana Jones And The Last Crusade," "Jurassic Park"]
please visit Chad'z Movie Page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz/index.html

Title
Review for Scream 3 (2000)
The "Scream" series comes to a close (hopefully) with this installment not 
really starring Neve Campbell.
Courtney Cox and David Arquette are the real stars here as the story takes 
them to Hollywood where a
killer is dressed up in that same black costume murdering people, only this 
time he follows a movie script. 
The premise offers a lot of possibilities but the execution of the story is 
mediocre. What's supposed to be
funny and satirical is only good for the occasional gaffaw but not too many 
belly laughs or sly zingers the
original "Scream" offered. In fact it's not really accurate to classify this 
film as a horror, there's really
nothing scary about it. It's more of a lame action/thriller since there 
doesn't seem to be anything remotely
supernatural. 
Teenyboppers will love it, but the rest of us will just have to accept the 
fact this franchise ran out of steam
fast. 
Chad'z Movie Page is back! 
New reviews of the latest movies in easy-to-swallow capsule form with the 
trendy, Entertainment Weekly-style of letter grades instead of the old star 
system. Have I sold out? Visit my page and decide for yourself ;-)

Title
Review for Titan A.E. (2000)
It's a good thing most animated sci-fi movies come from Japan, because "Titan 
A.E." is proof that
Hollywood doesn't have a clue how to do it. 
I don't know what this film is supposed to be about. From what I can tell 
it's about a young man named
Kale who's one of the last survivors of Earth in the early 31st Century who 
unknowingly possesses the key
to saving and re-generating what is left of the human race. That's a fine 
premise for an action-packed sci-fi
animated movie, but there's no payoff. 
The story takes the main characters all over the galaxy in their search for a 
legendary ship that the evil
"Dredge" aliens want to destroy for no apparent reason. So in the process we 
get a lot of spaceship fights,
fistfights, blaster fights and more double-crosses than you can shake a stick 
at. There's so much pointless
sci-fi banter it's too much to take. The galaxy here is a total rip-off of 
the "Star Wars" universe the creators
don't bother filling in the basic details which makes the story confusing, 
the characters unmotivated and
superficial and the plot just plain boring. 
Despite the fantastic animation and special effects, it's just not an 
interesting movie. 
Chad'z Movie Page is back! 
New reviews of the latest movies in easy-to-swallow capsule form with the 
trendy, Entertainment Weekly-style of letter grades instead of the old star 
system. Have I sold out? Visit my page and decide for yourself ;-)

Title
Review for Full Metal Jacket (1987)
***1/2 (out of 4 = very good)
1987, R, 117 minutes [1 hour, 47 minutes]
[drama/war]
starring: Matthew Modine (Private Joker), R. Lee Ermey (Sergeant Hartman),
Vince D'Onofrio (Leonard), Kevyn Major Howard (Rafterman), written by Stanley
Kubrick, Michael Herr, Gustave Hasford, produced and directed by Stanley
Kubrick, based on the novel by Gustave Hasford.
It's hard to believe war exists. Most of us don't understand it's such an
insane way of solving problems, and that is what "Full Metal Jacket" tries to
comprehend for us. Unlike most films about Vietnam, this one only focuses on
the soldiers and their roles as pawns.
The film "stars" Matthew Modine as Private Joker, a typical slacker who
joined the Marines because he had nothing else to do with his life (I say
"stars" because all of the characters have few lines and are all treated as
numbers - which is the purpose of the film). 
Unlike most war films, this one actually takes the time to show soldiers
going through boot camp. Here we meet some interesting characters here such
as Sergeant Hartman (Ermey), an extremely strict drill sergeant who is easy
to hate. There is also Leonard, AKA "Gomer Pyle" (D'Onofrio), a fat, cowardly
fellow  who tries his hardest to succeed, but is constantly punished by
Hartman because he can't cut it. The chemistry between the two is interesting
and often hysterically funny.
The setting shifts rather quickly after the first half hour or so, moving
from the rookies in boot camp, to their individual platoons in Vietnam. When
we see soldiers going off to battle we have no idea who they are and don't
feel sorry when one of them dies. Kubrick doesn't let you to get too attached
to his characters, as the focus constantly shifts between many different
characters, although always coming back to Private Joker. 
There is really no plot to this film, it is just the atmosphere of war,
showing how hellish and insane it is. The soldiers have not been with women
in a long time, and they act like typical chauvinists, but here it seems
justifiable. Paying $10 for a prostitute is normal there. Being woken at all
hours to fight battles with gunfire raining down upon them does not seem that
strange either. 
Hating the Vietnamese for no reason is the general consensus among the
soldiers. They subliminally define their hatred as they converse about how
the Vietnamese don't appreciate them at all, so why are they even there?
Freedom? Freedom for who?
Kubrick's films say something about our own society by taking us to totally
different ones. With "Full Metal Jacket" we go through something that
actually happened in our own reality but it seems just as surrealistic as
"2001." 
(4/11/96) (1/29/97) (6/13/97) [also by Kubrick: "A Clockwork Orange," "Dr.
Strangelove," "Spartacus," "2001: A Space Odyssey"]
please visit Chad'z Movie Page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz/index.html

Title
Review for Crow, The (1994)
Chad'z rating: **** (out of 4 = excellent)
1994, R, 102 minutes [1 hour, 42 minutes]
starring: Brandon Lee (Eric Draven - The Crow), Ernie Hudson (Officer
Albrecht), Michael Wincott (Top Dollar), Rochelle Davis (Sarah), produced by
Edward R. Pressman, Jeff Most, written by David J. Schow, John Shirley,
directed by Alex Proyas, based on the comic book and characters created by
James O'Barr.
"The Crow" is an unusual, but excellent film unlike anything I've ever seen
before. It's a modern mythology story that takes elements from almost every
genre. What we get is a fantastic thrill ride of adventure, suspense, and an
overall sense of Gothic supernaturalism. 
A narrator tells us when someone dies a crow takes their soul to the realm
of the dead, but if something went wrong, if something is unresolved,
sometimes that person is able to come back and set the wrong things right.
This is all told over an establishing shot of a dark and dirty city that
seems to be lit by the fires of Hell. The intense mood is immediately
established through the hardcore industrial soundtrack, a deathly black
night, with an overall design that is the epitome of Gothic.
Brandon Lee stars as Eric Draven, a man who was murdered after he and his
fiancee Shelly tried to protest the mob's decision to evict everyone in their
neighborhood. Throughout the film we are shown flashes of their murder, which
is quite disturbing. The killers were essentially common thugs but with a
vicious, sadistic attitude. Eric's "ghost" returns to the scene of the crime
and relives it, but now he is ready to make those who did wrong to him pay
for their sins. 
We also meet Sarah (Davis), a 12-year-old who was friends with Eric and
Shelly and misses them terribly. She is a curious, outspoken kid who takes
care of herself because her mother loves heroin instead. There is also police
officer Albrecht (Hudson), a cop who becomes personally involved with Eric's
case. He actually seems to care about people's welfare in a place where right
and wrong are reversed. 
Eric hunts down his killers, and one-by-one, exacts vengeance, always
leaving behind his symbol which Officer Albrecht uses to put together the
pieces. Lee is so intense as his character he is sometimes more frightening
than the villains.
The source of the city's crime and evil seems to be coming from the nearly
demonic mob boss "Top Dollar" (Wincott). We see him perform cannibalistic
rituals, and when he speaks, his rhetoric is almost hypnotizing, and all of
this adds to the supernatural mood. He vileness makes him easy to hate, and
the film plays to our hopes that Eric will eventually confront him and
justice will be served.
The storytelling style here is not exactly straightforward. It allows for
scenes of interaction between Eric, Sarah, Officer Albrecht, and the
criminals he is after. Many of scenes do not build up the story, but serve
only to enhance mood, which is the film's primary existence anyway. We never
know what's going to happen next, but everything that does happen makes
sense. 
Of course, Top Dollar figures out a way to "kill" Eric, which leads to an
exciting ending that is sad but poetic.
"The Crow" is a fascinating film. Never before has a film been able to
create such a powerful theme through mood and character alone. 


Title
Review for JFK (1991)
**** (out of 4 = excellent)
1991, R, 189 minutes [3 hours, 9 minutes]
[drama/mystery]
starring: Kevin Costner (Jim Garrison), Gary Oldman (Lee Harvey Oswald), Joe
Pesci (David Ferrie), Tommy Lee Jones (Clay Shaw/Burtron), produced by Oliver
Stone, A. Kitman Ho, written by Oliver Stone, Zachary Sklar, directed by
Oliver Stone, based on the novel by James Garrison.
"JFK" is like a music video with a story, with hyper editing and an
absorbing and thrilling mood. It grasps you, moves you, and makes you think.
At times it can be something more than a movie, like some kind of window into
another reality. 
Kevin Costner delivers an outstanding performance as New Orleans D.A. Jim
Garrison, upon whose novel and life story the film is based. Garrison has
some small connections with the JFK assassination when it first occurs, but
nothing comes out if it until three years after the incident. He becomes so
obsessed with the case it becomes his life's driving force. He knows there's
more to it than he has been told and decides to solve a mystery even the
federal government could not. 
Mysteries are never simple stories, especially as told by Oliver Stone.
Stone's use of hyper editing and surrealistic direction make for a moving,
and at times, scary mood. Certain words are emphasized and dramatic camera
angles and high contrast film also add to the mood. I didn't care so much
about the mystery as much as I was fascinated by the process used to tell it.
The focus of the story is not the government or the assassination, it is the
people. Garrison isn't just some obsessed lawyer, he is a real man with a
family. He is so focused on "saving" the rest of the country eventually his
home life starts to crumble - which is more important? Perhaps this element
is a little melodramatic but it also emphasizes the theme because of the
contrast.
Most of the film depicts Garrison and his staff's efforts to find out why,
how, and who killed Kennedy. All of the theories uncovered seem unbelievable
and yet logical at the same time. Stone's perfect depiction of mood is what
makes it all realistic and the excellent acting clinches it. 
"JFK" takes many different theories and puts them together in a complicated
but professional way. Stone doesn't want us to think this story is the
"correct answer," but just to realize how powerful those in power really are.
Please visit Chad'z Movie Page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz

Title
Review for Juice (1992)
1992, R, 95 minutes [1 hour, 35 minutes]
starring: Omar Epps (Q), Tupac Shakur (Bishop), Jermaine Hopkins (Steel),
Khalil Kain (Raheem), written by Ernest Dickerson, Gerard Brown, produced by
David Heyman, Neal H. Moritz, Peter Frankfurt, directed by Ernest Dickerson.
Guns and respect go hand-in-hand in the ghetto, and "Juice" dares to tell
this to a mainstream audience. Although the story is told in a Hollywood
manner you never doubt the events that take place haven't happened in reality
at some point (except maybe the end).
We meet our main characters through a montage which establishes the basic
setting of the film. They are four black teenagers who live in Harlem, yet
the way in which Dickerson depicts the atmosphere is not Gothic and
pessimistic, just realistic. 
First there's Q (Epps), a relatively quiet kid who aims to be a professional
rap deejay someday, but he seems to be the only one who believes in himself.
Then there's Bishop (Shakur), who's short-tempered, hyperactive, and
apparently fearless. He always seems to be harassed by a Puerto Rican street
gang, but he welcomes their violent challenges. It's hard to tell if he's
doing it to keep his rep, or if he's got a death wish. There's also Steel
(Hopkins), the generic funny-but-fat kid of the group whom the others
constantly pick on. Finally, there's Raheem (Kain), the mediator of the group
who seems the most responsible, although he does have an illegitimate child.
For the first 45 minutes there is almost no plot, just sheer character
development and it's  interesting to watch because it's a nice change of pace
and the acting is superb. These four young men are  an interesting group of
characters as the script and their improvisation makes for great camaraderie.
Few films are as driven by the acting as this film is. 
The first act consists of the crew's day off from school and the things they
do such as gamble at a poolhall, shoplift records, talk about their sex
lives, and run from cops, yet they're so likable it's hard to think of them
as hoodlums. They converse and laugh one minute, but they bicker and swear
the next, one such incident leading to a fist-fight. In fact, that incident,
for better or worse, is the turning point in the story. 
Bishop feels the crew is always on the run and they need to earn the respect
they deserve in the neighborhood. Eventually they get their hands on a
Saturday Night Special and decide robbing the corner store will give them a
taste of what they hope to be much "juice" (respect). The story takes quite a
turn in direction when the robbery is botched leaving the store owner, and
eventually one of the crew members dead at the hands of Bishop. 
Soon, the surviving members fear Bishop has snapped and their lives are in
danger for petty reasons. But here is a prime example of the acting driving
the film as Shakur plays the role perfectly, making it clear Bishop has not
gone insane, he has just been captivated by the sudden power he weilds. If
anything, this film isn't so much about respect as it is the seduction of the
gun.
It's clear Dickerson has a lot to say, but his themes and the way he
presents them are not black and white and rigid about the cycle of poverty
and black-on-black crime like "Boyz N The Hood." Instead, he opts for
concentration on a few characters and their interaction with each other and
not their environment. 
The final act and the actual ending prove how commercial the film aims to
be. I find it hard to believe the realistic, intense drama and suspense that
had been built up through the first two acts would be relieved through a
shoot-out and chase scene. Although a sense of justice is felt, it is served
through another case of classic irony.
There's a fair amount of holes in "Juice," but the storytelling process is
always interesting and the acting so convincing they overshadow almost all of
the flaws. The ending might be a bit weak, but the messages are potent and
enduring.
Please visit Chad'z Movie Page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz - over 150
new and old films reviewed in depth, not just blind ratings and quick
capsules. Also, check out The FIRST Shay Astar Web Page @
http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz/ShayAstar.html

Title
Review for Starship Troopers (1997)
1997, R, 130 minutes [2 hours, 10 minutes]
starring: Casper Van Dien (Johnny Rico), Dina Meyer (Dizzy Flores), Denise
Richards (Carmen Ibanez), Jake Busey (Ace Levy); written by Edward Neumeier;
produced by Jon Davison, Alan Marshalll; directed by Paul Verhoeven, based on
the novel by Robert A. Heinlein.
Seen Tuesday, Nov. 10, 1997 at 7 p.m. at the Glenwood Movieplex Cinemas in
Oneida, N.Y. - theater #1 by myself for free (press pass). (theater rating:
*** - good seats, decent sound, slightly dark picture, though)
The mistake many "blockbuster popcorn" movies have made in the last few
years is not incorporating a level of satire to make them lighthearted enough
to enjoy. "Starship Troopers" tries to have it both ways by establishing a
sense of satire which is quite clever, but is ultimately just a poor
"disclaimer" for the ridiculous plot and exhausting action.
Like many of his science fiction films, director Paul Verhoeven starts out
on the right foot here by establishing a futuristic and believable image of
the future. Much like "Nineteen Eighty-Four," etc.,  there seems to be a one
world government here. But this is an optimistic future with advanced
technology and the people here are general happy, although in a brainwashed
sort of way. 
The main characters are mostly kids in their late teens who are all in love
with each other but still have a sense of blind loyalty to the government.
Most of the actors are veterans of such shows as "Beverly Hills 90210," and
"Melrose Place." Some of them include: Johnny Rico (Van Dien) - the suave
jock who's in love with Carmen Ibanez (Richards) - the always smiling smart
girl who's friends with Dizzy Flores (Meyer) - the girl that constantly
throws herself at Johnny. There's many other silly characters like these who
create for even sillier, and often annoying  sub-plots. Initially, all this
keeps with the satirical atmosphere, but once the ball gets rolling and the
action kicks in, this becomes one of the film's biggest problems.
It's hard to tell exactly where the film is headed given the nature of the
first act. There are constant news updates spewing forth rhetoric about the
"evil bugs" on the other side of the galaxy that supposedly present some kind
of threat to Earth. We know the teens will somehow become involved in the war
against the bugs, but the film really takes its time in transitioning the
plot. 
It's not surprising all the characters join "The Federation," and are
separated in the process. The boot camp scenes are pretty generic, except for
the futuristic mentality where no one seems to notice the difference between
the sexes. The men and women not only physically fight each other, but shower
and sleep together! That's an original idea, but there's not nearly enough
detail explaining how this mentality is rationalized in this society.
Questions like these crop up throughout the film which are never answered and
only serve to create more plot holes and flaws.
But the film's biggest problem is the question it never answers: why are
they going to fight giant bugs on another planet? Perhaps the lack of an
answer is intended to keep with the satirical nature, but once the troopers
head out to fight the bugs, all the sense of satire is lost and the film
becomes pure action. 
We're supposed to be more concerned with the characters and their survival
than we are with their mission, but everything that happens is just
stupidity. Johnny and his fellow troopers are dropped off on the alien planet
and start firing their machine guns at hundreds of the giant bugs. It's just
one long battle scene of humans versus aliens, and of course they don't win
at first. And why would they? It's the distant future and they're still using
machine guns? Why don't they attack with tanks, or at least with grenades and
lasers (they have the technology)? One scene shows planes dropping bombs that
kill the bugs - couldn't they have just done that to begin with? It's really
difficult to take the combat scenes seriously when considering these things.
This is pretty much all that happens throughout the second half of the film
- just scene after scene of troopers fighting bugs on foot, even though they
are outnumbered. Not surprisingly, all the main characters have a brush with
death in one way or another, and this is done through such corny, sappy
storytelling methods it's unbearable. Plus the fact that almost none of the
characters are likable to begin with, so there's no element of suspense
either. By the time the ending rolls around, almost nothing is accomplished
nor resolved, and you really have to wonder what the point to anything and
everything was.
I'm not sure what "Starship Troopers" really intends to be. It could have
worked as a satire had it stuck with the genre throughout, but the action is
just mindless and overwhelming. What a waste of a story.


Title
Review for Mummy, The (1999)
Chad'z rating: ** (out of 4 = fair/below average)
1999, PG-13, 127 minutes [2 hours, 7 minutes]
Starring: Brendan Fraser (Rick O'Connell), Rachel Weisz (Evey), John Hannah 
(Jonathon), Kevin J. O'Connor (Beni); produced by Sean Daniels, James Jacks; 
written and directed by Stephen Sommers.
Seen May 13, 1999 at 6:10 p.m. at the Crossgates Cinema 18 (Guilderland, NY), 
theater #2, by myself for free using my Hoyt's season pass. [Theater rating: 
****: excellent seats, sound and picture]
        There are some movies you don't actually have to watch to know what 
happens. There are some movies that are so standard, so cliche, so unoriginal 
they don't take much mental energy to pitch, produce and sell to the public. 
And in keeping with movies like this, which `The Mummy' is a perfect example 
of, us critics don't have to do much in the lines of reviewing them because 
the public, the film studios and us critics ourselves already know what we're 
going to say, it's just kind of a formality to sit down at a computer and 
push the letters on the keyboard in the proper sequence.
        So here's some quotes from reviews of other movies. I trust my 
readers are smart enough to figure out what I'm trying to say... I'll meet 
you at the end of the review while I go grab a beer.
        `From the title alone... doesn't sound too appealing because it's so 
generic and boring. It's the epitome of a sci-fi title, and not surprisingly, 
this is the epitome of a sci-fi movie. It... tries to use both intelligent 
reasoning and barbaric violence to solve problems - guess which method 
dominates?' - review of `Alien.'
        `Getting an audience's attention right from the beginning plays a 
major role in how today's films work. We want to have something exciting to 
watch, not a slow build-up of a story (God forbid!), and this film plays 
right into the mainstream's hands. The opening sequence uses mystery, comedy, 
and action simultaneously to give a sneak preview of the level of the 
in-your-face energy the film has,' - review of `Armageddon.'
        `It's clear the film doesn't want to waste time on reality and thus 
the attempt to establish plausibility (the most minimal amount necessary) 
comes across as a half-assed effort. Supporting characters and shady 
sup-plots are introduced, but as is the case with films made up of a large 
cast of characters, only a handful have any real significance... There's a 
fine line separating homage from plagiarism...,' - review of `Godzilla' (1998)
        `... this story is fine and the film does a good job in creating a 
suspenseful mood since we seem to be the only ones who can see the obvious. 
Horror stories thrive on this kind of element, so when the evil things happen 
we can say to the naysayers, "Told you so." However, the manner in which the 
film actually breaks down the plot and uses this element is quite 
exploitative,' - review of `The Exorcist.'
        `Unfortunately, as is the case with most modern thrillers, once the 
film showed potential for authenticity and intelligence, the cliches and 
action sequences take over,' - review of `The Jackal.'
        `Most of the film is a bad rip-off of the "Indiana Jones" films and 
just about every sci-fi movie and comic book ever. We get a lot of rhetoric 
that seems to justify all the unnecessary violence and bizarre storyline and 
mythology, but just considering the basic elements, it's too stupid to take 
seriously,' - review of `Stargate.'
        `The last act... seems like the world really will come to an end and 
yet none of the characters seem worried about it... The script conviently 
provides for the massive special effects disaster imagery it promises and a 
climatic resolution, but still fails to work even as eye candy as it's very 
unconvincing and ends much too quickly,' - review of `Deep Impact.'
        `There isn't much going for... other than its special effects and 
production design (which are excellent, I'll have to admit it), but that 
doesn't make up for the mediocre story. Maybe if it had been scripted with 
more wit, it would be worth getting excited over,' - review of `Aliens.'
        But seriously folks, what it all comes down to is that `The Mummy' 
tries to be funny and intense at the same time and it just doesn't happen. 
It's hard to find the intense and suspenseful elements intense and 
suspenseful when you already know what's going to happen. It's good they 
throw in the comedy to keep us laughing when there's no action or adventure 
going on, but why not through in the comedy during the supposed adventure 
elements? What we end up with is clashing moods which cancel each other out 
and all we're left with is people running around and special effects. We 
could watch `Waterworld' for that.

Title
Review for Gone in Sixty Seconds (2000)
Another Hollywood wannabe epic film made mostly for the sake of wooing Oscar 
voters with its classic
story of eternal love and quest for vengeance. 
It's a guy movie and a chick flick at the same time. It has many exciting and 
bloody battle scenes which
service the plot about a Roman war general named Maximus (Russell Crowe) who 
was about to become
the next leader of the great empire until heir-apparent Commodus (Joaquin 
Phoenix) has him removed.
Commodus becomes an arrogant, selfish emperor who uses his power to service 
his own desires instead of
doing what's good for Rome. 
At 150 minutes the film is a bit overlong but at least its story is full of 
detail so pay close attention. The basic
plot is familiar and very Shakespearean, but the gladiator life Maximus finds 
himself trapped in is the most
interesting aspect of the film. Not as good as "Spartacus" or "Braveheart" 
but it's a fine effort. 
Chad'z Movie Page is back! 
New reviews of the latest movies in easy-to-swallow capsule form with the 
trendy, Entertainment Weekly-style of letter grades instead of the old star 
system. Have I sold out? Visit my page and decide for yourself ;-)

Title
Review for Ferris Bueller's Day Off (1986)
**** (out of 4 = excellent)
1985, PG-13, 103 minutes [1 hour, 43 minutes]
[comedy]
starring: Matthew Broderick (Ferris Bueller), Alan Ruck (Cameron Frye),
Jeffrey Jones (Edward R. Rooney - Dean Of Students), Mia Sara (Sloane),
Jennifer Grey (Jeanie Bueller), produced by Tom Jacobson, John Hughes,
written and directed by John Hughes.
"Ferris Bueller's Day Off" portrays an attitude most adults, and therefore,
most filmmakers ignore - the way the world is seen through the eyes of
teenagers. This movie captures that essence all the while being a mainstream
comedy and a hysterical one at that.
We meet Ferris Bueller (Broderick), and right from the get-go it's obvious
(but not to his parents) he is faking an illness so he can stay home from
school. This is the basic symbolism of which the entire movie relies upon,
where all the adults seem out of touch. The fact the parents aren't smart
enough to realize he's faking shows how clever kids can be. We also meet
Ferris's  jealous sister Jeanie (Grey), who has a bad case of sibling
rivalry. This element drives a lot of the action and is a plotline not often
found in most movies involving teens.
Ferris proceeds to narrate the film in a classy, funny way. He doesn't know
much about math and science, but he does know a lot about life, people, and
having fun. What he wants to do is take a day off and show his best friend
how to have some fun. That friend is the depressed hypochondriac Cameron
Frye, portrayed quite well by Alan Ruck. Ferris has a kind of psychological
control over Cameron and when he tells him to pick him up Cameron refuses,
but then guilt trips himself into going along with Ferris. 
We also meet Ed Rooney (Jones), the Dean of Students who is obsessed with
catching Ferris to show the example he sets is "a first class ticket to
nowhere." Rooney is somewhat of the cliche anal-retentive administrator, but
the atmosphere of the film is so zany and satirical even the typical elements
seem fresh.
So Ferris, his girlfriend Sloane (Sara), and Cameron take on the city of
Chicago. They take Cameron's father's Ferrari essentially to add to the risk.
We also watch Rooney as he tries to catch Ferris and we really hope that he
doesn't.
Unlike most comedies, the protagonists in this story aren't trying to
overcome a conflict, they are just being themselves and doing and saying
funny things. They do get into a few situations that could blow their cover,
but their teenage wit and fast thinking save them every time.
Meanwhile, Jeanie and Rooney are so obsessed with catching Ferris their
paths eventually cross and the result is a strange, but funny turn of events.
"Ferris Bueller's Day Off" is a genius comedy. It's very funny, original,
well written, and well acted. It's not preachy in terms of symbolism, but its
style is so brilliant it's in a class all its own. 
(3/10/96) (1/18/96) (6/13/97) [also by Hughes: "The Breakfast Club,"
"Planes, Trains, And Automobiles"]
please visit Chad'z Movie Page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz/index.html

Title
Review for Two Girls and a Guy (1997)
Chad'z rating: **1/2 (out of 4 = OK/average)
1998, R, 92 minutes [1 hour, 32 minutes]
starring: Robert Downey, Jr. (Blake), Heather Graham (Carla), Natasha Wagner
(Lou); produced by Chris Hanley, Edward R. Pressman; directed by James Toback.
Seen April 24, 1998 at 9:25 p.m. at Crossgates Mall Cinema 12, theater C, with
Casey Rivers, using Hoyt's Movie Cash. [theater rating: ***: good seats,
sound, and picture]
        When a film goes out on a limb and does something unique it's an effort worth
giving credit for. However, credit and quality are separates issues as one
does not necessarily equal the other. "Two Girls And A Guy" demonstrates this
notion by using minimalistic storytelling to carry an entire movie, but often
seems too caught up in its niche to use it properly.
        The story starts off simple and never really expands beyond its basic
premise, which is set into motion just as soon as the opening credits
disappear. We meet two young women: Carla (Graham), an upright, professional
blonde; and Lou (Wagner), a streetwise brunette, as they wait outside an
apartment building for their respective boyfriends. After an encounter with a
wannabe-player, the two begin to talk and realize they are dating the same
man, Blake (Downey, Jr.). He's a struggling actor whom both had considered to
be a bit mysterious, but never realized how easily they had been duped until
now. They decide they must brandish Blake with a vengeance of some sort and
proceed to break into his spacious loft and wait for him inside.
        Establishing a story is one of the most crucial elements to filmmaking and
the way this film does this is symbolic of the way it works (or fails to). The
first scene on the steps of the building is rather awkward, as the attempt at
humor through confrontation with a generic, cartoonish character shows little
promise for originality. Add to that the weak dialogue and performances which
makes the film seem like a teenage-oriented sitcom. Listening to the
characters ramble on about nothing is quite annoying, however, once the story
is given something to focus upon it begins to improve.
        And so the film manages to stretch what could be a 2-minute sitcom bit into a
an entire act. This does provide for some characterization on behalf of Carla
and Lou and we learn a great deal about Blake simply through their stories
about him. He has said and done the same things to each at same general time.
Each thought they were the only woman he ever "loved" (not including the
raunchy-but-funny terms which mean the same thing in GenX-speak). At times
it's hard to believe they could have been so gullible, but once Blake enters
the picture, we begin to understand why. Blake is an actor who takes his
profession seriously and tries to justify himself by saying he believes he
fell in love with both simultaneously. But is he being sincere or is he
acting? This idea is brought up continuously throughout the picture and
provides for a semblance of theme.
        Writer/director James Toback wrote the screenplay specifically with Downey in
mind (after his recent trouble with the law), and it's amazing to watch him
absorb the script and atmosphere and deliver such a superb performance despite
the limits he is forced to work with. Downey is so good he completely upstages
Graham and Wagner which also hinders the script. The confrontation scenes are
at least interesting as performed, but to listen to the words and consider the
actions that take place, it doesn't make much sense. Carla and Lou are angry
with Blake and they have every right to be, but why does Blake not seem to
care? Why is there a gratuitous sex scene in the midst of such hostility? And
most importantly, why do they stay at his apartment as long as they do when
they are clearly fed up with him? That question never seems to be answered,
which is surprising since it's the niche to the film.
        Even if "Two Girls And A Guy" falters with its story, it's worth commending
for the way in which it is told (almost entirely in real-time with one
setting). Unfortunately, it's just another case of style over substance.


Title
Review for Watcher, The (2000)
When most critics describe a movie as being "by the books" or "follows all 
the rules" they usually mean it in a derogatory way. I was thinking of using 
one of those kinds of phrases to review "The Watcher." After all, it is a big 
budget Hollywood serial killer flick with marquee names, but that doesn't 
make it a bad movie. Sophomoric maybe, but definitely not bad. 
Serial killer movies are a big box office draw but they're not exactly the 
easiest films to make, or make well at least. You need a hero you can really 
stand behind but one with some kind of personal weakness or character flaw so 
that they're not invincible. You also need a nasty killer who has a sick 
style in the way he operates. The better criminal he is, the more we want him 
caught. 
A good screenplay and tight direction are also needed to bring it all 
together and make it work. You want a story that's complex but not so 
intricate that it's confusing, and you need good direction to keep the pace 
moving for consistent suspense. 
"The Watcher" does a fair job in balancing these components, walking a fine 
line between making just another formula movie and making a GOOD formula 
movie. 
Our hero and villain are played by James Spader and Keanu Reeves, 
respectively. The setting is Chicago and Spader's a pill-popping burned-out 
FBI agent with constant flashbacks to his days tracking a serial killer when 
he lived in Los Angeles. He visits a psychiatrist twice a week to help deal 
with his guilty conscience of his failure to catch the killer. He's the 
classic obsessed hero but he's also a hobbled one as we see the mess his life 
currently is. He can't seem to get his act together and is so strung out on 
medication it's like he's an escapee from the ICU. His introductory scenes 
are intercut with surreal flashbacks to that time he almost got the bad guy. 
It's a good way to keep the film energized but it's a little more than 
necessary. Spader's character is basically an exaggerated version of Fox 
Mulder from "The X-Files." 
Reeves plays the killer, a man who has a penchant for stalking women without 
them knowing it and learning their every move and daily routine. He waits for 
them in their homes and strangles them with piano wire but not after spending 
some "quality time" with them. We never get a motive or even a clue as to 
what turned him into the sickie he is. He's a really charming, handsome man 
who appears to have some money and isn't a drug-addled vagrant or anything. 
If he's lonely he should just go to a bar because the women would be all over 
him. Many critics say Reeves and Spader should have switched roles, I agree, 
it would have been much more effective. 
So the film does a fairly good job in establishing an insecure, weak good guy 
vs. a cocky, vain bad guy. But can it string them through a good story? 
For the most part yes, except for the fact that there is barely a story. It's 
mostly just thriller filler, but it works well. As you may have seen from the 
commercials and trailers Reeves tells Spader he'll send him a picture of his 
next victim and he can have 24 hours to find her. Whenever a serial killer 
gives the authorities an inkling of a clue, especially on purpose, it creates 
for great tension and "The Watcher" takes advantage of this situation. The 
second act of the film picks up the pace quickly and keeps the going and 
going. Kind of like a Jerry Bruckheimer movie but instead of explosions and 
chase scenes it's police work (hey wait a second, there ARE a few explosions 
and chase scenes!). 
If you're a cop in a city with several million people and you know one of 
them is going to be killed how to you prevent it from happening? Even with 
the photograph of the victim and the help of the media and officers handing 
out flyers all over the city would it still be possible in this day and age 
for a person to be essentially invisible among thousands of other people? The 
answer we get here is a clear "yes" and that's what gives "The Watcher" so 
much energy and intrigue through most of its running time. The teamwork the Ch
icago Police and the FBI do to avert this crime is pretty amazing and the 
film doesn't take shortcuts around the detective work either. How DO you find 
a needle in a haystack? The killer knows you don't but the hero has to 
believe you can with a lot of hard work and a little bit of luck. 
I shouldn't even analyze or discuss the ending. I mean this is a formula 
serial killer flick, how else can it end? 
Is it suspenseful? Sort of. Is justice served? Yes, but it's not as 
satisfying as you'd think. Is it cheesy? On paper it would be, seeing it on 
the big screen it's not. 
You can take "The Watcher" at face value and enjoy the ride or be more 
cynical and see it for what it really is. Either way you'll agree it's decent 
but neither terrible nor terrific. 
You can also read this review at: 
http://www.epinions.com/mvie-review-4B11-4923A6B-39D29B39-prod1 
And other reviews on the same topic at: http://www.epinions.com/mvie 
Check out my profile page at: http://www.epinions.com/user-chad9976 
*****
Chad'z Movie Page is back! 
In-depth reviews of nearly all mainstream films playing at your local 
cineplex. There's also reviews of a few classic films and some of your 
personal favorites.

Title
Review for X-Men (2000)

The most popular comic book characters since the 90's finally make their film 
debut the way you'd pretty
much expect it to be: assemble of familiar characters, a lot of cool 
superpowers and special effects and a
story about saving the world from a really evil villain and his nasty 
henchmen. 
Those expecting a lot of action will probably be dissapointed - there isn't a 
whole lot of comic book-style
violence and fighting going on here. Yes, there is a showdown between the 
good guys and the bad guys
but it's unoriginal, poorly directed and predictable. In effort to make a 
film like this appealing to the general
movie-going, non-comic book-reading public, the Hollywood hotshots made it a 
bit too tame. Maybe a
little Joel Schumacher "Batman"-style campiness would have made it more fun. 
A better screenplay would
have helped too, the entire story seems like a big prelude to nothing. 
Nevertheless, I'm sure kids will love the movie but it doesn't have that 
certain charm that will appeal to the
kid in us all... not all of us at least. 
Chad'z Movie Page is back! 
New reviews of the latest movies in easy-to-swallow capsule form with the 
trendy, Entertainment Weekly-style of letter grades instead of the old star 
system. Have I sold out? Visit my page and decide for yourself ;-)

Title
Review for South Park: Bigger, Longer and Uncut (1999)
Chad'z rating: **1/2 (out of 4 = okay/average)
1999, R, 83 minutes [1 hour, 23 minutes]
Starring the voices of: Trey Parker (Eric Cartman, Stan Marsh, Mr. Garrison, 
Officer Barbrady, various others), Matt Stone (Kyle Brosloski, Kenny 
McCormick, Pip, Uncle Jimbo Marsh, various others), Mary Kay Bergman (Mrs. 
Brosloski, Ms. Cartman, Mrs. Marsh, Mrs. McCormick, Wendy Testaburger, 
various others), Isaac Hayes (Chef); written by Pam Brady, Trey Parker, Matt 
Stone; produced by Trey Parker, Matt Stone; directed by Trey Parker; based on 
the television series `South Park' created by Trey Parker and Matt Stone.
Seen July 1, 1999 at 5:10 p.m. at the Crossgates Cinema 18 (Guilderland, NY), 
theater #17, by myself for free using my Hoyts season pass. [Theater rating: 
****: excellent sound, picture and seats]
        Us critics have complained for years about artistic expression being 
suppressed by the suits in Hollywood. How dare some corporate goon interfere 
in the creative process just to make a few more dollars? But in the case of 
`South Park: Bigger, Longer And Uncut,' there doesn't seem to be any signs of 
any higher powers meddling with two GenXers beloved creation, which probably 
would have helped since the result plays more like a big spit in the eye of 
authority than any kind of zinging satire. What else do you expect when you 
let kids loose in the candy shop?
        Just to lay down a quick disclaimer here, `South Park' is an 
animated, adult-oriented comedy series on Comedy Central which consistently 
pushes the envelope of what is acceptable comedy for a mainstream audience. 
The jokes are raunchy, racist, disgusting and just plain cruel, but creators 
Trey Parker and Matt Stone aren't really out to offend any people or groups 
of people, just the powers that be. Watching it (and this film), you get the 
feeling that they are rebels at heart and instead of blowing up government 
buildings they redirect their hostility through their comedy about four 
children living and growing up in the seemingly ordinary, quiet town of South 
Park, Colorado.
        In fact, this is how the film begins, with a cute little song and 
dance routine performed by our four little scamps: Stan Marsh, Eric Cartman, 
Kyle Brosloski and Kenny McCormick (voiced by Parker and Stone among dozens 
of other characters). This opening routine works well to establish the fact 
that everything to do with `South Park' is a ripping, biting satire of some 
aspect of society or at least how we'd like to think of society as being. The 
four children are all in third grade and each has their own niche: Eric is 
the funny-talking, ill-tempered fat kid who everyone else makes fun of and 
just refers to as `Cartman;' Kyle is the Jewish kid whose mother (voiced by 
Bergman among other voices) feels the need to be the town watchdog on 
everything; Kenny is repressed son of white trash who is always tagging 
behind and can barely speak because his parka is pulled over his face (he 
always suffers a cruel death in each episode of the show); and Stan is the 
most normal of the group whose big characteristic is his nervousness around 
his crush, Wendy Testaburger (who he repeatedly vomits on).
        Of course most of these characteristics we're supposed to know going 
into the movie since Parker and Stone want to waste no time in establishing 
an easy plot and getting to the verbal kicking in the groin of the 
establishment. This is accomplished when Cartman, Kyle, Stan and Kenny manage 
to get into a movie featuring their favorite comedians, Terrance and Phillip 
(also regulars of the television series who have their own show within the 
show, which is 99 percent fart jokes and other lowbrow and low-blow jokes). 
The movie the four boys see is loaded with extreme vulgarity in which T&P 
sing songs about incest, bestiality and scatological topics (and this is 
putting it VERY mildly). As the two utter every possible profane term in the 
English language in a carefree, non-apologetic way, we're shown the 
expressions on the four boys' faces of delight and shock, which is probably 
what most people in the real audience will experience too. 
        By the time the first 20 minutes of the film have passed, more 
obscenities have been tossed around by the four than most three-hour Scorcese 
or Coppola flicks do in their entire running time. What's more, the film 
doesn't back down from there. It's just hit us with a sucker punch and then 
shows no mercy. Much like the show, the four boys throw around the vulgarity 
at each other as if the words were as common as `the' and `to.' How the film 
escaped an NC-17 rating just for its first act alone is a mystery.
        Watching the film continue to unwind its story and press on with its 
dialogue you quickly become completely desensitized to the extreme blackness 
of the comedy going on (either that or you'll probably walk out as everyone 
else but the four boys do at the Terrance and Phillip movie). But this is 
where the film loses touch of what makes the television show work - the fact 
there are no limits. Because of FCC regulations (and, I assume, Comedy 
Central's own standards), the show has to come up with original ways to be 
offensive, shocking and funny without just using blatant vulgarity for 
vulgarity's sake. I mean, it's much funnier to hear the boys call each other 
names like `ass master' rather than `_____(fill in the blank with anything 
utilizing the `S' or `F' words among others).' Name-calling is a staple form 
of comedy, but it's also generic, primitive and quickly becomes stale.
        The actual plot of the movie eventually kicks in when Mrs. Broslowski 
overhears the boys talking trash and organizes a massive group of concerned 
parents of South Park to blame Canada for warping their childrens' minds 
(because Terrance and Phillip are Canadians). There's even a full 
song-and-dance routine lead by Mrs. B and the fellow MAC (Mothers Against 
Canada) members to get the USA to declare war on our northern neighbor and 
execute Terrance and Phillip as war criminals.
        Sound a little zany and extreme? Of course, but that's the whole 
point of `South Park' the series and this film. And ideally this is funny and 
often makes way for some good belly laughs, but there just isn't much more 
depth to the satire here than just silliness. For example, the film regularly 
includes send-ups of Disney animated children's film with its little musical 
ditties, but they become tiring and boring when we get one every five or ten 
minutes. Also, a subplot in which Saddam Hussein has become Satan's gay lover 
is milked to death by Parker and Stone who must think all Americans think of 
Saddam in the same vein as Hitler, but I think most of us just don't know 
enough about the guy to care. Portraying Satan as a big teddy bear underneath 
his facade of evil doesn't do much either, it's just lame.
        There's a piece of dialogue spoken late `South Park: Bigger, Longer 
And Uncut' which states aloud the point Parker and Stone want to convey with 
their masturbatory masterpiece. In reference to Terrance and Phillip's 
R-rated film, a reporter covering a bloody war between the United States and 
Canada says something to the effect of, `It doesn't matter if it's loaded 
with violence, as long as there's no foul language the MPAA says it's safe 
for children.' 
---------------------------------
Please visit Chad'z 
Movie Page
 - over 220 new and old movies reviewed in-depth, not just blind ratings 
and blather capsules.
Member of The O.F.C.S. (Online Film 
Critics Society)

Title
Review for Mars Attacks! (1996)
1996, PG-13, 106 minutes [1 hour, 46 minutes]
starring: Jack Nicholson (President Dale, Art Land), Pierce Brosnan (Donald
Kessler), Martin Short (Jerry Ross), Jim Brown (Byron Williams), written by
Jonathan Gems, produced by Tim Burton, Larry J. Franco, directed by Tim
Burton, based on the Topps trading card series.
seen on home video by myself on Saturday, October 11, 1997 at 7 p.m.
It's funny how a punctuation mark can make or break a movie. From title
alone, you'd think "Mars Attacks!" would be a cartoony black comedy or some
kind of thrilling sci-fi movie, but to understand how the film really works,
just drop the exclamation point. Mars attacks - so what?
As with any alien invasion story, this film sets up its framework by showing
characters all over the country who are somehow connected. Of course numerous
sub-plots are established, but since this is a satire we're not asked to take
much of anything seriously. 
First there's Jack Nicholson who seems depressed playing the role of
President Dale - probably because Dale is the calmest character he's ever
played. Dale's staff is made up of generic characters including Pierce
Brosnan as Donald Kessler, a scientist who tells the president not to panic
when Martians surround Earth. Not surprisingly there's also the bossy,
hyperactive general who keeps saying we should "nuke 'em!" (this routine is
so old and unfunny it's almost sad). There's also Martin Short as White House
Press Secretary Jerry Ross who does his typical spiel (enough said). In fact,
it's really not worth mentioning all the characters here because there are so
many of them and they're all boring, familiar caricatures. They're meant to
be zany but the atmosphere is so dull nothing seems witty enough to be funny.
It takes over a half hour before any real action takes place, and although
the special effects are fantastic, they don't do much to save the lame
screenplay. The Martians are weird-looking aliens who blast humans with ray
guns and quack like ducks. It's obvious their malevolence is a parody of
aliens in films like these, but the film doesn't go far enough to make them
the funny cartoons they are meant to be. Remember how the evil "Gremlins" had
individual personalities? That should happen here, but doesn't. And even when
this is attempted, it doesn't really work.
This movie probably wasn't intended to be just a live-action cartoon and/or
a spoof of sci-fi movies, it's meant to be a humorous political statement
through satire. Burton attempts to make some themes about the obsession of
the media, but he doesn't nearly utilize the potential. After the halfway
point, the film is just small chunks of pointless scenes meant to be funny
but aren't. For example: the rednecks with guns who say, "They're not taking
the TV," or the hotel mogul Art Land (Nicholson again) who says, "Even aliens
gotta sleep somewhere."
"Mars Attacks!" is like a glass of flat soda where the taste is still there,
but there's no pep to it. The same thing happens here - it's a film with an
all-star cast, and a story that should be easy to satirize, but everybody
seems too bored to make an effort.
Please visit Chad'z Movie Page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz - over 160
new and old films reviewed in depth, not just blind ratings and quick
capsules. Also, check out The FIRST Shay Astar Web Page @
http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz/ShayAstar.html

Title
Review for Leaving Las Vegas (1995)
***1/2 (out of 4 = very good)
1995, R, 111 minutes [1 hour, 51 minutes]
[drama]
Starring: Nicholas Cage (Ben), Elizabeth Shue (Sera), produced by Lila Cazes,
Annie Stewart, written and directed by Mike Figgis, based on the novel by
John O'Brien. 
"Leaving Las Vegas" plays a lot like its main character of a suicidal
alcoholic, as it is a drunken stupor through the lives of two pathetic
people. This is a grim story about two people who have hit rock bottom, but
somehow manage to fall in love with each other, once again showing how
strange and powerful love can be.
Nicholas Cage stars as Ben, a failing screen writer who is fired and
de-friended because of his alcoholism. He has depended upon alcohol so much
that when he's sober he can't function properly. He embarrasses himself at a
bank as he tries to sign a check but can't because of his nerves. He goes to
his only home, a local bar, and after a few shots is back to normal and even
witty, friendly, and almost likable. It's obvious he's given up on life and
decides to drink himself to death in Las Vegas. He figures he'd be an even
less important stiff in a town full of derelicts and immorality.
Enter Sera (Shue), a typical hooker who will do anything for money. Figgis
goes so far to define this mood and theme by indulging us with her work, so
much so it almost seems pornographic, but that's just the atmosphere of Las
Vegas. While driving one night, Ben almost hits Sera with his car. Later, he
sees her on the street and offers to solicit her. Perhaps it was fate that
they met again, and this time something between the two clicks.
It's hard to tell if Ben wanted to solicit Sera for pleasure, of if he was
just too drunk to comprehend what he was doing. They don't exactly have sex
but instead just attempt to talk to each other. Somehow the two fall for each
other, but when considering what Sera does for a living, it's obvious she
can't have a relationship and the story becomes a bit predictable from here.
The works well as a brutally honest character study, however, it doesn't
offer anything creative as far as plot goes. What it does do is paint a bleak
picture of the effects of alcohol and how two people, even as pathetic as
these two, can find shelter and happiness in each other. At times the story
starts to get a little sappy, as it's implied that they love each other
through talking, kissing, etc. Ben admits he has nothing to live for, and
Sera's kindness is the only thing besides alcohol that affects him. 
"Leaving Las Vegas" works as a good love but is a little clouded with Ben's
alcoholism. What do they see in each other and why do they care? I'm not
really sure, but it is fascinating to watch them go through the motions. 
please visit Chad'z Movie Page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz

Title
Review for Crumb (1994)
1995, R, 119 minutes [1 hour, 59 minutes]
Produced by Lynn O'Donnell, Terry Zwigoff, directed by Terry Zwigoff.
Most people are familiar with Andy Warhol, Salvador Dali, and other modern
artists whose art seemed to reflect their bizarre lifestyles. Robert Crumb is
one of those artists, but more blue collar and down-to-Earth and this is
reflected in his artwork. His art defines the division between the sexes, but
portrays them in such a distorted manner , it's no wonder the documentary
"Crumb" was made.
The film does not have much of a linear order, which causes it to be just as
strange as Crumb's artwork. We drop in on him in the present day and learn as
much about him by following him around, meeting others who know and/or are
related to him, and also learn about his past at the same time. 
Crumb was a "geek" as a child, who wasn't accepted by his peers and vented
his emotions through his drawings and comics. They say the best revenge is liv
ing well, and Crumb gets his revenge in that manner, as he has become a rich
and famous comic book artist.
We also meet and spend (maybe a little too much) time with Crumb's brothers,
Max and Charles. Charles is over 40, clinically depressed, and still lives at
home. Max is much like Charles, ugly and weird, but seems to have more of a
life than Charles. All of this is just so bizarre it's interesting.
There is some attention paid to the effects of Crumb's artwork, but not
nearly enough. The art is also some of the craziest you will ever see, as
most of it somehow revolves around bizarre sexual situations, where women are
seen as only as bodies to have sex (in Crumb's mind). Is this degrading to
women? Perhaps, but that is not the point of the film. The point is to show
this man's outlook on the world, and in some ways this reflects how all men
feel. At least he does not blame society for his problems. In fact, Crumb is
not really depressed at all, he is quite happy with his situation.
"Crumb" was touching, but often confusing and bizarre. Art is a great medium
to comment about society and provide for quality entertainment and a source
of income. But sometimes the artist is even more fascinating than the art. 


Title
Review for What Lies Beneath (2000)
What would happen if Robert Zemeckis did an impression of M. Night Shyamalan 
doing an impression of
Alfred Hitchcock? "What Lies Beneath" is the answer. It's this year's "The 
Sixth Sense" only with an all-adult
cast and a more intense plot about supposedly happy people who aren't as 
happy as they seem and when
their secrets are revealed the plot gets thicker and suspense ensues. 
The problem is it takes the film a really REALLY long time to get to said 
secrets. The first two thirds are all
just build-up without much development of the story. There's practically no 
second act, it goes straight to
the major conflict and then a series of plot twists and action sequences and 
ends at the climax of the story.
There's no epilogue. 
So why am I giving this film a positive review? Because it works. It's a 
thriller that's not dumbed down and
a horror movie not about gore. It's the kind of film that doesn't come around 
that often so we must be
appreciative. It's got two of the best actors in showbusiness as the leads 
(Harrison Ford and Michelle Pfeifer
for all of you who have been living underwater for the last year or so). It's 
directed by a master autuer
doing something different from his usual style. He's clearly drawing from 
Hitchcock and Stanley Kubrick,
but they're legends of the film world and Zemeckis is on his way to being one 
too. In any other director's
hands this probably wouldn't have worked. 
Chad'z Movie Page is back! 
New reviews of the latest movies in easy-to-swallow capsule form with the 
trendy, Entertainment Weekly-style of letter grades instead of the old star 
system. Have I sold out? Visit my page and decide for yourself ;-)

Title
Review for Bye Bye, Love (1995)
**1/2 (out of 4 = OK)
1995, PG-13, 107 minutes [1 hour, 47 minutes]
[comedy/lighthearted drama]
starring: Matthew Modine (Dave), Randy Quaid (Vic), Paul Reiser (Donny),
Janeane Garofalo (Lucille), produced by Sam Weisman, Gary David Goldberg,
Brad Hall, written by Gary David Goldberg, Brad Hall, directed by Sam
Weisman.
I didn't think that there could be anything worse than dating, but there is:
dating after being divorced, especially if you have children, and "Bye Bye
Love" proves that to be true.
Technically, there isn't a single plotline pushing this story along, it is
just dropping in on the lives of three divorced fathers. Dave (Modine) is
still actively dating, he tries to commit to one woman but often finds
himself flirting with other women and not thinking rationally. Donny (Reiser)
can't bring himself to date again, he worries too much about his daughter and
doesn't want to go through all the trouble again. Neither does Vic (Quaid),
although his problem isn't so much that he doesn't want to date again, he
just can't get a date in the first place. All three of these buddies have
children and we see how difficult it is to have a good relationship with a
child when you can only see them once a week.
Weisman, Goldberg, and Hall use some unique techniques to make the story
interesting by contrasting situations with other characters not directly
associated with the three guys. There is a talk radio psychologist (Rob
Reiner) who tries to help divorced people with their problems, but it's not
as easy as the simple advice he gives which always seems to be giving the
three dads headaches. We also meet Max (Johnny Whitworth), a typical teenage
stud working at the local McDonald's where the fathers always seem to be
eating. Of course he is a superficial slacker, but when he meets Walter (Ed
Flanders), a 71-year-old widower, he becomes sensitive to the reality of the
world and makes a new friend. I found this entire plotline completely
unbelievable and distracting, there's no way a 17-year-old would befriend a
71-year-old.
Donny's daughter Emma meets Max at the McDonald's, flirts with him, and is
then invited to a wild party. Max invites his new pal Walter, but this is
just too predictable and cheesy. And since Emma is a teenage girl of a
divorced couple, she is a brat. When she goes to the party she gets drunk and
then takes her father's car for a joyride. And you can tell where the story
will go from there.
There is a good scene in which Vic finally gets a blind date with a woman,
Lucille (Garofalo), who he does not get along with because she is so strange.
This was somewhat funny, but it had a sit-com feel to it, which is how I felt
about the film as a whole. 
"Bye Bye Love" is a real movie machine, but it does have one soft spot, that
is the good characterization of the three divorced fathers and their daily
anxieties they go through. It certainly was interesting to see how difficult
it can be to be a divorced man in the 90s, but at times the films strays too
far away from that point of interest and becomes rather sappy and
melodramatic. I just wish the producers would make up their minds as to what
kind of movie this is supposed to be - a comedy or a drama?
visit Chad'z Movie page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz/index.html

Title
Review for Loser (2000)
"American Pie" alums Jason Biggs and Mena Suvari star in this summer's 
attempt to capitalize on the youth
market looking for a comedy about young people they can relate to that 
combines generic Hollywood cute
couple-ness and zany comedy. It's about an A+ student (Biggs as "Paul") who 
gets a scholarship to some
college in New York City who sticks out like a sore thumb and falls for Dora 
(Suvari) a ditzy heroin-chic
Goth chick who has no ambition or self-respect whatsoever and allows herself 
to be pushed around just
like "hick-boy" Paul is. 
So we've got a fish-out-water formula mixed with meet-cute romantic comedy 
which ideally should make
for a good movie. Unfortunately the atrocious screenplay and boring direction 
by "Clueless" auteur Amy
Heckerling successfully manages to screw up everything about the film. These 
characters are totally
unrealistic and unbelievable - it's as if everyone under age 30 is a stoned 
raver. There's no background or
details to anyone or anything, it's just a bunch of cartoon characters 
running into each other. Not to
mention the story itself which is virtually non-existant and contains so many 
plotholes it's like swiss cheese.
Even the basic editing is bad. 
If you're looking for a romantic comedy stay far away from this one because 
it is neither romantic nor
funny. I saw this in a PACKED cinema on opening night and the audience barely 
laughed at all. If you've
seen the commericials you've seen all the "funny" parts (which are all from 
the first five minutes). 
Chad'z Movie Page is back! 
New reviews of the latest movies in easy-to-swallow capsule form with the 
trendy, Entertainment Weekly-style of letter grades instead of the old star 
system. Have I sold out? Visit my page and decide for yourself ;-)

Title
Review for Austin Powers: The Spy Who Shagged Me (1999)
Austin Powers: The Spy Who Shagged Me
Chad'z rating: ***1/2 (out of 4 = very good)
1999, PG-13, 95 minutes [1 hour, 35 minutes]
[comedy]
Starring: Mike Myers (Austin Powers, Dr. Evil, Fat Bastard), Heather Graham 
(Felicity Shagwell), Seth Green (Scott Evil), Michael York (Basil 
Exposition); written by Mike Myers, Michael McCullers; produced by John S. 
Lyons, Demi Moore, Mike Myers, Jennifer Todd, Suzanne Todd; directed by M. 
Jay Roach.
Seen June 14, 1999 at 7:45 p.m. at Crossgates Cinema 18 (Guilderland, N.Y.), 
theater #15, with Shawn O'Shea for free using my Hoyts season pass. [theater 
rating: ****: excellent seats, sound and picture].
        I'm not sure if anyone else besides me has actually read my 
`Disclaimer' on my web page, but it's basically a list of rules I set for 
myself in how I view movies and write my reviews. Well, it's not often that I 
break my own rules, but in order to properly analyze and review `Austin 
Powers: The Spy Who Shagged Me,' I must say that it's a film I've formed an 
opinion on based on seeing it four times and also as to how the audiences 
with whom I saw it reacted.
        Those two rules are just part of my own theory on film and film 
criticism. I believe a movie should be judged by how it seems to you the 
first time you see it. If there's a lot of subtlety and complex storylines 
going on, you should be able to follow and comprehend them all on first 
viewing. Also, I believe when you see a film for the first time it should 
have the same effect on you whether you're watching it in a cinema, on home 
video, alone or with a large audience. 
        Of course that's just some of my `idealist film critic' theories to 
establish my integrity, psychologists and sociologists would probably argue 
otherwise on some of these points (and other critics might too).
        How it all relates to my take on this film is in these two ways: 
firstly, I saw it four times and loved it the first three times and just 
plain liked it the fourth time; and secondly, I saw it with large audiences 
who laughed hysterically the first three times and with a semi-large audience 
who laughed a lot, but not as much as the other larger audiences.
        You might be thinking what's the point of all this since I've written 
four paragraphs and haven't even discussed the film itself yet. Well dear 
readers, the point is this: `Austin Powers: The Spy Who Shagged Me' is in and 
of itself a very, very, very funny and enjoyable movie, but what makes it 
better than being a just plain good flick is the fact that it does hold up on 
repeated viewings and that half the fun of seeing it is the atmosphere of the 
audience - a large group of people who, just like you, have plunked down a 
few beans to stare at a screen for 95 minutes and just have a good time: 
that's exactly the reason the entertainment industry exists.
        It became clear to me just 20 minutes into this film that writing a 
review of it that accurately summed up and analyzed the film would be 
difficult, if not impossible. It's a comedy that fires off the jokes, the 
gags, the zaniness and the fun like an Uzi fires bullets. It does have some 
general comedic styles to it but even I would have a hard time trying to 
define them all. Satirical? Yes. Witty? Yes. Gross? Yes. Original? Yes. 
Stupid? Yes (but in a good way).        
        To quickly go over the premise, this is the sequel to 1997's `Austin 
Powers: International Man Of Mystery,' a funny farce about a British spy-guy 
named Austin Powers (Myers), who is frozen in 1967 and returns 30 years later 
to battle his nemesis Dr. Evil (also Myers). Powers is basically James Bond's 
dorky little brother - he's not suave, he's not attractive (those bad teeth 
jokes consistently work every time), he's not always playing with a full 
deck, yet his charm lies in Myers' ability to make the guy so freaking funny.
        Since this is a summer blockbuster flick, it's not surprising the 
tone of the film isn't quite as smart as the original, and that the comedy 
comes in a rapid-fire succession to cater to the modern audience's short 
attention span. Normally, I'd have a problem with that (consider 1998's 
`Armageddon'), but since everything we get here is so unbelievably funny it's 
forgivable for the most part (Myers' screenplay may get all the jokes right, 
but his execution of plot and story could definitely use some work).
        The story goes like this: Dr. Evil, who froze himself and launched 
himself into space at the end of the last movie returns to Earth only two 
years later to hatch another scheme to, well, be evil. Dr. Evil realizes he 
can't beat Austin Powers because he lacks `mojo' and decides to travel back 
to 1969 to steal Powers' mojo while he was still cryogenically frozen. Powers 
and his boss, Basil Exposition (York) at the Ministry of Defence, realize 
this and develop a time machine of their own and thus Powers goes back in 
time to get back his mojo and stop Dr. Evil's latest scheme which involves 
shooting a giant laser at Earth from the moon.
        That's pretty much all there is to the actual plot of the film which 
amazingly allows for such funny and outrageous situations as well as the 
occasional spoof and satire.
        Here's where my aforementioned problem lies: how do I even begin to 
breakdown and analyze the comedy without leaving out any of the best and most 
important jokes? To list only a few would be an injustice for fear of making 
them seem only mildly funny on paper (or on a computer screen as is the case 
here). How do I convince the non-viewer of the film's high entertainment 
value?
        I guess I can sum it all up by saying Myers set out to make a fun 
movie and must have had a lot of fun in the process. Some comedies today are 
cruel and cynical and are based on shock value and testing society's ethics. 
Here, everything is done in good spirits, so that even when the comedy goes 
to the extreme, you can tell the filmmakers were having a great time 
producing it all. For a movie with jokes about accidentally drinking fecal 
matter; two freaky, ugly people having sex; the giant butt crack of a 
500-pound man covered in grease and filth; and eye-illusion  silhouette jokes 
about the insertion and removal of things from an anus, it's shocking but not 
too shocking. It's childish and stupid, but shown in a whole new light and is 
surprisingly funny.
        With this film Myers shows us a fresh face of mainstream comedy I've 
not seen since `Wayne's World' in 1992. Almost everything is a 
tongue-in-cheek reference to something else, whether is be within the film 
(such as Myers looking directly into the camera and telling the audience not 
to worry about the possible plot holes or how England looks in no way like 
southern California), or at modern society (such as Dr. Evil making his 
appearance on Earth known not by launching missiles at the Kremlin, but by 
appearing on `Jerry Springer').
        The modern society comedy is simply brilliant and really does go a 
long way to show how some things that might seem ordinary to some people can 
really be funny taken out of context. Dr. Evil's entire persona seems to be 
based on this idea here, as we see him rapping, seducing one of his female 
partners in crime, and just being a big cartoony villain. It's probably safe 
to say that he's one of the most likable villains in movie history and 
certainly one of the funniest, and we still never doubt his malice (after 
all, his name is Evil and he went to evil medical school).
        After seeing `Austin Powers: The Spy Who Shagged Me,' for the first 
time, I read one some Internet newsgroups posts from people that hated it 
telling how they couldn't possibly understand how all the people around them 
laughed so much at what they considered rubbish. Technically, I could 
understand someone not liking the sense of humor the film conveys, but I 
can't imagine seeing this with an audience and not being swept up in the fun 
of it all. It's something I believe is so true in the case of  that if you 
don't like it, I'd say there's something wrong with you. 
---------------------------------
Please visit Chad'z 
Movie Page
 - over 220 new and old movies reviewed in-depth, not just blind ratings 
and blather capsules.
Member of The O.F.C.S. (Online Film 
Critics Society)

Title
Review for Trois couleurs: Bleu (1993)
***
1994, R, 98 minutes [1 hour, 38 minutes]
[drama]
starring: Juliette Binoche (Julie), Benoit Regent (Olivier), Charlotte Very
(Lucille), Phillippe Volter (Realtor), produced by Marin Karmitz, written by
Krzystof Kieslowski, Krzystof Piesiewicz, directed by Krzystof Kieslowski.
If you ever wondered what it would be like to be invisible, "Blue" will give
you the feeling you are. It is a film where all we do is follow a woman
around, get to know her, and see what an interesting life she leads. We
hardly ever get stories told like this, and although this can become rather
strange at times, it is still original, realistic, and enjoyable.
We meet a woman named Julie (Binoche), who finds herself unable to cope with
the death of her husband and daughter who died in a car accident she was also
involved in. The accident itself opens up the story, but it is portrayed in
somewhat of a strange manner. At first Julie tries to commit suicide, but
can't bring herself to do it. Is she afraid of death or does she really want
to live? 
Slowly, things start to return to normal in her life. She doesn't want
anything around her that will remind her of her family, so she sells her
house and all of her possessions and moves from the country to the city. 
Kieslowski's film tends to have a rather strange tone, both in the way the
story is told, but also in the way it is presented, that is, not exactly in a
straightforward manner. At times this can become confusing, but nevertheless
it makes the story more intriguing and interesting.
Julie has some kind of an affair with her husband's friend Olivier (Regent),
but she doesn't seem to enjoy it much. It's as if she can't feel anything
anymore. This sense of emptiness can be felt throughout the film, as there is
no real plot to it, just some strangely connected events in Julie's life;
swimming, dining, talking with her neighbors, etc. 
Some small things occur to build up her character, but it seems more like an
excuse to follow show how seemingly normal people can live unusual lives. For
example, her neighbor Lucille (Very), is a prostitute of sorts, whom she
saves her from being evicted because she won't sign a petition to have her
removed. She does this not so much to defend Lucille, but rather just to
spite everyone and stay out of controversy.
Julie's husband was a famous French composer whose music would supposedly
unite Europe, but when she gets a copy of his unfinished symphony she throws
it away until she learns Olivier tried to finish it. This is an example of
powerful symbolism: is it because of her own honor and/or selfishness she
would threaten something that could bring peace between nations? Or is it
love and respect for her husband, that only he could finish the piece? 
Not much happens in "Blue" but it is still a good movie to watch just to
observe how normal people really are.
visit Chad'z Movie page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz/index.html

Title
Review for Spartacus (1960)
Spartacus
Chad'z rating: ***1/2 (out of 4 = very good)
1960 original version: not rated, 184 minutes [3 hours, 4  minutes]
1991 restored version: PG-13, 196 minutes [3 hours, 16 minutes]
[drama]
starring: Kirk Douglas (Spartacus), Laurence Olivier (Crassus), Charles
Laughton (Gracchus), Jean Simmons (Varinia), Tony Curtis (Antoninus), Peter
Ustinov (Batiatus), written by Dalton Trumbo, produced by Edward Lewis,
directed by Stanley Kubrick, based on the novel by Howard Fast.
        "Spartacus" embodies the spirit of the movies. It's an epic drama of noble
heroes and evil villains with glamorous costumes and lavish sets, all strung
together by outstanding acting. Not to mention the fact it was directed by
Stanley Kubrick, one of the greatest directors ever, who manages to convey an
important theme of humanism even through the film's commercialism.
        The story takes place in 200 B.C. Rome, an era where some of the most
important events in history took place. We meet a slave named Spartacus
(Douglas) who cannot endure his position and starts single-handedly fighting
the Romans until Batiatus (Ustinov), a recruiter of gladiators, discovers him
and sends him to a gladiator training center. 
        The first act revolves entirely around Spartacus' training. The initial
outlook is quite dark, both in design and in atmosphere. Douglas has few
lines during his training sequence, so it is Trumbo's screenplay and
Kubrick's direction that makes the film so interesting and moving.
        Many things happen to define the oppressive mood, such as the terrible
conditions the slaves are forced to live with while the Romans live like
kings. Spartacus meets Varinia (Simmons), a beautiful slave woman with whom
he is arranged, but cannot bring himself to treat her as the Romans treat
him. "I am not an animal!" he yells, to which she whispers, "Neither am I."
        Although little happens in terms of plot, a subtle romance develops between
Spartacus and Varinia. Meanwhile, the tension becomes so thick and tight it's
obvious something's got to give. When two couples of high authority visit the
camp and pay to see a battle to the death, Spartacus is chosen, and is about
to die when his opponent turns on the nobles instead. Spartacus then leads a
rebellion and all the slaves escape, and he is finally able to be with
Varinia.
        But this not a love story, it is one man's passion for freedom. The only
problem is the film's a bit too Hollywood for its own good. The actors put
their heart into their roles, but the scripting seems a little flashy, as if
these realistic characters were stuck in soap opera. The sets and the
costumes are beautiful, some of the most impressive I have ever seen, but at
times it seems a little too glamorous. Kubrick tries to counter this by
emphasizing the theme of freedom by detailing the contrasting attitudes of
Spartacus against that of the elite Roman officials.
        Laurence Olivier and Charles Laughton co-star as Crassus and Gracchus, two
senators who have a subtle rivalry going on. Olivier's character is a perfect
villain, he is hateable through his attitude alone. Gracchus is likable
through his kind acts but there seems to be even room for more character
development.         
        The film does not seem too concerned with telling a story so much as it is a
theme. Douglas and Simmons' characters do seem to be in love, but only in a
Hollywood manner. The battle of good (Spartacus' slave army) versus evil
(Crassus' arrogance and oppressiveness) does add a good deal of suspense and
adventure to the film, but not nearly enough. The ending is surprisingly
bleak, but gives a sense of poetic justice and the ultimate love through self
sacrifice.
        "Spartacus" has all the makings of a classic film, but seems to be a bit
bogged down by its own weight. As good as the film is, there's an even
better, more artistic and thematic film underneath it that constantly cries
out.
Please visit Chad'z Movie Page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz
E-mail: ChadPolenz@aol.com
(C)1997 Chad Polenz 

Title
Review for Vertigo (1958)
1958 original version: not rated, 128 minutes [2 hours, 8 minutes]
1996 restored version: PG, 129 minutes [2 hours, 9 minutes]
starring: James Stewart (John "Scottie" Ferguson), Kim Novak (Madeleine
Elster, Judy Barton), Barbara Bel Geddes (Midge Wood), Tom Helmore (Gavin
Elster); written by Alec Copperl, Samuel Taylor, produced and directed by
Alfred Hitchcock, based on the novel "D'Entre les Morts" by Pierre Boileau,
Thomas Narcejac.
They say you know you're going crazy when you think you're normal and the
rest of the world is insane. That's the feeling I got watching "Vertigo," a
pseudo epic story about love, betrayal, classic irony, but most of all
insanity. To truly appreciate the film one must realize all the characters
are insane, and yet still sympathize with them and that's just an unrealistic
expectation.
The story starts off in an interesting manner by introducing us to John
"Scottie" Ferguson, a San Franciso detective who forced himself to retire
after a traumatic incident left him with a permanent sense of agoraphobia
(fear of heights). While at his friend Midge's (Bel Geddes) apartment, he
wonders if he can beat his phobia if he takes it a little bit at a time,
unfortunately, he can't. The film makes such a point of showing his
agoraphobia, it's obvious it will be vital to the plot at some point (hence
the title), especially as some kind of ultimate weakness.
Most of the first act involves interaction between Scottie and Midge and his
old college alum, Gavin Elster (Helmore). Elster hasn't seen Scottie in years
but feels he is the only one who can help him. He believes his wife has
become possessed by some kind of supernatural entity and he wants Scottie to
follow her to see what she does and where she goes. Scottie scoffs at
Elster's notion, but decides to take the case anyway. Here is where the
essential aspect of the film kicks in, but the direction the film takes is a
misguided one. It sets up an entire plotline which will later be revealed as
one big illusion, that is, if you don't figure it out first.
And so Scottie embarks upon his quest, following Madeleine Elster (Novak)
from her home, to a florist, to a cemetery, to an art museum, and back home.
Little happens in terms of plot development, and much of the middle act seems
to serve no purpose. You have to wonder why Madeleine never suspects she is
being followed, and why Scottie doesn't try very hard to be silent and
invisible. Her wandering leaves clues to her behavior, which Scottie pieces
together (but not through any interesting detective work). He believes she
thinks she is possessed by the spirit of her great grandmother, whose
portrait she stares at in the museum and whose tombstone she leaves flowers.
In the spirit of such epic-yet-subtle romances, it's clear this film is not
everything it seems. When Scottie saves Madeleine from a suicidal drowning
attempt, it's obvious the two are in love when she is revived. I refuse to
accept love could occur between these characters, especially through such
generic motions. This is one of those films where you're not supposed to
realize the two barely know each other (even after they start spending time
together), because the romance will later lead to more profound themes. The
fact the film condones what is seemingly adultery is also quite twisted.
I'm not sure how to describe the sudden shift the film takes about halfway
and two-thirds through. Basically, everything that happened was just a
conspiracy perpetrated by Elster to cover up the murder of his wife so he
could be with his lover. I'm sure this is an attempt at telling a story of a
perfect crime spoiled by love, but upon close examination it doesn't seem
that way. This is where you realize the main characters must be insane
because of the trouble they go through when easier, simpler methods are
available. But the point of the film is not the conspiracy, it is simply an
allegory for the most tragic of romances, that is, a supposedly perfect one
which never really existed.
The final act is like a completely separate film, but the central themes
carry over. It's inspirational in one way as it seems like a classic Greek
myth happening in modern times. But this is also why the film fails: its
usage of the classical elements are so obvious and predictable they seem more
cheesy and stupid than thematic.
In fact, if there's any reason this film is sub-standard, it's due to the
poor storytelling. Hitchcock is supposed to be a master of suspense, but I
often found myself restless and bored. Most of the performances are
satisfactory, but the motions the characters go through are dull and
repetitive. 
"Vertigo" is just so dependent upon its themes it fails to be entertaining
as a film. It's just too bizarre to take seriously... or however we're
supposed to see it.
Please visit Chad'z Movie Page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz - over 150
new and old movies reviewed in depth, not just blind ratings and quick
capsules. Also, check out The FIRST Shay Astar Web Page @ http://members.aol.c
om/ChadPolenz/ShayAstar.html

Title
Review for Original Kings of Comedy, The (2000)
Stand-up comedy isn't as simple as a comedian standing on a stage with a 
microphone trying to get the audience to laugh. It's now an interactive 
almost physical game with the audience so that their participation can 
overshadow the comedian's material. When you go to see "The Original Kings of 
Comedy" in a cinema your audience will probably act a lot like the one in the 
movie, except that the comedian can't hear them and this will make or break 
the experience for you. 
Live comedy now seems to be the outlet for which performers and audiences can 
go to for straight-up blatant jokes about really risque subject matters and 
jokes that can't be delivered in a fictional medium. Comedians today have to 
be as in-your-face and outrageous as possible to work a crowd, especially a 
concert hall crowd. And with black comedians in front of a predominately 
black audience it's bonding experience. It's very emotional and unrestricted 
like a black church is, but here instead of everyone praising God they're 
laughing at themselves via the comedians' hardcore material (it's the 
forbidden fruit of the modern age). The material and the performance isn't 
insulting (at least not intentionally), it's a method that uses humility as a 
character builder. You have to be able to laugh at yourself. I'm sure God has 
a sense of humor but I doubt He would approve of the material here. 
The movie is basically a filmed concert of the same title starring four black 
comedians who are rising stars in Hollywood: Steve Harvey, D.L. Hughley, 
Cedric "The Entertainer" and Bernie Mac. The film opens with some 
behind-the-scenes documentary-style of the four talking about the show and 
themselves and how they relate to each other. There's also little vignettes 
between performers showing the four talking directly to the camera although 
they don't really say much they just kind of ramble. There isn't much point 
to these because they aren't quite that funny, they just seem like 
time-filler. 
As for the show itself it's quite funny. Harvey is the opening comedian and 
the emcee of the show and gets the most screen time. He is the most 
interactive with the audience and really gets to the heart of the crowd by 
pointing out some people making jokes about them. At one point he even gets 
the jacket of an audience member and spoofs him after he leaves his seat. 
Harvey's actual material discusses characteristics of being an 
African-American and makes a lot of really funny jokes about topics that 
would be depressing. 
D.L. Hughley is next and seems to have the shortest set. His material is 
mostly personal but it's stuff you can relate to, well, sex stuff that is. He 
also works the crowd very well by picking people out and making fun of them. 
He's not being mean because he's so aloof and over-the-top you can't take it 
seriously (although I wouldn't want to be one of the people he points at). 
Cedric "The Entertainer" is third and probably has the funniest and most 
lighthearted material ("light" compared to the three others'). Most of his 
set deals with the differences between blacks and whites in America. He's 
successfully able to break down subjects that are pretty serious and make 
them funny such as the subconscious desire for confrontation and hostility 
blacks have and whites don't (his words not mine!). His bit on why black men 
don't play hockey is great although I would have liked more. 
Closing the show is Bernie Mac, the most vulgar and outrageous of the four. 
His material is just as funny as the others but a little disturbing. He raps 
about what it's like to be a parent of young black children today and how 
black parents have a tendency to be totally honest and crude with their kids. 
He also talks about how black parents aren't at all afraid to smack their 
kids around when they need discipline ("If you're old enough to talk back 
you're old enough to get hit" is his rationale). Still, it's a bit disturbing 
at how much the audience relates to and laughs along with his bits about 
being mean to kids and other people. There's a whole book worth of 
conservative commentary to write just about Mac's material alone but I'm not 
going to even bother with it. 
I guess what it all comes down to is that "The Original Kings of Comedy" is 
clearly aimed at the African-American demographic and makes no apologies for 
it. If you're white (like me), you WON'T be able to relate to the material as 
well and thus not laugh as hard and/or be insulted. But don't take it 
personally, everything here is done in relatively good spirits and isn't 
meant to provoke anyone (if it were the audience would probably boo the 
comedians for every other joke). It's not surprising Spike Lee directed and 
produced this film - it says a lot of the same social commentaries as his 
other films, only this time it's right to your face and there's nothing 
subtle about it. 
GRADE: B 
Chad'z Movie Page is back 
after heavy renovation. Reviews of ALL mainstream movies playing today! Surf 
on over to my web page today and take the poll on which is the better way to 
rate movies.

Title
Review for Back to the Future (1985)
**** (out of 4  = excellent)
1985, PG, 116 minutes [1 hour, 56 minutes]
[adventure/sci-fi]
starring: Michael J. Fox (Marty McFly), Christopher Lloyd (Dr. Emmett Brown),
Lea Thompson (Lorraine Baines/McFly age 17, 47), Crispin Glover (George McFly
age 17, 47), Thomas F. Wilson (Biff Tannen age 17, 47), produced by  Bob
Gale, Neil Canton, written by Robert Zemeckis, Bob Gale, directed by Robert
Zemeckis.
What makes "Back To The Future" such a gem is its ability to take elements
of adventure, comedy, and sci-fi, mix them all together,and make for a
wonderfully entertaining movie.
Michael J. Fox is perfect as Marty McFly, the typical teenager who
skateboards, plays in a rock band, and has a girlfriend - your basic "cool
guy." His home life is rather pathetic though; he has a nerd for a father
(Glover), a drunk for a mother (Thompson), and two losers for siblings. His
best friend is a strange scientist named Doc Brown, played brilliantly by
Christopher Lloyd. We don't know how Marty and Doc hooked up, but it doesn't
matter, we quickly become too caught up in the excitement to care.
Doc has invented a time machine out of a DeLorean, but to power it he must
use plutonium which he ripped off from Lybian terrorists. But when the
terrorists catch up with Doc and shoot him, Marty escapes by driving the car
in a high speed chase and in the process ends up traveling back to the year
1955. And so the real adventure begins, as it is obvious Marty is stuck in
the past and must somehow get back home. 
The atmosphere of the film is very satirical of the 1950s with kids obsessed
with sci-fi, 3-D movies, "The Honeymooners," all those big cars, crew cuts,
and poodle skirts. When Marty finally finds younger Doc, not only must they
figure out how to get him back to the future, but they also have to fix the
error in history Marty accidentally caused by his travel. 
Almost every single action and event here has a purpose and reason, that is,
to solve the conflict. There is no excess dialogue or gratuitous comedy, you
have to admire it for being so succinct. Another great thing is the use of
suspense. We know there is a definite "deadline" of sorts, and whenever a
plan goes awry we panic and wonder "how are they going to get out of this!?"
Even in the climatic scene problems suddenly pop up and we're on the edge of
our seat, biting our nails, but totally excited throughout. 
"Back To The Future" is one of the greatest modern films. The adventure, the
excitement, and the total creativity are all so original and so well
assembled there is not one point in the movie where you would remotely lose
interest or become skeptical. Movies that are this much fun with such
innocence are really a unique phenomenon. 
visit Chad'z Movie Page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz/index.html

Title
Review for Shaft (2000)
Samuel L. Jackson stars in this updated version of the classic early-70s 
blaxploitation action/crime movie.
And since it's the 21st century you can just imagine what level the intensity 
is going to be - a lot of violence
and a lot of attitude. 
The story is very intricate and involves Shaft's pursuit of a rich, racist 
murderer who can evade justice and
his partnership with a drug dealer to track down the sole eye witness who 
could convict him. In between
Shaft spends a lot of time trying to work within the system to bring all the 
bad guys down but eventually
becomes an all-out mercenary in his pursuit for justice. 
The action is vital to the story, and pretty much is the story at some 
points. It's not surprising the
screenplay and editing seem so disjointed according to all the stories of 
production problems on the set of
this thing. Still, it's got a little bit of everything for everyone. 
Chad'z Movie Page is back! 
New reviews of the latest movies in easy-to-swallow capsule form with the 
trendy, Entertainment Weekly-style of letter grades instead of the old star 
system. Have I sold out? Visit my page and decide for yourself ;-)

Title
Review for Erin Brockovich (2000)
Based on a true story, this drama about a strong-willed, independent woman 
named Erin Brockovich (Julia
Roberts) who sticks it to a huge corporation at first comes off as a great 
story of the human spirit and an uphill
battle for justice. 
Upon closer inspection it's a little disjointed since the story tries to 
balance Erin's dysfunctional home life with
her courageous fight against a power company who poisoned a small town's 
water supply and lied about it. 
The investigative work Erin and lawyer Ed Marsly (Albert Finney) must perform 
in order to win the case and
the emotional ties they must make with each of their 600+ clients is strong, 
interesting and suspenseful. But
Erin's home life and her sort of relationship with her young children and 
biker-who's-actually-a-big-teddy
bear-boyfriend George (Aaron Eckhart) is a tad weak and doesn't work as well 
as it should have. Still, a good,
entertaining story. 
Chad'z Movie Page is back! 
New reviews of the latest movies in easy-to-swallow capsule form with the 
trendy, Entertainment Weekly-style of letter grades instead of the old star 
system. Have I sold out? Visit my page and decide for yourself ;-)

Title
Review for Go (1999)
Chad'z rating: **** (out of 4 = excellent)
1999, R, 103 minutes [1 hour, 43 minutes]
Starring: Sarah Polley (Ronna), Desmond Askew (Simon), Jay Mohr (Zack), Scott 
Wolf (Adam); written by John August; produced by Matt Freeman, Mickey 
Liddell, Paul Rosenberg; directed by Doug Liman.
Seen April 16, 1999 at 10 p.m. at Crossgates Cinema 18 (Guilderland, N.Y.), 
theater #15, by myself for free using my Hoyts' critic's pass. [Theater 
rating: ***1/2: very good seats, sound and picture]
        Do you realize that every time you encounter a new person you've just 
become part of a story? Everyone has their own life story, both past and 
present, and every time two or more interact, they become part of each 
others' story (not necessarily an important or even significant part, but a 
part nevertheless). That seems to be the basic theory behind `Go,' where 
several characters' chance encounters all effect each other in extreme ways.
        In order to test this theory screenwriter John August and director 
Doug Liman assemble a cast of characters that wouldn't usually be the types 
to have an entire film revolve around them, such as a teenage supermarket 
cashier, a bottom-of-the-drug-food-chain dealer and two struggling soap opera 
actors. These types of characters might not sound all that original, but 
consider that they will all be somehow effected by a strip club bouncer and 
his psychotic father, a mid-level drug dealer, a narc obsessed with 
multi-level-marketing, horny wedding guests, a Zen lovemaker, two 
shrimp-scarfers and a cute normal teenage girl to round things out.
        How they will all come together is the process the film deals with. 
I'd imagine the concept to the film started out as the creators' testing 
themselves to see if they could actually pull it off and the outcome is a 
terrific achievement in filmmaking and the craft of fiction in general.
        The film starts out as anything else, with little indication of 
what's to come. We meet Ronna (Polley), a depressed Los Angeles checkout girl 
who doesn't seem to have much desire to do anything except work just to pay 
her rent. She's not very charming, especially to her customers, but this is 
played mostly for laughs rather than characterization and it works. Maybe 
this is because she's not a very afeminite character, but she's far from 
masculine - a creative character indeed.
        Things start to progress when Ronna reluctantly agrees to take the 
hours of the goofy, hyperactive, yet likable Simon (Askew), an English teen 
into vices for the sake of the experiences. This agreement starts a 
three-pronged storyline as it allows Simon to go to Las Vegas for the weekend 
with his friends and in turn drags Ronna and her friends into buying and 
selling an experimental drug. The process of which will not only bring Ronna 
close to being arrested but also to death.
        Nearly the same can be said for two other characters, Zack (Mohr) and 
Adam (Wolf), who we don't think much of when they first appear as supporting 
characters, but later will become major players to the film's makeup - 
another process used by the filmmakers to elaborate on the theory of how 
significant insignificant interaction might be.
        Once the pace is picked up the film really begins to show its mettle. 
When the title screen `Ronna' is flashed shortly after the aforementioned 
turning point scene, it's clear this film isn't going to employ the standard 
linear method of storytelling. Considering how good it is up until that 
point, it's a long overdue change of pace needed in movies today.
        And so the film begins to take shape, first by following Ronna and 
her friends on a one-night adventure that begins with a drug deal instigated 
by Zack and Adam (who were actually looking for Simon), which doesn't exactly 
go as planned, but that's what keeps it all so interesting.
        The second storyline starts at the same moment as Ronna's story, but 
this time the camera chooses to follow Simon instead. Simon and his three 
friends head to Vegas for a night on the town and in the process experience 
things they never would have imagined. 
        The third arc, about Zack and Adam, again overlaps with Ronna's story 
telling much of the same story but from a completely different angle. We're 
shown things we never would have expected were going on while following 
Ronna. And many of the events that do happen to Ronna because of Zack and 
Adam aren't even their fault - they just happened to be where they were when 
they were.
        I'd really like to dissect each of the three storylines and 
especially how the film wraps up in the end, but that would take up too much 
time and space and spoil everything for those who haven't seen the film. 
Perhaps the greatest element to the film is its constant surprises and 
unpredictability, and not due to plot twists or a confusing screenplay, just 
through great filmmaking.
 Direction: Trying to piece together such a complex story is no easy task 
and for a rookie filmmaker such as Liman, it's a great accomplishment. He 
doesn't just depict a story, he wraps us up in it all, pulling us into the 
fray so that we experience every high and low.
 Screenplay: Besides being chiseled with detail and creative in general, 
it's clear the script has been inspired by many sources, with both obvious 
and subtle references, yet it never screams `rip-off.' 
 Tone/mood: Where other Hollywood films have failed to bring the charm of 
the independents to the mainstream, this one is able to create its own sense 
of the macabre. It's not overly-dark or twisted and the comedy isn't so 
satirical for it to be considered a black comedy, more like `macabre light.'
 Cinematography/art direction: Able to photograph both the intense and the 
lighthearted in the same manner.  
 Characterization: For nearly every character introduced, no matter what 
role they play in the big picture, we're able to get a sense of who they are, 
what they're thinking and how they came to be in their situations. Even when 
their actions are surprising, it never seems very out of synch.
 Performances: Every actor nails their role (see above).
 Theme/theory: The film doesn't seem to be concerned with conveying any kind 
of political or social messages, instead, it's more of a philosophical 
experiment. In fact, it might not have meant to do that intentionally, but 
there definitely is something existential to it all.
...And to think that `Go' is just a big comedy and adventure! 
(4/23/99) [see also: `The Big Lebowski,' `Clerks,' `Jackie Brown,' `Pulp 
Fiction,' `True Romance;' also by Liman: `Swingers']

Title
Review for Braveheart (1995)
****
1995, R, 177 minutes [2 hours, 57 minutes]
[drama/adventure]
starring: Mel Gibson (William Wallace), Patrick McGoohan (Longshanks - King
Edward I), Angus McFadven (Robert The Bruce), Catherine McCormack (Murron),
produced by Mel Gibson, Alan Ladd, Bruce Davey, written by Randal Wallace,
directed by Mel Gibson.
"Braveheart" reminded me of "Star Wars" in a way, as both are essentially
the same stories of rebels (who we know are righteous) fighting against
impossible odds for their freedom from the evil oppressors.
 The film starts out by giving us a sense of Scottish history and culture,
as we learn a lot about the main characters and why they really are the "good
guys" and why the oppressive British are such "bad guys." The Brits are
tyrannical and cold hearted, they don't care about the Scots, except for
taxing them and conquering their land (that sounds familiar). The interaction
of the screenplay and directing captures the essence of the oppression and
sympathizes with the rebellion. 
The Scots' leader, William Wallace, falls in love with a woman, Murron
(McCormack), but they must have secret affair because the British could
separate them. When one of the British attempts to rape Murron,Wallace comes
to her rescue and kills the officer. This causes a chain reaction as all the
other villagers begin to revolt against the British, and thus the first major
step towards freedom has begun.
In some ways, the violence in this film isn't much different from the
typical action/adventure movies. We get a lot of fighting, but it seems
justified and is more exciting because the villains are portrayed as such
evil tyrants we're glad they get what they deserve. At other times the film
starts to seem like something out of legends and fairytales (a la "Robin
Hood"), but there are no magicians or dragons, nor any cartoony characters in
this story, and that is why it works as well as it does. Gibson's breezy
storytelling style and superb acting makes us sympathize with the Scots.
Like in any other movie, the villain must be hated, and Patrick McGoohan
does an excellent job in portraying the relentless Longshanks - Kind Edward
I, a king who considers the Scots to be scum and cannot believe it when he
hears that some of his soldiers have lost battles.
The plotline to this film is so complex I cannot begin to describe it. It is
your basic fight for freedom, but in a more poetic way than in most films. It
relies heavily upon characterization to tell the story, as we know the Scots'
love for their homeland and for each other is what really drives them.         
"Braveheart's" sense of characterization and storytelling style make it a
modern masterpiece. This is not just a story about the Scots' freedom, but
about the price and value of freedom itself - we must never take freedom for
granted.
visit Chad'z Movie page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz/index.html

Title
Review for In & Out (1997)
1997, PG-13, 90 minutes [1 hour, 30 minutes]
starring: Kevin Kline (Howard Brackett), Joan Cusak (Emily Montgomery), Tom
Selleck (Peter Malloy), Matt Dillon (Cameron Drake), written by Paul Rudnick,
produced by Scott Rudin, directed by Frank Oz.
With the wave of political correctness sweeping Hollywood it was just a
matter of time before a mainstream, "family" comedy dealt with the issue of
homosexuality. You wouldn't know it from the way "In & Out" has been
marketed, but it's actually one big political statement. Not only that, but
it's poorly scripted, over-acted, and unfunny.
Everyone knows the setup to the story - Howard Brackett (Kline), a high
school teacher in a generic suburban town is "outed" by Cameron Drake
(Dillon), a former student of his who goes on to win an Academy Award and
tells the world his "gay" teacher was his inspiration. Howard must then
explain to everyone he's not gay, but when they think about it, it seems like
he would be from the way he talks, dresses, and acts.
The first act does a mediocre job in defining the all-American (read:
"conservative") community in which the story takes place. When the media
flocks to this small town and ambushes Howard it's done so supposedly as
satire, but doesn't have any wit to it. Then the one-joke "mistaken identity"
premise comes into play and repeats itself over and over and wears out
quickly. There are a few funny one-liners here and there, but the characters
that say them seem like cardboard cutouts, not real people.
After only 40 minutes it's clear the film has run out of ideas and just
wanders aimlessly. It throws in a few scenes about Howard's inability to "be
a man," but the film's definition of "a man" is the kind of stereotypes and
cliches stand-up comedians talk about. In one scene Howard plays a self-help
tape, "Exploring You Masculinity," which includes: untucking your shirt;
belching; saying "Yo!"; and refraining from dancing. This might have been
funny on a sit-com, but it's lame and silly for such a major motion picture.
But the film presses on and starts to make supporting characters more
important. Howard's fiancee Emily (Cusak), is a recovering over-eater who
panics at the drop of a hat. Cusak is a good actress but she over-acts so
much it's exhausting (and another example of the cartoony/sit-com-esque
atmosphere). There's also Tom Selleck as Peter Malloy, a gay tabloid TV
reporter who wants to exploit Howard, but Selleck doesn't play this character
nearly as sleazy as he should have. This character is used supposed in a
satirical manner, but the script is so bland you can't appreciate it.
The mid-section of the film seemed to wander a bit, which was tolerable, but
the entire last act rapidly deteriorates. A major twist in the plot occurs
which completely contradicts the premise of the film! Howard is almost
completely forgotten about and minor characters carry the story. By this
point there are no jokes left to tell and the few attempts at comedy through
gags are pathetic.
I hold the screenwriter, Paul Rudnick, responsible for the film's
substandard quality. Rudnick is an open homosexual and it's obvious this film
is his way of making mainstream America deal with homosexuality in a
supposedly funny and entertaining way. The problem is, his political
statements are so blatant they kill the comedy. The last few scenes
illustrate this perfectly as the entire town rallies around Howard after he
is fired. Howard was fired because the administrators think he's gay, but
everyone wonders what that has to do with anything. The movie becomes a big
talk show and you can tell it's supposed to make you deal with the issue
yourself, but because it's so one-sided and stupid in its delivery, it can't
be taken seriously.
"In & Out" turns out to be a real mess of a movie. It has potential, but it
assembles its pieces poorly and fails to be thought-provoking nor funny.


Title
Review for Paper, The (1994)
1994, R, 112 minutes [1 hour, 52 minutes]
starring: Michael Keaton (Henry Hackett), Robert Duvall (Bernie White), Glenn
Close (Alicia Clark), Marisa Tomei (Martha Hackett), Randy Quaid (McDougal),
produced by Brain Grazer, Frederick Zollo, written by David and Stephen
Koepp, directed by Ron Howard.
We'd like to think that the "real" media has a much higher standard of
quality and ethics than sensationalistic tabloids, but "The Paper" proves
they really don't. The media is a business just like everything else, and
they'll do whatever it takes to make more money and sell more papers.
The story revolves around Henry Hackett (Keaton), the Metro editor for "The
Sun," a New York tabloid newspaper. It's not the most elite publication in
the world, but it is respected and has good production values, yet Henry
wants to move on to the "New York Sentinel." 
We learn a lot about the paper through Henry, and we learn a lot about Henry
through the paper. He is an important editor under a lot of stress, working
long hours and making sure things get done. Back home, his wife Martha
(Tomei) is pregnant with their first child and she feels he is ignoring her
and their marriage is suffering because of his work. But at the same time,
his work is suffering from his marriage. It's a no-win situation and this
goes to show just how stressful jobs in the media can be. I'm sure some of
this is exaggerated for characterization, but Howard plays upon it in such a
way as to make it believable without going over the top. 
There are some other interesting characters here: Bernie (Duvall), the
generic editor-in-chief,  (has there ever been an editor-in-chief who wasn't
divorced, balding, and a strict?); Alicia (Close), another editor who is
constantly trying to one-up Henry; and McDougal (Quaid), the 30-something
slacker who somehow has fantastic connections. The characters might not be
anything special, and that's fine with me because it makes the story more
sympathetic.
The sub-plot of the film involves a supposedly race-related murder of two
white businessmen. All the other papers get the scoop on this story except
for The Sun, and this becomes their driving force: to finally beat everyone
else. We follow Henry and McDougal and learn how a paper operates in the
process. 
The underlying theme here is truth as "If it's wrong we'll print the
exclusive that it was wrong tomorrow, but for now we go with this" can
constantly be heard in the background. Henry seems to be one of the last
people who has some kind of values and would rather have the truth be known
even if it means selling fewer papers.
The last act involves Henry and Alicia fighting over what story should be
the front page catch, will it be either a headline that is wrong but will not
be known to the public, or will it be the truth? And if the truth should be
published, it will take a lot of effort and production time to do it, which
is more expensive. The fact this is even questioned is depressing in a way.
Our news may depend upon two people's personal disputes? 
Still, "The Paper" is a good film and it certainly is interesting to watch
the production of a newspaper and see how a story is portrayed through the
storyteller.


Title
Review for Alien: Resurrection (1997)
Chad'z rating: ** (out of 4 = fair/below average)
1997, R, 108 minutes [1 hour, 48 minutes]
starring: Sigourney Weaver (Ripley), Winona Ryder (Call), Ron Perlman
(Johner), Gary Dourdan (Christie); written by Joss Whedon; produced by Bill
Badalato, Gordon Carroll, David Giler, Walter Hill; directed by Jean-Pierre
Jeunet; based on characters created by Dan O'Bannon, Ronald Shusett.
Seen December 1, 1997 at 7:20 p.m. at The Glenwood Movieplex Cinemas (Oneida,
NY), theater #2, by myself for free (free pass). [Theater rating: ***: good
seats, sound, and picture]
        If there's anything I learned about the "Alien" series, it's the fact it
epitomizes the term "The more things change, the more they stay the same."
Each film has a unique direction to it, yet the stories and individual
elements are basically the same. But what's most annoying about "Alien:
Resurrection," besides the fact it repeats absolutely everything we've seen
before, is it doesn't even try to have any direction or originality.
        Describing the plots and the way they are set up in these films is beginning
to become an exercise in futility, and I wouldn't doubt the screenwriters
feel the same way writing them. Much like the previous sequels, there's a lot
of jargon and rhetoric here to explain how Ripley (Weaver) will end up facing
the aliens even though everything was fine when we last saw her. This time
it's 200 years after the death of her original self, and scientists have
created a clone of her (why did they wait so long?). How they did this isn't
clearly explained, but we are knocked over the head with the fact she has
memories and was slightly crossbred with alien DNA (which explains her
super-strength and psychic abilities).
        We get more variations on the same plot such as the arrogant scientists and
leaders who try to study, breed, and exploit the aliens but something goes
wrong and chaos ensues. There's also a militia brat pack, although this time
they're pirates instead of miners, marines, or prisoners. Much like Ripley,
they're also re-incarnated characters. First there's Johner (Perlman), the
wise-cracking tough guy; then Call (Ryder), the smart, rational,
strong-willed woman; Christie (Dourdan), the special weapons guy; along with
a cripple in a high-tech wheelchair, a frail woman, and the suave leader.
Most of these characters will die just as we're beginning to like them, and
one of them will turn out to be a robot (deja vu!).
        The storytelling here is so choppy we don't really get establishment of
plot, but a collection of remotely related scenes, such as the scientist
driven mad with curiosity studying the aliens, or the meeting between the
pirate leader  and the corrupt military leader which somehow explains why the
pirates are on board the huge military vessel the film takes place in.
        Of course the aliens break free from their cages and run rampant around the
ship, killing many of the humans and giving the pirates something to run from
and shoot at. And if that wasn't generic enough, I counted at least six times
in which the music built up with violins screeching and then an alien popping
out the shadows and killing someone. There's also an interesting scene (the
only one for that matter) that takes place underwater, but somehow the humans
manage to hold their breath for five or ten minutes!
        Most of the film recycles and even rips-off elements from the other films
that didn't work that well to begin with. We get dizzying action sequences
with fire and bullets flying all over the place, corny one-liners, guns jam
up at the last second, and people apparently dead come back to life. The faux
Gothic atmosphere with lots of shadows, strobe lights, and steam all over the
place is also tiring. The aliens themselves are now such cartoony embodiments
of evil it's hard not to laugh at them, much less be frightened by them.
        The "Alien" films are meant to be intense, sci-fi thrillers and there's no
doubt that's what "Alein: Resurrection" is too, and I don't object to that
principle. What I do object to is how the film constantly tries harder to be
intense, but the more it does so, the sillier it seems.
Please visit Chad'z Movie Page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz - over 180
new and old films reviewed in depth, not just blind ratings and quick
capsules. Also, check out The FIRST Shay Astar Web Page @
http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz/ShayAstar.html
To receive Chad'z movie reviews directly, send e-mail to ChadPolenz@aol.com
with "subscribe" in the header.

Title
Review for Rain Man (1988)
***1/2 (out of 4 = very good)
1988, R, 128 minutes [2 hours, 8 minutes]
[drama]
Starring: Tom Cruise (Charlie Babbit), Dustin Hoffman (Ray Babbit), written
by Ronald Bass, Barry Morrow, produced by Mark Johnson, directed by Barry
Levinson.
For most of us, it's difficult to imagine having any major handicaps or
mental problems. We really don't think about the people that do have those
problems because they only seem like images on TV and in movies. "Rain Man"
is a good, touching story that proves those people do exist and we learn a
lot about life from those who live simple ones.
Tom Cruise stars as Charlie Babbit, a cocky, greedy import car salesman. He
makes huge amounts of cash from importing the most expensive cars from around
the globe (i.e. Ferrari, Lamborghini, etc.). He also has a girlfriend and
everything is OK, even though business is looking shaky. When he hears of his
father's death we learn a more about him as he talks about the terrible
relationship he had with his father. But since he is the only surviving
relative he believes he will inherit his father's entire estate.
Apparently, Charlie's father left three million dollars to another
beneficiary. But Charlie is so upset and confused, he does some research and
eventually finds himself at a mental hospital in Ohio arguing with his
father's friend over the inheritance and in the process realizes he has an
older brother named Raymond (Hoffman) he never knew existed. 
Ray is an autistic savant, he can memorize anything upon hearing or reading
it once, but is incapable of making decisions for himself and does not
understand emotions either. When Charlie demands half of the money and is
rejected, he essentially kidnaps Ray and starts a cross-country trip home.
There really isn't a plot after this point, it's just chemistry between
these two very different people. Cruise and Hoffman are so excellent you
totally believe everything that happens. Hoffman delivers an astonishing
performance, not only is his character touching because of his innocence, but
he is also quite funny and gives the film a lighthearted tone.
Charlie cannot understand Ray, and Ray certainly cannot understand Charlie.
There are many  funny scenes that deal with these problems. For example, Ray
says he can't wear Charlie's underwear because he only wears boxer shorts
bought at K-Mart at 400 Oak Street in Cincinnati. He is also obsessed with
watching television shows at the same time everyday, and if he can't see
these programs he will break routine and it will be too much for him to
comprehend. 
Perhaps this is a theme of our lives too. We are pretty much slaves to
routine, but imagine if every minute of every day was dependant upon an exact
schedule. This seems difficult to understand, and for a "Scrooge" like
Charlie, it is totally impossible.
The film does have an important sub-plot to it concerning Charlie's business
dealings, although it really is not that necessary to keep the story going.
There is a long but interesting detour as Charlie exploits Ray's ability to
memorize everything as they pass through Las Vegas and "cheat" at Blackjack
and win almost $100,000. By this point the two have really gotten to know
each other  and realize their limitations. The Vegas setting also provides
for many great scenes, one involving a prostitute flirting with Ray, and
another with a slow dance between the two brothers.
Of course by the end of "Rain Man" Charlie is completely transformed and
wants custody of his brother. Maybe this seems a little too sweet in the big
picture, but the way the movie's nuances work so well, it doesn't make a
difference. We're just happy with what happened. 
please visit Chad'z Movie Page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz

Title
Review for Se7en (1995)
Chad'z rating: **** (out of 4 = excellent)
1995, R, 125 minutes [2 hours, 5 minutes]
[thriller/mystery]
starring: Brad Pitt (Detective David Mills), Morgan Freeman (Detective
William Sommerset), Gwenyth Paltrow (Tracy Mills), written by Andrew  K.
Walker, produced by Arnold Kopelson, Phyllis Carlyle, directed by David
Fincher.
"Seven" is one of the best mystery movies I've ever seen. It's extremely
intriguing and suspenseful, but it's also quite fun. It's a serial killer
mystery, but you don't care so much about making the killer pay as much as
hope they just catch the killer.
The story is a cops-on-the-trail-of-serial-killer mystery. Someone is
murdering people who are offenders of "The Seven Deadly Sins." A fat man
(gluttony) was forced to eat himself to death, a lawyer (greed) is
slaughtered by his own rich possessions... I could go on but revealing any
more would give away entirely too much.
What makes this film so unique is the characterization of the "good guys"
which makes the unseen villain seem so vile. Brad Pitt stars is quite
excellent as Detective David Mills, the cocky rookie. However, Morgan Freeman
is even better as Detective William Sommerset, the wise veteran on the verge
of retirement (and he doesn't get killed by the end). There is a great sense
of camaraderie here which often provides for a breath of comic relief. This
is impressive because the mood is so tense, and the fact that it can be
down-played as well as it is here (let alone at all) is quite an
accomplishment.
The setting takes place in present day New York City but the art direction
is able to give the city a feeling of the evil, scary place many believe it
to be. The production design is superb, in the spirit of "Batman" and "The
Crow," this film embodies the Gothic mood. The way the words fade in and out,
along with the freaky Nine Inch Nails music really add a lot to the story on
a subconscious level - even the credits are scary!
The killer's victims have no connections at all, and thus Mills and
Sommerset don't have much to go on to solve the case. They can only wait for
the next murder to occur which makes for tremendous suspense. We become just
as tense and worried as the detectives because of this thick atmosphere of
the unknown. Not that many films have such an interesting and intriguing
screenplay as this. 
The only problem I had with the film is the way in which Mills and Sommerset
are lead to a suspect. Let's just say it seems a little too "mystery movie,"
or too convenient in other words. When they are led to a suspect by the name
of  John Doe, a terrific chase scene ensues. This is a typical thrilling
element, but it works perfectly here because of the process of the story. 
If anything, this film is the epitome of twist endings. I don't have to tell
you Mills and Sommerset finally catch the criminal, but the way in which this
happens is surprising. There is a scene of intriguing philosophy between the
killer and the detectives, and even though he's obviously insane, his
charisma makes for some good points. What's even more surprising is the last
few scenes themselves as the suspense comes to a terrific climax as the
film's resolution comes down to a question of what justice really is.
"Seven" is not just a film about crime, but about the evil within man. John
Doe felt he was doing society a favor by ridding it of "scum." But as
justified as he makes himself seem, we must never be tempted by such twisted
ideals of justice.
Please visit Chad'z Movie Page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz
E-mail: ChadPolenz@aol.com

Title
Review for American Pie (1999)
American Pie
Chad'z rating: ***1/2 (out of 4 = very good)
1999, R, 100 minutes [1 hour, 40 minutes]
[comedy]
Starring: Jason Biggs (Jim), Chris Klien (Oz), Thomas Ian Nicholas (Kevin), 
Eddie Kaye Thomas (Finch); written by Adam Herz; produced by Chris Moore, 
Craig Perry, Chris Weitz, Warren Zide; directed by Paul Weitz.
Seen July 15, 1999 at 7:50 p.m. at Crossgates Cinema 18 (Guilderland, NY), 
theater #14, by myself for free using my Hoyts season pass. [Theater rating: 
***: good sound, picture and seats]
    Dammit. It's been over two weeks since I saw `American Pie' (and almost a 
month since it was actually released) and I'm just now sitting down to write 
this review. In `filmcriticworld' - to let a review go a fews days later than 
the date the film was released is an eternity. 
Anyway, I'd been thinking long and hard about how to review this film and 
it became clear to me after a while that it would be a difficult review to 
write. If you've been following my reviews this summer you'll notice I've 
been experimenting with style and I guess this would be another good test 
case. 
So, I dedicate this review to one of my best friends, Matt Perreault, who 
I've known since sixth grade and have been able to talk to and relate to on 
just about any and all subject matters. The problem is the guy is 200 miles 
away in Boston and I haven't seen or talked to him in a while despite 
repeated phone calls and e-mails. Maybe this review - a hypothetical 
conversation Matt and I might have about this film - will get him to 
respond...
CHAD: What's up?
MATT: Nothing. What're you doing?
C: I'm trying to figure out how to write my review of `American Pie.'
M: I didn't see it, is it good? What's it about?
C: Yeah, it's really good. It's got like everything in it. It's like raunchy 
in some parts and sweet in others and throughout the whole thing you get that 
feeling that the dudes that made the movie grew up on the same movies and TV 
shows that we liked. I sensed a strong John Hughes inspiration here because 
they show teenage kids for what they really are and what they really act 
like. They're not just a bunch of sex-crazed maniacs.
M: That's what the commercials and the previews make it look like. They make 
it look like some kind of `Porky's' or something for the 90s.
C: Well, actually, there is that kind of sleazy feeling during some parts. 
Some of it looks like they're making the movie purposely for horny teenage 
boys cuz of all the sexual innuedo, but it's like, REALISTIC sexual innuedo. 
The guys in this movie - they're actually realistic teenagers. I mean, 
they're all in their senior year and they make a pact to lose their virginity 
by graduation. That's pretty original right there because I think Hollywood 
assumes all kids lose their viriginity at like age 14 or something. It 
actually acknowledges the fact that, hey, it's pretty fricking hard to get 
sex when you're a kid. But the actual plot is about them trying to keep this 
pact and like encourage the other guy and by the end when it doesn't look 
like they're going to keep the pact they all start to blame each other for 
not keeping the pact.
M: Sounds like that `Seinfeld' where Jerry and George made a pact to get 
married and then George got pissed that Jerry reneged on it.
C: Yeah it's kinda like that. There's some other subtle Seinfeldian things 
going on here, but it's more geared towards teens so it doesn't try to be too 
super highbrow comedy about little things. I mean, it's a sex comedy.
M: Yeah. So what's the plot about?
C: Well it's mostly about this kid Jim (Biggs) who's in this clique that's 
not at the highest social rung on the high school clique ladder, but it's 
pretty high up. Jim's kind of a quiet, sorta goofy guy. He's a lot like one 
of those characters you'd see on a sitcom, especially like something on one 
of those ABC TGIF shows or something... only in an R-rated movie.
M: Okay.
C: Anyway, so Jim has three best friends: Kevin (Nicholas), Oz (Klein) and 
Finch (Thomas) who also fit that kind of sitcom-esque, 
sorta-cliche/sorta-real kind of personality. Like Kevin is the sensitive guy 
in a long-term relationship with this hot chick named Vickie (Tara Reid, 
who's a helluva lot different than the chick she played in `The Big 
Lebowski'). He keeps thinking they're gonna do it because they've been going 
out for a few months and it's just like the law of dating ya know? Him and Oz 
make fun of Jim because he's never been to third base and that's where that 
pie joke comes from (and the title of the movie). There's a good joke when 
they tell him that and he says `McDonald's or homemade?'
M: 
C: And that Finch guy is like this really dorky guy who's just kind of 
friends with these other guys. He's like if Niles Crane (from TV's `Frasier') 
was a kid in the 90s. He drinks mocha chino at school and he refuses to use 
the school's bathrooms (oh they exploit that for a Faralley-brothers type gag 
that's really funny even though you're totally grossed out and winching the 
whole time). After they all make the pact he suddenly gets this reputation 
for being like a total stud and that he has like, uh.. ya know... like... a 
big schlong.
M: How does that happen?
C: Well, that's one of the movie's many surprises. It's better to find out 
for yourself.
M: So what happens, is it like they all try to seduce chicks or something?
C: Sort of. I mean, Kevin already has a girlfriend to work on and Oz, who's 
like a total jock and sort of a mimbo, a lot like the character Chris Klien 
played in `Election,' well he decides to fake being really sensitive and he 
joins a singing group to try to start with a clean slate so the girls there 
won't know what he's really like. And then it turns out that he's not just 
faking being sensitive and sweet and stuff, he actually is. There's this 
really good subplot where he meets this cute blonde girl who you think he's 
going to just seduce and use and all that, but they end up being a really 
good couple. They have a few fights but they have some good talks and stuff 
too. That's kind of where you notice the John Hughes-type themes and dialogue 
going on.
M: Yeah whatever happened to John Hughes? He should make more movies like 
`Breakfast Club' and `Ferris Bueller' again. All he does now is like these 
gay Disney kids' movies.
C: Yeah I know. But anyway I'm getting off track. So a lot of the movie is 
about the four guys and their quests to do it. But a lot of stuff happens 
along the way. Like there's a few scenes where Jim's dad keeps coming in and 
talking to him about sex and masturbation and stuff. It's really funny 
because the dad just says it so non-chalently and you can tell it's an 
uncomfortable subject for him. He's like `Jim, I want to talk about 
masturbation... It's like banging a tennis ball against a brick wall - which 
can be fun, but it's not a game. What you want is a partner to return the 
ball. Do you want a partner Jim?'
M:  I can't imaging having a conversation with my dad like that. Is 
there any cheesy subplots going on, like does someone get knocked up or get 
AIDS or something ?
C: No, but I think they should have delt with those issues. But then again, 
this is a mainstream comedy movie so they're going to get realistic and 
stuff. I mean, that's what the afterschool specials are for. Still, they do 
take it pretty seriously. There's this one conversation Vickie has with her 
friend and she asks if it hurts. I can't remember any movie where a girl even 
remotely hinted at the possibility that sex might not be completely 
pleasurable ya know? I talked to a lot of girls and they say it does hurt the 
first few times. I can't imagine THAT hurting.
M: So is the whole movie about sex?
C: I wouldn't say it like that. It's more like an honest coming-of-age story 
of kids in the 90s and what they think about sex. It's more about the hope 
of getting it than the act itself. There's a lot of taboo stuff going on 
during it all too, like this secret book that Kevin's brother tells him about 
which says how to give a girl oral sex where they actually enjoy it. There's 
a funny scene with that in which the chick screams out `I'm coming' and she 
doesn't mean for supper!
M:  That IS pretty raunchy, but that sounds really funny though.
C: There's a lot of other parts like that, that should be offensive and 
stuff, but they just weren't to me, like a beer cup full of semen and this 
part where this madd hot chick gets naked in Jim's bedroom and... well.. it's 
like almost porn at one point, but it's really funny. I saw it with some 
girls and I was totally surprised they didn't find that disgusting or 
offensive or anything.
M: So, it sounds like you're saying it's like a guy's comedy that girls will 
like too. And you're sure it doesn't get too sappy or corny or anything? I 
mean, it's gotta have some cheesiness if it's going to get girls to like it.
C: Yeah sorta. There's no one specific aspect I'd say is like that, but it's 
there. But it didn't bother me. I laughed a helluva lot and it's just a 
really good and a witty script and it's easy to relate to and everything. 
(8/1/99)

Title
Review for Contact (1997)
Contact
Chad'z rating: *** (out of 4 = good)
1997, PG, 150 minutes [2 hours, 30 minutes]
[science fiction/drama]
starring: Jodie Foster (Dr. Ellie Arroway), Matthew McConaughey (Palmer
Joss), Tom Skerrit (Dr. David Drumlin), James Woods (Michael Kitz), written
by Carl Sagan, Ann Druyan, James V. Hart, Michael Goldenberg, produced by
Steve Starkey, Robert Zemeckis, directed by Robert Zemeckis, based on the
novel by Carl Sagan.
There's so much going for, going against, and going on in "Contact" it's
difficult to begin critiquing it, let alone describing it. It's a grand scale
Hollywood film that tries to please everyone  with its "neutral" stance on
humanity, and theology versus science. In fact, it tries so hard to be a work
of genius philosophy it nearly collapses under its own weight. What makes it
good is the breezy, easy-to-swallow storytelling, outstanding effects and
production, and a solid array of acting. 
Zemeckis's last feature, "Forrest Gump," took the world by storm with its
story of a simple man in a complex world. Here, he uses almost the exact
opposite formula for similar themes. Our main character is Dr. Ellie Arroway
(Foster), a smart astronomer who is surrounded by high technology and the
precision of science. Her parents died when she was a child, but told her
science is the language and problem-solver of the universe and she applies
this to her own life in many ways. Most thematically, she is an atheist
because she doesn't see any scientific evidence for the existence of God.
What you believe in personally is irrelevant because Ellie's character is
developed so well you understand her rationale. 
Although the entire film is not a debate over theism, its significance is
evident and often becomes so blatant you expect to see labels on every
character and their specific dialogue. Not that this is automatically a flaw,
but wrong because it tries to present itself in such a "neutral" manner. 
Representing the perspective of theism is part-time Christian
preacher/part-time secular philosopher and author Palmer Joss (McConaughey).
The two meet early on at a government SETI where Ellie is searching for
extra-terrestrial life, but Palmer is there collecting data for a book about
how technology exploits the helpless and has caused man to become so confused
spiritually. Unlike Ellie's character, we don't get to know Palmer well
enough to sympathize with his religious convictions as its obvious his
dialogue and character are being written and directed by people who probably
don't believe what he stands for. Thankfully, he is not portrayed as a
right-wing nut.
What brings these characters and their significance together is the main
plot of the story involving an intelligent transmission from space.
Basically, aliens thought we were hot and gave us their beeper number and
directions to where the party's at - cool! But here's where the film also
starts to slip in a few ways. 1) This information is made known to the public
and the entire world freaks out and everyone suddenly belongs to a group of
one extreme or another (I doubt this would happen in reality). 2) A
mysterious character suddenly appears who answers all of the mysterious
questions such as how to decode the message and the significance of every
little detail. The film had not been so "sci-fi movie convenient" before, so
why the [first of many] cop-out[s]?
Not much happens throughout the film in terms of general plot, so what we
get is a serious of several sub-plots overlapping each other. Many supporting
characters are introduced and the script works well enough to give them all
significance within the story, even though some are clearly plugged-in for
theme. 
The film also uses modern technology to create for an almost frighteningly
realistic mood. Much like "Independence Day," "Mission: Impossible," and
"Ransom," there is a sense of technological trendiness here. Use of the
Internet and laptop computers are exaggerated to create this mood, but
sometimes the movie machine takes over and we get technological conspiracies
that really aren't plausible, let alone necessary.
The entire point of the film is the end because we know Ellie will somehow
make the trip to "the other side," but is the final payoff worth it? I didn't
find it to be as powerful as it intends to be because there isn't enough
mystery to it. Everything comes together in the ultimate ending and I guess
you might say the characters, and especially their symbolism are dealt with
poetic justice. Maybe you could see it as following the film's logical
conclusion. Or maybe it's really about free will.
"Contact" is probably one of the most enigmatic films I've ever seen. Even
if the thematic elements don't do much for you, it's still interesting to
watch because the story is told through a fluid script and an atmosphere of
total modernism. 
Please visit Chad'z Movie Page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz - over 140
new and old films reviewed in depth, not just blind ratings and quick
capsules. Also, check out The FIRST Shay Astar Web Page @
http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz/ShayAstar.html

Title
Review for Summer of Sam (1999)
Summer Of Sam
Chad'z rating: **1/2 (out of 4 = okay/average)
1999, R, 122 minutes [2 hours, 22 minutes]
[drama/thriller]
Starring: John Leguizamo (Vinny), Adrien Brody (Ritchie), Mira Sorvino 
(Dionna), Jennifer Esposito (Ruby); written by Victor Coliccho, Michael 
Imperioli, Spike Lee; produced by Jon Kilik, Spike Lee; directed by Spike Lee.
Seen July 20, 1999 at 6:10 p.m. at Crossgates Cinema 18 (Guilderland, NY), 
theater #4, by myself for free using my Hoyts season pass. [Theater rating: 
***: excellent sound and seats, picture was slightly blurry]
On the drive home from `Summer Of Sam,' I could sense a major dilemma 
going on inside my head (I wonder if the fact it was a movie about a 
psychotic serial killer had anything to do with it?). I felt as though I had 
just seen a really powerful film since I was slightly nervous, shaken, even 
nauseous, but I couldn't tell if that was good or bad.
I think trying to honestly express my thoughts and fairly review the 
film will be a real challenge for me, at least in the usual way I write 
reviews. But then I remembered Roger Ebert's review of `The Hudsucker Proxy' 
in which the entire review was written as a dialogue between an angel and a 
devil pointing out the good and bad things with the result being a compromise 
between four stars and none. I feel the same way about this film, although 
I'll give it **1/2 which is, what I consider, my `neutral' rating or `your 
call' rating (which it is if you consider my rating scales goes: 0, *, **, 
**1/2, ***, ***1/2, and ****. Ebert's verdict was ** for `Hudsucker,' which 
means the devil ultimately won).
And so, to pay homage to one of my inspirations, I'll compose this 
review in a similar matter except with `Optimistic Guy' and `Pessimistic 
Guy,' (I don't think an angel would like this film). But first a quick 
synopsis of the plot and whatnot*.
The film takes place in New York City during the summer of 1977 when 
the Yankees ruled baseball, young people were divided into camps of disco 
versus punk, a massive heat wave kept everyone sweating in buckets and a 
deranged maniac calling himself `Son Of Sam' scared the entire country to 
death by repeatedly blowing away couples whose only crime was sitting on a 
stoop or making out in a car. He appeared out of the shadows, blasted his 
victims with a .44 caliber handgun and just as quickly as he appeared he was 
gone, with almost no solid leads, clues or witnesses.
The actual story does not involve a police investigation into the 
killer (although a pair of detectives on the case do act as minor supporting 
characters), but instead the effect the paranoia and fear has on the 
residents of the city, especially in the Bronx where the main characters live 
and work.
OPTIMISTIC GUY: Spike Lee is really onto something here by making a movie 
about a serial killer and not making him or the authorities' attempt to hunt 
him down the focus of the film. Instead, he just tells, basically, one long 
character study to show what a challenge it must have been to just live on a 
day-to-day basis. You really get a sense of the intense heat and the overall 
uncomfortable feeling. 
PESSIMISTIC GUY: I agree that this is an interesting new take on the worn-out 
serial killer genre, but Lee goes a bit too far by making it too much of a 
character study. He obviously wants to show what it must be like living in a 
city of panic, so why concentrate the story on just a handful of main 
characters? And why make it so melodramatic in the process? All the 
characters here are difficult to figure out: Vinny (Leguizamo), the 
hairstylist gigolo who never seems happy and we can't just chalk that up to 
the paranoia aspect; Dionna (Sorvino), his wife who is too stupid to realize 
what a sleazebag he is and leave him, especially considering that she can't 
figure out how to please him sexually; Richie (Brody), an old friend of 
Vinny's who's gone punk and sometimes talks in a British accent, but you get 
the feeling he's gone punk mostly to spite the world, not because he enjoys 
it. The semi-major subplot involving his closet homosexuality and his 
relationship with his girlfriend Ruby (Esposito) is really strange. This 
should have been explored more, especially considering the mix of the 
characters - a nihilist punk rocker and his generic slutty girlfriend (what's 
her motivation for staying with him?)
OPTIMISTIC GUY: You have to remember that Chad has only seen one other Spike 
Lee film, so the feeling that this might be new territory for Lee may not be 
correct. It's true that the characters' backgrounds and emotions could have 
been sketched out more, but this clearly isn't your run-of-the-mill drama, 
it's about a significant time in history about fear of becoming a victim. 
Considering many of the event going on in the world today - school shootings, 
gang violence, suburban kids doing drugs and babies having babies, etc., it's 
a timeless allegory.
PESSIMISTIC GUY: If it's really just a human drama, why even bother showing 
what David Berkowitz must have been like at home and inside his mind while 
this was all going on? Those shots of the children's wooden blocks with 
numbers and letters don't come off as very thrilling or scary, it just seems 
like a rip-off of `Se7en' or `Taxi Driver.' In fact, there's many instances 
throughout the film where the mood will suddenly change from the dramatic to 
the surreal without a smooth transition. This is reflective of how the 
screenplay often loses track of the characters and lets them wander too far 
without justification. Towards the end they all seem to have fallen off the 
wagon, but what wagon were they on to begin with?
OPTIMISTIC GUY: If you look at many of the films released in recent years 
about the 1970s they all have that same theme of decadence; casual, 
guilt-free sex; the joy of abusing your body, etc. And they all end up with 
the same message - that there's always a price to pay. When all the 
characters do the bad things they do, they all get theirs in the end.
(Final arguments)
OPTIMISTIC GUY: It's a creative drama about some very interesting characters 
and is simultaneously a good suspense thriller. The perfomances all are 
Oscar-worthy, and I'd imagine it must have been a huge challenge for both the 
actors and the filmmakers to endure making a film of such intesnity on a 
daily basis. You'll definitely be moved, shocked and you won't be the same 
afterwards.
PESSIMISTIC GUY: Yes, but that's not what I or most people want out of their 
summer entertainment. Although there's justice in the end, the way the film 
tries to seduce you with much of its anarchic and lurid subject matter is 
just gratuitous. There's way too much sexuality thrown in, seemingly for 
shock value (for example, that orgy scene which was almost sickening), ditto 
for the wickedly-profane dialogue (been there, done that). A good edit and a 
rewrite of the script would have done wonders for the film. The cliché `Less 
is more' is so true.
In the end, we... err... `I' say `Summer Of Sam' is a flawed 
masterpiece - interpret that any way you want.
*another homage, but I think only Ted Prigge will get this reference.
---------------------------------
Please visit Chad'z 
Movie Page
 - over 230 new and old movies reviewed in-depth, not just blind ratings 
and blather capsules.
Associate member of The O.F.C.S. (Online 
Film Critics Society)

Title
Review for Saving Private Ryan (1998)
Chad'z rating: **** (out of 4 = excellent)
1998, R, 170 minutes [2 hours, 50 minutes]
starring: Tom Hanks (Captain Miller); Tom Sizemore (Sergeant Horvath), Edward
Burns (Private Reiben), Jeremy Davies (Corporal Upham); written by Robert
Rodat; produced by Ian Bryce, Mark Gordon, Gary Levinsohn; Steven Spielberg;
directed by Steven Spielberg.
Seen August 8, 1998 at 6 p.m. at Rotterdam Square Cinemas (Rotterdam, NY),
theater #6, by myself for free using my Sony/Loews critic's pass. [theater
rating: ***: good seats, sound, and picture]
        War is a topic that can't help but be glorified any way it is portrayed by
the media. Movies, documentaries, and even history books have a way of making
the darker side of humanity exciting since the most general aspects are
focused on, such as strategy, politics, and victory. It's easy to forget war,
in its most basic form, is a battle of armies out to slaughter each other.
Forgotten more easily is the fact that each soldier, no matter what his rank
or importance, is a real flesh-and-blood person and not just a number. "Saving
Private Ryan" is one of the few films that dares play up this aspect,
especially in its unapologetic, realistic delivery. It proves there's a huge
difference between battling and killing.
        The film opens with one of the most graphic, disturbing scenes in recent
memory. It's World War II, D-Day to be exact, and the U.S. military is
invading Omaha Beach where the Nazis are more than ready for them. Spielberg
uses many techniques to create for a total sense of reality. Instead of
positioned cameras, the footage here seems to have been shot by camera
operators running alongside soldiers as if they were just as scared. There is
no sense of stability, but of constant, anxious, and confusing motion, giving
us the feeling of being in the middle of the battle, and just a vulnerable as
the poor troops.
        "Poor" is a proper word to describe how pathetic and yet innocent the men
fighting are. There is little to no dialogue throughout the loud battle and no
prologue to define any characters. We don't get the feeling these are handsome
actors playing heroic roles, but that these are men about to kill and be
killed for reasons beyond their understanding. The Nazis are not portrayed as
enemies to be hated, but as people that must be destroyed because they're
there.
        In the movies, the good guys can run through a firestorm of bullets and bombs
and not get a scratch, but in reality that wouldn't happen. The men have
nothing to shield or protect them besides some metal flanks and dead bodies.
They are sitting ducks and we realize this through the perspective of the
well-secured Germans who can actually see who, what, and where they're
shooting, unlike the Americans who must fire in a general direction to avoid
getting their heads blown off.
        Perhaps the film is flawed by not providing any backstory on the war itself
and who the men really are, but that seems to be part of the theme. The film
seems to rely on the audience's sense of patriotism, that the American
military is "right" and good and that the Nazis are "inherently evil." The
battle scene eventually focuses on a group of men who have miraculously
survived and made their way close to the enemy stronghold (a whole 50-foot
progression), and begin to inflict some damage. I have to admit that once the
first glimpse of victory over the Nazis sprang up, I couldn't help but feel
some sense of joy and relief. To triumph against all odds is a cliche to be
sure, but there's nothing cliche about the graphic, detailed, atmosphere here
because it really happened.
        One of the most surprising aspects of the film is how little story
construction there is, and yet the events that take place make sense and are
interesting. The plot is practically irrelevant since the film is more
concerned with the reality of the war and the soldiers we meet. Tom Hanks
stars as Captain Miller, a relatively average man who happens to be the leader
of a platoon. He's never obsessive or any such generic, cartoonish
characteristic that might dominate a character like this. He doesn't want to
be there any more than his men, but when he is given a mission he intends to
carry it out. The mission the film is concerned with is, as the title states,
saving Private Ryan. 
        Through a series of command started by an ordinary clerical worker, it is
brought to a general's attention that three brothers from Iowa have been
killed in action and their mother will receive notices of each's death
simultaneously. When they learn a fourth brother is stationed somewhere in
Europe, they make it a top priority to have him returned safely to his mother.
It's easy to sympathize with this situation, after all, no one should have to
lose all their children at once. But finding one man in this war is, as Miller
puts it, "Like trying to find a needle in a stack of needles."
        The saving of Private Ryan isn't just a dramatic device, but a thematic one.
His salvation represents the sense of innocence the country, the world even,
was trying to convince itself it still had. When Miller's company hears of the
mission, they scoff at the idea assuming he is dead, but Miller isn't so quick
to shrug it off. He knows the only thing that can really save soldiers from
death is hope, and now he has the opportunity to make someone's sense of hope
a reality.
        The mission to find Ryan gives Miller's group a destination, but not
direction. Along the way many things happen to them, both good and bad. A few
battles are fought, not to be major accomplishments for the war, but because
they encounter German soldiers and have no other choice. The act of killing
itself becomes one of the film's major philosophical metaphors. The soldiers
don't mind killing other soldiers in blind battle, but when they come across a
lone survivor who begs them to let him go, they can barely stop themselves
from killing him in cold blood as some kind of vengeance for their losses.
        Unfortunately, death is a fact of war, and most films try to avoid it when it
comes to the main characters, but here Spielberg doesn't want us to think
these men are invincible. In fact, only a small amount of color and
personality is sketched into each man, and the performances are good enough to
make this method work. Although the characters are somewhat typical, the
actors maintain control over the material at all time. Whether they're arguing
with each other, telling stories of back home, or fighting the Germans, they
never go overboard and always seem believable. Sure, there's a zinger here and
there, but war doesn't change the fact boys will be boys. If and when one dies
we too can feel the loss, even though we hardly knew them.
        The final act brings the story full circle with another tremendous, violent
battle sequence. Private Ryan has been found, but facing four to one odds, can
the Americans defeat the Germans and keep Ryan alive? That's not a premise for
thrills, it's symbolic of everything the film has worked for. It would be
wrong to say the film has either a happy or sad ending, it ends the way it
must end.
        I remember reading a "Calvin & Hobbes" comic strip where Calvin asked his dad
something like, "Dad, how do armies of men killing each other solve problems?"
"Saving Private Ryan" is the adult version of that question.


Title
Review for Return of the Jedi (1983)
Chad'z rating: **** (out of 4 = excellent)
1983, PG, 133 minutes [2 hours, 13 minutes]
[fantasy]
starring: Mark Hamill (Luke Skywalker), Harrison Ford (Han Solo), Carrie
Fisher (Princess Leia), James Earl Jones (voice of Darth Vader), Billy Dee
Williams (Lando Calrissian), Ian McDiarmid (The Emperor), produced by Howard
Kazanjian, written by George Lucas, Lawrence Kasdan, directed by Richard
Marquand.
In "Star Wars" we got a swashbuckling tale of a few good guys against a lot
of really bad guys. In "The Empire Strikes Back" we got a great study in
character and vivid definition of the universe and the powers that be. Now
with "Return Of The Jedi" we get that innocent thrilling adventure but at the
same time a philosophical portrait of the good and evil battles within a
person and how they can be much more brutal than the Death Star.
As the story opens we once again see our favorite droids, C3-PO (Anthony
Daniels) and R2-D2 (Kenny Baker), on their way to Jabba The Hut's palace.
Here is where Han Solo's (Ford) frozen body lies, property of the gambler he
never had a chance to pay back. Jabba is a huge, worm-like creature weighing
thousands of pounds. He is disgusting to look at, but he also gives forth an
image of power as everyone seems to do his bidding.
Eventually all of the main characters end up in Jabba's palace, either
through a disguise (Princess Leia and Lando Calrissian - Fisher, Williams),
mock imprisonment (Chewbacca - Peter Mayhew), or by walking in the front door
(Luke Skywalker - Hamill). 
Luke claims to be a Jedi Knight but he seems powerless against the mighty
Jabba. The battle and escape scene out in the desert is pure swashbuckling,
as Hamill seems more like Eroll Flynn up against pirates than a Jedi Knight
fighting evil aliens. This is not one of the most original scenes in the
trilogy, but it is probably the most fun as it is all hand-to-hand combat
instead of spaceships.
Luke goes back to Degobah to complete his Jedi training with Yoda (voiced by
Frank Oz), but we learn he does not need any more, the only thing left to do
is to "confront" Darth Vader (voiced by Jones). Yoda tells Luke another
Skywalker exists, and Ben Kenobi (Alec Guinness) again appears to Luke and
elaborates further. This adds to the great mythology of The Force and the
Jedi Knights. We also know a final battle between Luke and Vader is imminent,
which adds to the metaphysical suspense.
Back at the Rebel Alliance the final assault against the Empire is about to
occur. Another Death Star has been constructed and is orbiting a forest moon
where it is protected by an energy shield. Han Solo will lead a team to
infiltrate and destroy the shield generator while Lando Calrissian will lead
the attack on the Death Star. In "Star Wars," this great feeling of uniting
together to fight the evil power didn't occur towards the end, the fact it
happens early here is fantastic because the intense excitement lasts for the
rest of the film, not just the climax.
The Emperor (McDiarmid) is the epitome of the ultimate evil character. He
hides his red eyes and wrinkled face under a dark cloak, he speaks in a
devilish tone without raising his voice, and of course he has that wicked
laugh. When Skywalker comes face to face with him, we realize it is his words
that make him so evil. He encourages Luke to act on instinct and strike him
down, but Luke knows the power of the Dark Side cannot be used against
itself.
Han Solo and Princess Leia's strike team gains victory over the Imperials
with the help of primitive, bear-like creatures called Ewoks. The Ewoks are
so cute and innocent that when they launch an attack against the Imperial
Army the irony of it all is really exciting (I almost cried!). 
What is even more moving is Darth Vader's ultimate salvation. It's amazing
the Alliance's savior would be the person they had been fighting against all
along.
Needless to say the rebels do win in the end, and the space battle is even
more detailed this time than any other scene in the trilogy, but it isn't the
most important point. "Return Of The Jedi" has once again taken us as far
away from own reality as possible to make a statement much closer to the
heart. 
Please visit Chad'z Movie Page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz

Title
Review for UHF (1989)
UHF
Chad'z rating: *** (out of 4 = good)
1989, PG-13, 97 minutes [1 hour, 37 minutes]
[comedy]
starring: "Weird Al" Yankovic (George Newman), Kevin McCarthy (R.J.
Fletcher), Michael Richards (Stanley Spadowski), David Bowe (Bob), written by
Al Yankovic, Jay Levey, produced by Gene Kirkwood, John Hyde, directed by Jay
Levey.
In the spirit of "The Naked Gun" and other such satirical movies, "UHF" is
another funny movie full of back-to-back parodies and sheer wackiness. The
only problem is sometimes you wonder why you laughed.
The film starts off with the typical buddy system. George (Yankovic) and Bob
(Bowe) are two slackers who can't get their act together and keep floating
from job to job. When George's uncle wins the deed to Channel 62, a UHF
television station, he lets George manage it because he has nothing else to
do. 
Since this a film about stupidity for the masses, Channel 62 becomes an
overnight success due to George's wacky ideas, especially when he gives
Stanley Spadowski (Richards), the station's janitor, his own TV show.
Richards is quite funny as Spadowski, a janitor who loves his mop with a
passion. When he is given his own television show the stations' ratings soar
and suddenly Channel 62 becomes the biggest station in town because of its
sheer wackiness. George brings in his friends to create their own shows like
"Wheel Of Fish," "Strip Solitaire," and "Fun With Dirt." 
Yankovic and Levey certainly have a knack for satire and zaniness, as they
do the correct thing by making everything in the film just as bizarre as
everything else. If anything, the film is just a live action cartoon in all
aspects, but a funny cartoon at that. Not only are the shows wacky, but so
are the commercials such as "Spatula City," and "Plots R Us." There's a good
sense of detail here, where as every little joke and gag have meaning and are
funny within their context.
The actual "plot" involves the efforts of R.J. Fletcher (McCarthy), the
general manager of a network affiliate, and his plans to sabotage Channel 62.
But because the film is so lighthearted, even Fletcher and his associates are
funny because of their whole "bad guy" persona is so overboard.
When George's uncle suddenly finds himself in debt he agrees to sell Channel
62 to Fletcher if George cannot come up with the money by a certain deadline.
The story from here starts to become a comedic adventure, with cliff hangers
and the like, but you can tell how it's going to turn out.
Although "UHF" is funny, it's far from a perfect film. Sometimes it becomes
more ridiculous than necessary, but at least it doesn't take itself too
seriously.
Please visit Chad'z Movie Page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz - over 140
new and old films reviewed in depth, not just blind ratings and capsules.
Also, check out The FIRST Shay Astar Web Page @
http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz/ShayAstar.html

Title
Review for Spanish Prisoner, The (1997)
Chad'z rating: **1/2 (out of 4 = OK/average)
1998, PG, 112 minutes [1 hour, 52 minutes]
Starring: Campbell Scott (Joe Ross), Rebecca Pidgeon (Susan Ricci), Steve
Martin (Jimmy Dell), Ricky Jay (George Lang), produced by Jean Doumanian,
written and directed by David Mamet.
Seen April 18, 1998 at 12 p.m. at the Ritz Bourse (Philadelphia, PA), theater
#1, with Ted Prigge for $4.50 [Theater rating: ***: good seats, sound, and
picture]
        Independent films thrive on their dialogue, storytelling, characterization
and other basic aspects while the big-budget Hollywood blockbusters use these
elements only as needed. "The Spanish Prisoner" seems to be an independent
film that tries to have it both ways, as it's a standard thriller that
attempts to substitute emotion and sympathy for special effects and production
design. 
        The basic set-up to the story is rather simple, but explaining the
significant aspects is a complicated task as many details are pushed aside to
make room for the plot. We start out somewhere in the Caribbean where we meet
our four main characters: Joe Ross (Scott), a young man who is apparently
successful, as he has just finished some kind of mathematical or chemical
formula that will change the world; Susan Ricci (Pidgeon), Joe's new personal
secretary who adores him like a 5-year-old with a large vocabulary; George
Lang (Jay), Joe's co-worker and company lawyer who plays a role in how
successful he will become; and Jimmy Dell (Martin), a wealthy-but-mysterious
businessman who serves as the film's main catalyst (and only interesting
character).
        Right from the beginning it's clear the film is establishing all the key
elements which will crop up later. The pacing is slow, tedious, and often
boring and it's not due to overwhelming detail, but to lack thereof. Almost
nothing happens in terms of plot, only scene after scene of the generic
highbrow, 5th Avenue business rhetoric. When the Jimmy Dell character is
introduced, it's through a manner which is impossible to understand at the
time, and only minor details crop up later to explain the significance to the
rest of the plot.
        Mamet has often been called a master of characterization and dialogue, yet
the entire first act seems more like a novel acted out rather than a modern
film. The performances are mediocre and conflicting because the actors are
playing caricatures, not characters (i.e. Scott as the monotone loner and
Pidgeon as the happy-go-lucky extrovert). Most importantly, we don't learn
much about Joe, nor about "The Process" he has invented and its application.
The absence of that is probably one of the film's central themes, but since it
creates for a snowball effect of flaws, it's more distracting than anything
else.
        Although the first half tends to wander with little focus, everything comes
back into play as the second half turns almost instantly into a suspenseful
thriller. What had been a subtle, almost irrelevant sub-plot involving a
conflict and cooperation between Joe and Jimmy suddenly becomes the main focal
point of the film. Jimmy had always been an enigmatic character, and when Joe
realizes he has just been completely taken advantage of and framed into a
situation impossible of escape, a fantastic case of the perfect conspiracy is
evident.
        Throughout the second and third act the plot thickens as Joe becomes
entrapped by just about everyone and everything and it's impossible to tell
who's who and what's what. The "Batman Syndrome" (where by a seemingly normal
man is transformed into a brilliant detective and stunt man) takes over, and
it doesn't work because the atmosphere isn't gripping enough to believe. The
story is so involved with itself that everything that happens seems to take
place within a reality shared by only a few characters while no one else in
the world seems to notice the insanity going on (unless it creates for
suspense) [example of the former: Joe and Susan running from police and
villains through airports and boat docks while no one seems to notice the
chaos; example of the latter: everyone in the world noticing some blood on
Joe's hands as he rides the subway, giving the impression he is about to be
"caught"].
        Even if "The Spanish Prisoner" fails to be a thrilling adventure, it still
has an original hook, that is, an independent take on a tired Hollywood
formula. It's a valiant effort to be sure, but the net result is a bit too
sensational and thus the impact isn't as strong as it could be.


Title
Review for Cable Guy, The (1996)
**1/2 (out of 4 = OK)
1996, PG-13, 97 minutes [1 hour, 37 minutes]
[comedy]
starring: Jim Carrey (Chip), Matthew Broderick (Steven), Leslie Mann (Robin),
Jack Black (Rick), produced by Andrew Licht, Jeffrey A. Mueller, Judd Apatow,
written by Lou Holtz Jr., directed by Ben Stiller.
"The Cable Guy" seems to have a schizophrenic personality. I can't tell if
it wants to be a wacky Jim Carrey flick (a la "Dumb And Dumber," "The Mask"),
or just another straight comedy. I think it tries to combine the two, and
even so, it doesn't work well. To make a comedy truly zany, every aspect to
it must be over the top, it cannot be remotely serious.
Jim Carrey may be a comic genius. Most of his humor stems from wild physical
antics, and the fact he can make it seem funny instead of stupid is quite an
accomplishment. Here he stars as Chip, a lonely cable installer who speaks
with a funny lisp. Like many of Carrey's characters, Chip is a human cartoon
of sorts: he says demented (but funny) things, and he does things no normal
person would do. In short, he has a very animated personality. Now all of
this is fine, the problem here is it doesn't keep with the rest of the film.
Matthew Broderick co-stars as Steven, a young businessmen who is on the outs
with his girlfriend and has just moved into a new apartment. Steven is a such
a normal character he seems a bit stiff, especially considering how charming
Broderick can be (i.e. "Ferris Bueller"). When Chip arrives to install the
cable, Steven doesn't seem to notice how silly Chip is, which is the film's
first major mistake. We can clearly see through Chip, it's obvious he's
deranged. Chip forms an almost homosexual passion for Steven, and when a
slight friendship starts between them, it doesn't seem to fit because they
are so different.
The first act contains good, funny gags and other Carrey routines. No story
or plot seems to be forming but it doesn't really matter... at first. By the
second act, a subplot involving Steven's efforts to win back his girlfriend Ro
bin (Mann) starts to become the focal point. But once we realize Carrey is
the only interesting (and funny) element to this movie, it seems irrelevant.
Eventually Steven finds Chip to be overbearing, and when he tries to "break
up" with him we get a slew of events that are more bizarre than funny.
The entire middle section seems non-existent. There had been no real plot
driving the story, so when it becomes a comedic version of "Fatal
Attraction," the transition is not very smooth. It's difficult to tell if
Chip's obsession with Steven is supposed to be plausible (at least for a
comedy). Initially, we were laughing at Carrey's cartoonish antics, but at
least they had a sense of innocence to them. His character becomes so twisted
the bit wears thin and isn't funny.
Comedies are supposed to be fun, but this film takes the bizarre obsession
too seriously. Weirdness can be funny, and this film does make some good use
of that, but the ending is so far out it doesn't make much sense.
I'm not sure what the point of "The Cable Guy" was. It's obviously intended
to be a disposable commercial comedy taking advantage of Carrey's
eccentricity, but the film becomes much stranger than it needs to be, and
thus the comedy suffers.
visit Chad'z Movie Page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz/index.html

Title
Review for Barton Fink (1991)
Barton Fink
*** (out of 4 = good)
1991, R, 117 minutes [1 hour, 57 minutes]
[drama/satire]
starring: John Turturro (Barton Fink), John Goodman (Charlie Meadows), John
Mahoney (W.P. Mayhew), Judy Davis (Audrey Taylor), produced by Ethan Coen,
written by Ethan and Joel Coen, directed by Joel Coen.
Sometimes the movies have a way of playing with our heads by confusing us,
not necessarily plot-wise, but mood-wise. Sometimes we can't tell what's real
and what's a dream. "Barton Fink" is a journey into that world of vertigo
where what's real seems more like a dream with constant surprises and
unexplained occurrences. It's a satire, obviously, but what is it satirical
of?
The Coen brothers are no strangers to the world of the bizarre, many of
their films are seemingly normal with very unusual twists to them. We
recognize the objects, but they become foreign to us in the way they are
presented. That fascinating sense of the surreal is what this film is all
about - usual characters in most unusual circumstances. 
We meet our main character, Barton Fink, played wonderfully by John
Turturro. He is a struggling Jewish playwright in 1940s New York who is given
rave reviews but isn't satisfied. He knows there's something out there for
him but just doesn't know what it is. When Barton is asked by a major
Hollywood studio to come out and write for them he thinks this may be his
chance to make a difference. Unfortunately, he is assigned to write a campy B
movie that has no value whatsoever. This is reflective of the society in
which it is produced; a place where only action and money matter, where
reality becomes blurred because of the isolation from the regular world. 
Barton moves into a dumpy hotel and is befriended by his next door neighbor
Charlie Meadows (Goodman), a portly insurance salesman who seems to be the
most normal and most caring person in Hollywood. Charlie's dialogue is
composed in such a way that it seems very "written," but it also enhances the
satirical mood.
Barton's problem is that he feels he is too good for everyone, but does not
realize it. He writes about the common man, yet he does not accept the notion
he is a common man. He insults Charlie to his face but does not realize that
he is doing so. The chemistry between the characters is portrayed very well
as Turturro and Goodman work off of each so well because of their
differences.
When Barton meets W.P. Mayhew (Mahoney), his favorite writer, he is shocked
that he is an an alcoholic. His mistress Audrey (Davis), probably did all his
writing, and an attraction between the two is evident. There is potential for
a typical movie affair but it is not carried out over time and in secrecy,
just a one night stand that ends in tragedy. The film had seemed rather
offbeat until this time, but suddenly it becomes almost incomprehensible.
Maybe the Coen brothers got the idea for "Barton Fink" from a dream. We are
not placed in this type of atmosphere for shock value, but for a glance
through the looking glass. 
Visit Chad'z Movie Page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz/index.html

Title
Review for Nixon (1995)
***1/2 (out of 4 = very good)
1995, R, 191 minutes [3 hours, 11 minutes]
[drama]
starring: Anthony Hopkins (Richard Nixon), Joan Allen (Pat Nixon), Paul
Sorvino (Henry Kissinger), James Woods (Bob Holland), David Hyde-Pierce (John
Dean), produced by Clayton Townsend, Oliver Stone, Andrew G. Vajna, written
by Oliver Stone, Stephen J. Rivele, Christopher Wilkinson, directed by Oliver
Stone.
"Nixon" is another epic film by Oliver Stone with a bit of a split
personality. At times it's a  touching drama of a man who had the world in
his hand and still wasn't happy. And at other times it's a commercial film of
espionage, diplomacy, and politics. The final outcome is quite moving at
times, but is held back due to strange storytelling.        
First of all, special mention must be made to Anthony Hopkins who delivers
an outstanding performance as Richard Nixon. He is able to take a complicated
story and simplify it down to one man's struggle for his own happiness. 
Nixon came from a blue collar family in California, and there are many
flashbacks to his childhood to give some idea of what made Nixon who he is.
Although his family suffered from tuberculosis, his parents were hard
working, God-fearing people who established tough morals for him. Nothing he
did seemed to impress them that much, and after his father died he didn't
seem to realize that all the work in the world cannot bring someone back. In
his adult life, especially as president, he seems to be suffering from a
terrible case of Oedipus Complex and doesn't realize it.
We'd probably like to think politicians are just like regular people but
we'd be wrong. Stone is usually able to present moods and themes in a clear
manner, but it doesn't work as well here. When Nixon and his associates
debate what to do over possible communists, it seems more like a commercial
adventure movie of sorts, involving lots of conspiracies and strategies (a la
"Clear And Present Danger").
The first two acts seemed interesting as they were pretty much told in a
straightforward manner. However, the third act turns on a dime and becomes
complicated and confusing as it dives into the Watergate scandal. I didn't
know much the before seeing this, and by the end of this film I was just as
confused about it. Still, the steps taken are entertaining and of high
quality. The only problem is its difficult to tell whether the theme is Nixon
as a person, or Nixon's personality as it effected the presidency. 
Maybe there's just a little too much Nixon to "Nixon," by the end I was all
Nixoned-out. It's like two films in one: first of his political career and
downfall, and a detailed investigation into the Watergate scandal. Perhaps
its' a little too epic, but who said being the president was easy?
please visit Chad'z Movie Page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz 

Title
Review for Batman: Mask of the Phantasm (1993)
1993, PG, 77 minutes [1 hour, 17 minutes]
starring the voices of: Kevin Conroy (Bruce Wayne/Batman), Dana Delany
(Andrea Beaumont), Mark Hamill (The Joker), Stacey Keach Jr. (Carl Beaumont,
The Phantasm), Hart Bochner (Arthur Reeves), written by Alan Burnett, Paul
Dini, Martin Pasko, Michael Reaves, produced by Benjamin Melniker, Michael
Uslan, directed by Eric Radomski, Bruce W. Timm, based on characters
appearing in DC comics, Batman created by Bob Kane.
"Batman: Mask Of The Phantasm" is a pretty exciting film that could have
been terrific if it just didn't try so hard. It's a serious, mature story
trapped in the spirit of cartoon adventure.
The immediate style, design, and animation here is overwhelming. As the
opening credits fade in and out over a computer generated animation scene,
the Gothic, art deco mood is established quickly. The film wastes no time and
getting in some action as we witness Batman (Conroy) crash a counterfeiting
scheme and single-handedly disarm a half dozen men. The lead gangster
escapes, but he is confronted in the parking garage by, what appears to be a
phantasm. This phantasm seems invincible; bullets, and even getting hit by a
car doesn't seem to stop it, and thus kills him.
This first scene, and the entire first act really held my attention. I liked
this Batman much better than those in the live action movies. He seems much
more realistic fighting "high level" criminals instead of costumed nut jobs.
The fact he uses some actual detective skills makes the film seem original
and even a bit realistic. 
The story does not follow a linear order, it constantly engages in
flashbacks to make things interesting and bit complex. Unfortunately, many
plot holes, continuity errors, and just plain corny scenes result from this
storytelling style.
Batman slowly puts the pieces together concerning the phantasm murders, but
Bruce Wayne is distracted as by the return of an old lover, Andrea Beaumont
(Delany). We get a tremendous amount of back story concerning his
relationship with Andrea and her father's involvement with the gangsters. In
fact, the back story often takes precedence over the main story, and at times
it seems both are happening at the same time. These flashback scenes also
tend to run on longer than they need to, and as the story shifted back to the
present, I sometimes forgot what the main story was about.
A gangster who thinks Batman is murdering mob bosses (and soon him), hires
The Joker (Hamill) to exterminate Batman. Mark Hamill is hilarious as the
Joker's voice, but the character's presence doesn't seem essential to this
story. This fact, along with the entire ending is a total cop-out.
There are a lot of things in "Batman: Mask Of The Phantasm" that could have
made for a great film instead of the satisfactory one it is. The actual
breakdown of the story is choppy and often distracting. I liked it for what
it was, but I didn't like it for what it was trying to be. 


Title
Review for RoboCop (1987)
1987, R, 103 minutes [1 hour, 43 minutes]
starring: Peter Weller (Officer Murphy/Robocop), Kurtwood Smith (Clarence
Boddicker), Ronny Cox (Dick Jones), Nancy Allen (Officer Anne Lewis), Miguel
Ferrer (Robert Morton), written by Edward Neumeier, Michael Miner, produced
by Arne Schmidt, directed by Paul Verhoeven.
        As long as there are people on this planet there will be two things: crime;
and an attempt to stop crime. "Robocop" exploits that notion by painting a
picture of grim future and then offers a ray of hope through its hero's
actions. Unfortunately, the film tries to maintain a level of satire through
its Gothic atmosphere, and the two moods do not work well together.
        The setting takes place in a typical futuristic Detroit where crime is so
rampant the police force is controlled by OCP - a security corporation that
develops military technology. The CEOs of this company are straight from the
cliche book. There is the old president and two vice presidents that bicker
with each other like little children. 
        The "bad" V.P., Dick Jones (Cox), has developed a huge robot that would
replace human police officers. His model, ED-209, is quite menacing through
its appearance alone. But here is where the film makes the first of many
mistakes - it doesn't seem satisfied with simple mood alone, it goes too far
to define the obvious. ED-209 talks with an evil, computer-generated voice,
and it growls like a lion. There is also the "less bad" V.P., Robert Morton
(Ferrer), who kisses up to the president and has his "Robocop" project
approved when ED-209 malfunctions (didn't see that one coming).
        A need for a heroic figure is quickly apparent here and when we meet police
officers Murphy (Weller) and Lewis (Allen), it's clear who the savior will
be. Murphy is an honest cop who has just transferred with Lewis, who is a
female cop but does not display any feminine qualities at all (which is not a
complete flaw). And as soon as they get together they are separated when
Murphy is blown to bits by a gang of criminals who are entirely too nasty
(they look like The Village People on crack, and talk and act like cartoon
villains). Murphy is pronounced legally dead and is used in Morton's Robocop
project.
        And so we get a superhero of sorts and we just can't wait for him to stop
the rampant crime spree - or at least that's what we're supposed to feel. We
get the obligatory scenes of Robocop using his high technology to stop crimes
other cops could not. But these scenes aren't as exciting as they should be.
Robocop shoots firsts and asks questions later, and he doesn't seem like some
kind of hero, more like a cyborg vigilante.
        Stories about vigilantes, or at least "superheroes" tend to have a bit of
complexity and mystery to them, but this film is virtually plotless as it
wanders between the OCP V.P.s' rivalry and Robocop's recollection of his
former life. The element of Jones' involvement with a nasty mob boss named
Clarence Boddicker (Smith) is a little too predictable. Meanwhile, Robocop
seems to take the law into his own hands.
        The ending follows the story's logical conclusion with Robocop running from
the controlled police force, almost "dying," but manages to take out the
villains anyway.
        Overall, "Robocop" is definitely interesting to watch but it seems a bit
empty. The Gothic atmosphere could have been used much better had the layer
of satire been so distracting. I saw enormous potential here and it really
disappointed me it wasn't taken advantage of. 


Title
Review for Babe (1995)
*** (out of 4 = good)
1995, PG, 92 minutes [1 hour, 32 minutes]
[comedy]
Starring: Christine Cavanaugh (voice of Babe), James Cromwell (Farmer
Hoggett) Magda Szubanski (Mrs. Hoggett), produced by George Miller, Doug
Mitchell, Bill Miller, written by George Miller, Chris Noonan, directed by
Chris Noonan, based on the novel by Dick King-Smith.
"Babe" is one of the cutest, original, and charming films I've ever seen.
How a story about farm animals could have such innocence and be so good
amazes me.
The film starts off like your typical children's story, it seems like it may
be a sappy and boring movie for adults, but surprisingly enough it isn't.
It's about an Australian pig named Babe (voiced by Cavanaugh) who was
randomly picked to be in a contest to sponsor a charity. Whoever guessed his
correct weight won the pig, and that person is our main human character
Farmer Hoggett (Cromwell).  Babe is the only pig on Hoggett's farm and we see
how the other animals consider him somewhat of an outcast. The dogs know
their place, they have an important role and are not eaten. The cat is the
family's pet and always stays inside the house - her job is to keep the
humans happy. Even the sheep and the ducks know they have duties of sorts,
but what they all are sure of is pigs have no purpose. 
Most of the story revolves around Farmer Hoggett training Babe to be a sheep
dog. Hoggett enters Babe in the annual sheep dog competition and we watch
them go through all the training and see even more interaction between the
animals. It's funny to watch the humans get so excited over the animals and
vice versa. 
The screenplay works very well, we get a definite sense of the animals'
characters, but it does not get sappy as to make us feel sorry for them. The
humans are not played as evil butchers either, we can relate to them too.
They're just trying to make a living and they eat animals for food. It's
amazing a story like this is doesn't become an anti-meat campaign nor a
simple, childish story.
"Babe" is a very cute and adorable picture. It's just a nice fairytale about
farm animals. (3/18/96) (12/11/96) (5/23/97) [see also "Gordy"]
visit Chad'z Movie Page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz/index.html

Title
Review for How the Grinch Stole Christmas (2000)
Dr. Suess' "How The Grinch Stole Christmas" 
Christmas is that one time of year where everyone, regardless of their age, 
becomes a little kid. You get caught up in the excitement of it all - the 
decorations, the music, the get-togethers and of course the presents. 
Christmas stories usually work the same way so whether you've seen something 
for the second or one hundred and second time you can still enjoy it, but 
that is unlikely to be the case for you with this year's spin on Dr. Suess's 
"How The Grinch Stole Christmas." It's a live-action version of the classic 
children's book and cartoon show, but something's missing. It's only half as 
funny as it should be and the Christmas spirit it's supposed to radiate comes 
off as more of an advertisement to a theme park. 
The only reason this "Grinch" movie was made is because of its star: Jim 
Carey as the infamous spoiler of Christmas. If Carey hadn't signed on to this 
movie would it have been made? I doubt it considering 95 percent of the 
film's gags, jokes and one-liners are directly attributed to Carey's 
zaniness, goofiness and unflinching love of potty jokes. Director Ron Howard 
and his Imagine Entertainment production company do their best to synchronize 
the outrageous antics of Carey with the children's story and the result is a 
bit of a mixed bag. 
The basic story of "The Grinch" is about a mean green monster-looking guy who 
lives alone in a cave in the mountain overlooking Whoville. The village below 
is inhabited by human-like, cartoony characters with big noses, buck teeth, 
crazy hair styles and a mindset that rivals the Munchkins from "The Wizard of 
Oz." For some reason the Grinch hates Christmas while the Who's love it and 
he attempts to sabotage their holiday to crush their spirits but his plan 
backfires when the Who's carry on with their holiday as if nothing happened. 
Stretching this premise out to a full-length feature film seems like a 
difficult task and at times Howard and Co. do struggle to get as many of 
Carey's antics on screen as possible while still sticking to the main story. 
They introduce several sub-plots such as little Cindy Lou Who's (Taylor 
Momsen) constant inquiring about who the Grinch really is and her wondering 
if Christmas has gotten too commercial. Momsen is absolutely adorable as the 
little innocent girl and of course her questions are reflective of how our 
own society has made the holiday into more of an economic indicator than a 
joyous occasion for all mankind. The problem is this theme is simply plugged 
in where necessary and never really leaves much impact with you, especially 
at the end. 
The screenplay's story is a bit different from author Theodore Geisel's 
original. This time the Who's aren't so innocent, they've made Christmas into 
a cutthroat competition and even a sleazy mayor character is thrown in. This 
makes Cindy Lou's cuteness all that much more so - but only in a technical 
sense. She's fascinated with the Grinch, she wants to meet him and befriend 
him and try to change his mind about Christmas. There's a scene where this 
actually happens and the Grinch tries to scare her away like a monster would 
to Shaggy and Scooby Doo but she doesn't buy it. Cindy Lou's affection for 
the Grinch is so bizarre it's almost sick in a pedophile way. 
Along those lines there's also a sub-plot about Martha May Whovier (Christine 
Baranski) who had a crush on the Grinch as a child and still has feelings for 
him now. Since Whovier's supposed to be the bombshell character Baranski has 
the least makeup on and looks about 99% human compared to the other Who's. 
This is a problem with this film: it's inconsistent. After meeting the Grinch 
in person you'd think Cindy Lou would know all his tricks. During that famous 
scene where the Grinch, "disguised" as Santa Claus, breaks into her house and 
she catches him stealing the Christmas tree she actually doesn't recognize 
him! This is totally unbelievable and comes off as very trite. Even the 
3-year-old boy sitting in front of me at the cinema tugged on his dad's shirt 
and wondered aloud why Cindy Lou didn't realize Santa Claus was actually the 
Grinch (the father's answer: "shhh!"). 
But I digress, I've come all this way and haven't mentioned much about Carey. 
Is he funny? Is he outrageous? Is he a convincing Grinch? I guess the answer 
to all three would be yes, but with reservations. Carey is basically playing 
his "Ace Ventura" character but toned down for children, this is a PG movie 
after all. Thus, to be outrageous he has to do a lot of yelling and spout of 
lines that are really only funny on a Saturday morning cartoon. He gets to 
say a lot lines that are in synch with pop culture now, but 5 or 10 years 
from now will be dated and that does not a classic make. It's funny on paper, 
but as an adult watching this you're just thinking: "yeah that's funny, but 
why aren't I laughing?" 
The answer might be because it's familiar and comes off as contained. C'mon 
Carey, go wild! But that would mean we'd get a PG-13 movie and Geisel's 
widow, who had the final decision over almost all aspects of this film, wouldn
't have liked that. I can understand her logic and I agree with it, which 
means Imagine Entertainment should have taken a different approach to "The 
Grinch" altogether. 
You can also read this review at: 
http://www.epinions.com/mvie-review-4B46-386CBEF-3A241B75-prod1 
And other reviews on the same topic at: http://www.epinions.com/mvie 
Check out my profile page at: http://www.epinions.com/user-chad9976 
*****
Chad'z Movie Page is back! 
In-depth reviews of nearly all mainstream films playing at your local 
cineplex. There's also reviews of a few classic films and some of your 
personal favorites.

Title
Review for Hoop Dreams (1994)
Chad'z rating: **** (out of 4 = excellent)
1994, PG-13, 176 minutes [2 hours, 56 minutes]
Produced by Frederick Marx, Steve James, Peter Gilbert, directed by Steve
James.
"Hoop Dreams" is a moving documentary about two poor black teenagers and
their struggles to succeed despite how troublesome and oppressive their lives
may be. It proves that sometimes reality can be even stranger and more brutal
than fiction. 
As the film opens, we meet two black teens living in the housing projects of
Chicago. Arthur Agee and William Gates have just been given partial and full
scholarships (respectively) to St. Joseph's High School, a private Catholic
school way out in the suburbs. The immediate atmosphere plays like so many
fictional dramatic films about life in the ghettos ("Menace II Society,"
"Juice"), but this is much more powerful in a shorter amount of time because
it is real. 
The families of the boys are portrayed in just the right manner; it is
obvious they are poor but the film does not wallow in depravity. We're not
meant to (or really allowed to) feel sorry for them, just the opposite in
fact. We know Arthur and William each have a special talent that can and will
take them places.
Freshman year at St. Joe's proves to be difficult for Arthur who only makes
the Junior Varsity team, while William dominates the Varsity squad. We meet
Coach Pingatore who would be straight out of the cliche book if this was a
fictional movie; he's middle-aged, white, has a short temper and pushes his
players to their breaking point. It is this element of internal drive that
becomes the real focal point of the film. 
Arthur and William both love the game, but since they have suddenly been
upgraded to a higher education, they find the academic work difficult. They
both seek help, but only William is able to pass and Arthur must withdraw
from St. Joe's because his tuition assistance has been cut due to his grades.
He then enrolls in the poor local public school and we see just how bad
living conditions in his environment can be.
If the same story had been told in the form of a drama I'm not sure it would
be believable. Arthur's father, who seems like a caring person, suddenly
leaves the family after 20 years and is arrested on drug charges. Meanwhile,
William injures his knee and cannot play basketball for a long time. Elements
like these would be melodramatic anywhere else, but since this is real and
these people now seem like old friends, it is suspenseful because we really
care for them.
The game of basketball itself makes the film powerful. How many times in
mainstream sports films have we seen underdog teams and/or athletes come from
behind and beat the juggernauts? The title of the film is "Hoop Dreams" not
"Hoop Reality," because they don't always win, but it is the boys' dreams
that control their lives. The filmmakers carefully incorporate games and
crucial moments, causing for suspense and excitement that works on a
metaphysical level.
What makes the film so uplifting is the fact the boys never give up hope no
matter how many bad things happen to them. Even though he does not do well
academically, Arthur is content with his situation. William is offered full
scholarships to top-ranked colleges, but if he does not get at least 18 on
the ACT, he won't be able to attend any of them.
We do get to see what happens to them after they graduate from high school,
but I'm not sure if it's relevant. On one hand, it is crucial to the ultimate
outcomes of their lives and their dreams to make it to the NBA. But on the
other hand, the film works as a powerful depiction without "resolving"
anything.
"Hoop Dreams" is probably one of the most inspirational films I've ever
seen. Just like the lives of its subjects, it debunks stereotypes and
predictability, and proves the American Dream is still alive... even where
you'd least expect to find it. 


Title
Review for Clockers (1995)
Chad'z rating; ***1/2 (out of 4 = very good)
1995, R, 129 minutes [2 hours, 9 minutes]
starring: Mekhi Phiffer (Strike), Harvey Keitel (Detective Rocco Klien),
Delroy Lindo (Rodney), John Turturro (Detective Larry Mazilli), Pee Wee Love
(Tyrone), produced by Spike Lee, Martin Scorsese, Jon Kilik, written by Spike
Lee, Richard Price (based on his novel), directed by Spike Lee.
I know a film is really successful when it makes me think and even scares me
in a way. There have been many films about urban gang life (i.e. "Menace II
Society," "Boyz-N-The Hood"), but "Clockers" is a different because not only
is it a moving and realistic, but it also incorporates a fascinating crime
story.
This story revolves around Strike (Phiffer), a small time drug dealer who
hangs out with his friends in the local park, and are constantly harassed by
the police. Surprisingly enough, Lee does not portray all the cops as racist
and mean. These police are actually concerned about stopping crime rather
than flexing their muscles.
Strike works closely with his supplier and boss of sorts, Rodney (Lindo),
who claims the night manager at one of his competitors' stores harasses his
"kids" and wants Strike to take care of him. Strike visits his older brother
at a bar across the street from the store and tells him the problem. His
brother says he can get someone to do it for him, but we never actually see
who kills the manager. We assume that it is Strike, but was it really? This
storytelling provides for a good sense of mystery, which is even more
interesting considering the genre.
The story also focuses on two homicide detectives Rocco Klien and Larry
Mazilli (Keitel and Turturro), and their investigation of the murder and of
Strike and his associates. It seems as though the film could suddenly switch
to being a straight crime story intead of a ghetto drama, but Lee and Price's
uncanny script and Lee's great direction allows for a great balance of both. 
We learn a lot about the life of Strike and where he comes from, which is
reflective of the entire inner city society. Like most of his friends he had
to do some drug dealing on the side in order to make enough money, because
working a part time job won't help much. Strike also teaches his little
brother Tyrone (Love) about how system "really works."
Klien and Mazilli somehow manage to get evidence on Rodney by plea bargining
with amatuer criminals they cathc. The storytelling does not get too much
into the legal aspects, but instead tries to show the situation as it really
would happen. The cops bend and break the rules in order to get their way,
but are not totally corrupt. Eventually the situation between Strike, Tyrone,
Klien, and Rodney comes to a boil and even more blood is shed. It's difficult
to explain, but it is not confusing to watch. 
"Clockers" is a powerful film that makes you think about the characters, the
settings, and their basis in reality. It is able to take a bleak story about
life in the ghetto and turn it into something a little bit more commercial,
but still good nevertheless. 


Title
Review for Heat (1995)
Heat
Chad'z rating: **1/2 (out of 4 = OK)
1995, R, 171 minutes [2 hours, 51 minutes]
[crime/thriller]
Starring: Al Pacino (Detective Vincent Hanna), Robert De Niro (Neil
McCauley), Val Kilmer (Chris Shiherlis), Jon Voight (Nate), produced by Art
Linson, Michael Mann, written and directed by Michael Mann.
It's a shame "Heat" is not the fantastic crime movie you'd expect it to be.
It has so much potential to be an epic and exciting  film, especially
considering the all-star cast and the basic plot. But this is where the
problem lies: the film is a bit too epic for its own good as it makes the
common mistake of trying to do too many things at the same time. 
The setting is present-day Los Angeles and the story starts off on in an
interesting way as we see a group of well organized criminals rob an armored
van, not for cash, but for stocks and bonds. But things never go according to
plan in crime films and when one of the thieves slips up, the result is three
unnecessary deaths. 
Quick on the scene is Detective Vincent Hanna (Pacino), your typical movie
'tect who is able to piece together the scene and figure out what happened.
Meanwhile, the criminals, as lead by Neil McCauley (De Niro) and Chris
Shiherlis (Kilmer), are not happy with the situation which continues to go
sour for them when the one who slipped up escapes. At this time the film
delves deeper into the technical aspects of McCauley's mob and Hanna's
investigation, but here is where the major flaws start to occur as the
storytelling becomes much too technical (even a lover of the crime genre like
me could not follow it entirely), and sub-plots involving the main
characters' personal lives are emphasized much more than necessary.
Filmmakers often use confusion as a cop-out to make a story seem epic and
more intelligent than it actually is. Mann's screenplay does this to some
extent as we continue to follow Hanna and McCauley and learn about their
plans, but it doesn't seem like anything is leading to anything else. And
this is symbolic of the film overall - even though details abound, they don't
seem to have much relevance because of a lack of a backstory. Everything
always seems to be one step ahead of comprehension, and when you do catch up
it doesn't seem to pay off.
Humanism is really the center of all crime movies, because without
well-developed and interesting characters, it's hard to sympathize with them
and become involved in the suspense. Pacino and De Niro both give good
performances but their characters seem like they're just going through the
motions. For example, Hanna and his wife and stepdaughter are experiencing a
painful time in their relationship because he's so obsessed with his job he
can't concentrate on anything else (almost the exact same situation occurs
with Shiherlis and his family). Also, McCauley meets a woman whom he falls
for immediately, but there isn't much chemistry nor much definition to their
relationship. Do I have to tell you all of these sub-plots will become
crucial elements at one time or another?
The central plot of the film has something to do with McCauley's efforts to
steal bonds and find the man whose information might be used against him.
However, this is really just a means of setting up a game of cat-and-mouse
between Hanna and McCauley on a grand scale. In retrospect, it's interesting
how common Hollywood elements like melodrama and action sequences come into
play as they do.
Although the story often seems to be missing something, it still manages to
be at least interesting throughout. Many individual scenes themselves are
quite suspenseful and intelligent, especially one involving a conversation
between Hanna and McCauley which works as a violent brawl  of words and
diction. The two know they are enemies but there is a subtle understanding
that each finds the other to be the most challenging opponent they've ever
faced. Yet each believes he is superior and warns the other not to get in his
way.
Even if "Heat" fails in some ways as a realistic, detailed crime story (the
ending proves this),  it still works in other ways as a Hollywood thriller
(the ending proves this). At times I was excited, other times I was bored,
but throughout it all I could see a much better film hidden behind the
collage that is this film. 
Please visit Chad'z Movie Page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz - over 150
new and old films reviewed in depth, not just blind ratings and quick
capsules. Also, check out The FIRST Shay Astar Web Page @
http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz/ShayAstar.html

Title
Review for Star Wars (1977)
Star Wars
Chad'z rating: **** (out of 4 = excellent)
1977, PG, 121 minutes [2 hours, 1 minute]
[fantasy]
starring: Mark Hamill (Luke Skywalker), Harrison Ford (Han Solo), Carrie
Fisher (Princess Leia), Alec Guinness (Obi-Wan "Ben" Kenobi), James Earl
Jones (voice of Darth Vader), produced by Gary Kurtz, written and directed by
George Lucas.
        The basic purpose of all forms of entertainment, especially fiction, is
escapism. If ever there was a film that fulfilled that need for escapism,
"Star Wars" is it. All stories must establish and make real the atmosphere in
which they take place, but this movie doesn't just establish an overall
setting, it creates an entire universe! The battle between good and evil is
the basic premise, but because it takes place in an completely different
reality, it is unlike any story ever told before.
        As the story opens, we watch a small spaceship be taken over by a much
larger one. We learn this small ship is part of a rebellion against an evil,
oppressive government. When the evil leader Darth Vader (voiced by Jones)
appears, we learn something about secret plans a cute princess named Leia
(Fisher) has stolen. The mood is then set and you can tell a grand adventure
is going to take place. 
        Just before her ship was captured, Leia hid the plans in the memory banks of
R2-D2 (Kenny Baker) and C3-PO (Anthony Daniels), two "droids" (robots) who
escape the rebel ship and crash-land on a desert planet. They are later
captured and sold to a farmer and his nephew Luke (Hamill).
        Luke Skywalker is a young man who, from his presence alone, represents some
kind of salvation or freedom. This is proved true during an encounter Luke
has with an old man named Obi-Wan "Ben" Kenobi (Guinness). We learn more
about his father - he was an important person in the rebellion, and he, like
Ben, were mystical masters of "The Force." The Force is an invisible energy
field that binds the universe and those that can expand their mind and can
use it to become powerful Jedi Knights. This element is probably the most
significant and original aspect to the film, as it resembles Zen philosophy
but takes it one step further and adds a supernatural power to it. This makes
the film even more interesting because it seems somewhat secretive. Ben
encourages Luke to learn the ways of The Force as he could be (and will be) a
powerful warrior against Vader's tyranny.
        The first half moves slowly as it takes the time to establish and define
many details. We witness the power of the Galactic Empire when its primary
space station, the Death Star, destroys a planet. Meanwhile, Luke and Ben,
along with their escorts and new friends Han Solo (Ford) and Chewbacca (Peter
Mayhew), find themselves in a real jam. En route to return the droids to the
rebels, they are captured by the Death Star's tractor beam. Harrison Ford
steals the show as the cocky space smuggler Solo, and we also get great
camaraderie between him and Luke.
        As if the grand adventure had not been potent and fluid enough, it becomes
the definition of excitement when Luke, Han, and Chewie attempt to rescue the
princess. Much action ensues as the heroes attempt to escape and save the
princess, but it doesn't always seem as if they're going to succeed - now
that's what makes for good suspense.
        Perhaps one of the greatest moments in movie history is the entire third act
of the film. When the rebels prepare to attack the Death Star it is not just
an adventurous battle, but a symbol of the powers of good versus evil.
Lucas's script builds the tension dramatically, his direction, along with the
outstanding special effects, work together so perfectly it doesn't seem like
a movie but a journey to a place where the events are actually happening. 
        In retrospect, "Star Wars" is a pretty simple story of adventure, but it
never presents itself in such a manner. Everything about this movie is
perfect: the story is detailed but not confusing; the characters are well
defined; the actors all deliver outstanding performances; and the final
payoff gives one a sensation that is almost undescribable. 
Please visit Chad'z Movie Page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz

Title
Review for There's Something About Mary (1998)
1998, R, 118 minutes [1 hour, 58 minutes]
starring: Ben Stiller (Ted Stroehem), Cameron Diaz (Mary Jensen-Matthews),
 Matt Dillon (Pat Healy), Lee Evans (Tucker); written by Ed Decter, John J.
 Strauss, Peter Farrelly, Bobby Farrelly; Michael Steinberg, Bradley
 Thomas, Charles B. Wessler, Frank Beddor; directed by Peter and Bobby
 Farrelly.
Seen July 25, 1998 at 2 p.m. at Rotterdam Square Cinemas, theater #1, with
 Chris Wessell for free using my Loews/Sony critic's pass. [Theater rating:
 ***: good picture, sound, and seats]
If there's any genre that could use improvement, the lowbrow screwball comedy
 is it. One does not tend to associate such films with authentic romance,
 intricate plotting, and witty scripting, which are all qualities possessed by
 "There's Something About Mary" that make it a cut above the rest. There's an
 over-all sense of moderation here to make the jokes all the more funnier,
 especially considering how questionable the level of taste is.
The film starts out with a flashback to the mid 1980s, in the suburbs of
 Rhode Island where all comedies involving high school flashbacks might take
 place. The teens all appear to be in their 20s, but it keeps with the
 nostalgic, satirical atmosphere. We're quickly introduced to our main
 characters, Ted (Stiller), a dorky loser who inadvertantly charms the new foxy
 girl Mary (Diaz), after standing up for her retarded brother in a scene so
 generic it's original in its unapologetic approach.
Initially, the film is a little slow to demonstrate its comedic power. The
 atmosphere is rather sitcom-esque, but once the first bout of zaniness is
 unleashed, it's clear this is not going to be zinger-oriented comedy.
The promotions hint at the first major joke and plot device, which involves
 Ted having a painful accident with his zipper. To elaborate on the set-up of
 this joke would be an injustice to the film, but the way this gag is set up
 and the ultimate, hilarious delivery it provides goes to show how such a crude
 joke can be stretched out without snapping. 
Ted's injury itself is funny, but the way the other characters react to it is
 the key. Penis jokes are pretty much the lowest of the lowbrow, but the film
 works in such a way as to let the viewer decide how gross the gag is (although
 it's still funny no matter how you see it).
Eventually a plot unfolds involving Ted's modern-day search for Mary. Through
 a series of connections he is put in touch with Pat Healy (Dillon), a slow-
 witted creepy character who fits in perfectly in such a screwball comedy.
 Healy tracks down Mary, who is now an orthopedic surgeon living in Florida,
 still foxy as ever, and still yearning for true love. It's no surprise Healy
 is attracted to her and proceeds to lie to Ted to discourage him from pursuing
 her. Using a bag of tricks James Bond might have thrown away, Healy learns
 everything about Mary. The conversations he is allowed to hear might seem a
 little too convenient to the plot, but the set-ups are funny and interesting
 enough to make them pay off. As Healy spies on Mary, we too feel the sense of
 voyeurism, which of course makes for many jokes and gags, but is something a
 film like this wouldn't usually inspire.
And it is this kind of surprising, subtle charm that gives the film merit.
 It's not meant to be any kind of achievement in film making, but just a good
 comedy which is becoming increasingly difficult to do. It takes the time to
 sketch out the characters - to provide motivation, backstory, and thematic
 elements. None of this is really necessary, as the film could have easily been
 more concentrated on the gags, but the fact it's here at all shows a level of
 maturity. Maturity in the midst of jokes involving slapstick, bodily functions
 and fluids, stupidity, and gross sight gags, but maturity nevertheless.
The entire middle hour can be used to illustrate this concept, as it's not
 just a series of jokes to string together a plot, but a story that constantly
 unfolds new layers without becoming confusing or predictable. New characters
 and minor sub-plots are introduced into the fray as natural transitions of the
 story. For example, another possible suitor for Mary named Tucker (Evans), is
 casually introduced as a supporting character. Gradually we learn he is not
 what he seems, as he too has been victimized by Mary's charm and beauty and
 will stop at nothing to gain the same affection both Ted and Pat Healy are
 striving for. More background material is lain out to give the plot some
 semblance of complexity. The gags and one-liners are plugged in at all the
 right points, but they all push the story just that much further. 
Of course the film does get a little sidetracked for the really bizarre
 elements of the comedy. The Farrelly brothers have been known to push the
 envelope, but where as most do so for pure shock value, theirs seem to be
 natural progressions of the story. Somehow an elaborate gag involving
 masturbation provides for the slightest, idiosyncratic insight to the male
 mind. The same can be said for conversations about meat products on sticks and
 cones, or why movies like "Harold And Maude" aren't made anymore. Taken out of
 context this type of comedy might seem typical, but inside the film they work
 well.
Wrapping up zany comedies such as this usually involve a lot of cop-outs,
 sudden revelations, wild action, and predictable endings, and although some of
 these things are present here, the process of putting them together continues
 to highlight the film's subtle hook. As is most of the film, it's generic and
 off-the-wall, and yet funny and charming.
My only major grievance with "There's Something About Mary" might be the fact
 it's not as funny as it could have been, but that's because there's a sense of
 continuity and thoroughness here - something a lot of other movies could take
 a cue from.


Title
Review for Jui kuen II (1994)
How much martial arts fighting can you take? How much kung fu fighting can a 
movie have and still have a story? How many men can the world's greatest 
combatant take on? How many impossible situations can a hero survive through 
before your suspension of disbelief is gone? Those are the questions "The 
Legend of Drunken Master" poses - and your answer to the last question is how 
much you will like or dislike this movie. 
A lot of critics who have reviewed this film don't discuss much of the story 
since this a Jackie Chan movie and the choreography of the stunts and 
fighting are the focus of the movie. Still, I think it's worth mentioning 
because as far as cheesy martial arts movies go, this one has a pretty 
intricate story that is both antagonistic of the action as well as reflective 
of it. For a movie that is about 2/3rds fighting there's enough background 
detail to fit into one normal movie. 
The setting is a Chinese city in the 1930's or so. Jackie Chan plays the 
eldest son of a doctor and as the film opens he figures out a way to smuggle 
ginseng onto a train so that they don't have to pay taxes on it. Chan's 
character is a mischievous lil' devil and his ideas tend to do more harm than 
good. Soon he finds himself fighting with an old man he doesn't know and when 
he returns home he has to find a substitute for the ginseng because he lost 
it to the old man. His father is a pretty over-bearing, strict conservative 
guy who never seems to be in a good mood. Chan's best known for his physical 
action but the script here puts him in many situations where he must run all 
over the place in order to not get in trouble. It's lowbrow and slapstick, 
but it's in good humor so it's passable. 
The story itself is kind of fuzzy. It has something to do with British 
Ambassadors smuggling out ancient Chinese artifacts with the help of some 
crooked executives at an iron mill. There's an entire story running virtually 
simultaneously as Chan's story about workers in the mill who are treated like 
slaves by these nasty guys. You know they're going to get their cumuppence in 
the end. 
But how does the movie breakdown this process? Only average at best I'd say. 
The screenplay seems to be written backwards with the story existing as the 
glue between the fight scenes. It's exhausting after a while because the 
action keeps going and going. There's no breaks for some drama or character 
development - all this crops up as things roll along. It's like someone 
telling you a story while you're walking to your car and once you start to 
drive away they run alongside to finish the story. By the time the third act 
rolls around the plausible story seems to have been long forgotten about but 
the action continues to build and build. The last act is all fight scenes 
that look like background visuals in a video game and not the exciting 
showdowns you're expecting. 
The final 20 minutes are made up of one fight sequence between Chan and the 
head honcho of the evil executives. It's probably the most physically 
demanding fight and carefully choreographed action you can expect out of 
human beings. Chan and his nemesis pretty much get their clock cleaned by 
each other (including being thrown into a pit of hot coals and breathing fire 
on each other). It's almost disturbing and far too serious for what had 
started out as such a high spirited movie. 
So how much kung fu fighting CAN you handle? "The Legend of Drunken Master" 
shows that even those not easily amused by martial arts can still appreciate 
the work and dedication Chan and his cronies have to their craft. They just 
need to find a way to make a really good movie out of it. 
------------------------------------------------------------------------ 
You can also read this review at: 
http://www.epinions.com/mvie-review-2FB-30625B16-3A15EADA-prod3 
And other reviews on the same topic at: http://www.epinions.com/mvie 
Check out my profile page at: http://www.epinions.com/user-chad9976 
*****
Chad'z Movie Page is back! 
In-depth reviews of nearly all mainstream films playing at your local 
cineplex. There's also reviews of a few classic films and some of your 
personal favorites.

Title
Review for Sense and Sensibility (1995)
Chad'z rating: **1/2 (out of 4 = OK)
1995, PG, 136 minutes [2 hours, 16 minutes]
[drama]
Starring: Emma Thompson (Elinor), Kate Winsley (Marianne), Alan Rickman
(Colonel Brandon), Hugh Grant (Edward Ferreras), Greg Wise (Willoughby),
produced by Lindsay Doran, written by Emma Thompson, directed by Ang Lee,
based on the novel by Jane Austen.
I don't understand why a film made with a lot of class, and set in
historical time settings are considered so great (or at least present
themselves as such). "Sense & Sensibility" is another one of those films, but
it's not that it's bad, it's just a soap operas set in a different time
period, and a boring one at that.
This is the story of the Dashwoods, a family of women living in England
sometime in the 18th or 19th century. They are an "upstanding" family that
comes from a wealthy heritage. Although this is past the era of arranged
marriages, the people here don't exactly marry out of love. It's as if every
person is a robot going through the motions and can't really express what
they feel. The dialogue is dry and almost unrealistic. They do not speak in
Shakespeare-like speech, but the dialogue has an extremely highbrow,
snobbish, elegant tone to it.
Emma Thompson stars as Elinor Dashwood, the oldest of three daughters who
live with their widowed mother. They don't really have occupations because
they inherited a fortune, but many things happen to them because of this.
Elinor meets a handsome gentleman named Edward Ferreras (Hugh Grant) who she
is drawn to immediately and gets along with well. Basically, it isn't any
different from romance stories we see today, and it's a shame it does not
become the focal point of the film because it was quite interesting. 
The middle daughter, Marianne (Winsley), is attractive and the perfect age
for marriage. No wonder she meets Colonel Brandon (Rickman), but is even more
attracted to the rebellious Willoughby (Wise) who comes to her rescue when
she sprains her ankle while frolicking in the meadows (literally). Marianne
later finds out Willoughby is quite a coward (now there's a shock). In fact,
most of the events are even more formulated than this. 
Despite all these romantic elements and storylines, there really isn't any
one plot to the film. It is just the story of a close-knit family of women
who care for each other and must somehow make ends meet in this rigid
society. Just when it seems that one of them has fallen in love something
comes up and their lover is gone, or some other kind of tragedy ensues. We've
seen all of these characters before, and they are not any more interesting or
original here. 
 I have to give "Sense & Sensibility" credit though. It is not formulated
for the sake of dramatics and sappiness, it is true to itself. This should
make for some depth, but it doesn't work well here. Everything is too boring
and slowly paced to maintain interest. 
Please visit Chad'z Movie Page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz
E-mail: ChadPolenz@aol.com

Title
Review for Nutty Professor, The (1996)
**1/2 (out of 4 = OK)
1996, PG-13, 95 minutes [1 hour, 35 minutes]
[comedy]
starring: Eddie Murphy (Prof. Sherman Klump, Buddy Love, the entire Klump
family), Jada Pinkett (Clara Purty), Larry Miller (Dean Richmond), written by
David Sheffield, Barry W. Blaustein, Tom Shadyac, Steve Odekerk, produced by
Brian Grazer, Russell Simmons, directed by Tom Shadyac.
If "The Nutty Professor" is Eddie Murphy's attempt at a "comeback" it's not
a very good one. The film starts off with cartoonish innocence to it, but
eventually it becomes a typical, raunchy Murphy flick just slightly toned
down to appeal to a wider audience. 
The story starts off in a lighthearted manner as we meet Sherman Klump
(Murphy), 400-pound chemistry professor whose obesity keeps getting him in
trouble. Klump is the typical, lonely-but-lovable fat man who can't help but
feel sorry for himself. He tries to exercise and diet, but it just doesn't
work. 
The jokes and the atmosphere revolving around such an easy target seem like
just that: easy jokes and gags that can be funny, be could be even funnier
had they some originality to them. The first such example of this is a
somewhat funny scene involving thousands of hamsters running all over the
college grounds (that escaped due to Klump's massive bulk bumping into
everything). However, this immediate cartoony humor is symbolic of how the
film works as a whole.
And what's a comedy without a beautiful woman? Jada Pinkett co-stars as
Clara Purty, a new chemistry teacher who somehow finds herself drawn to
Klump, and even agrees to go out with him. Let's see... we have a beautiful
woman with a fat man, and they go to a comedy club... the story and the jokes
essentially write themselves from here.
Klump can't take it anymore and concocts a formula that causes him to drop
250 pounds in a few seconds. But when his size changes, so does his
personality, that of the extremely vain, but smooth Buddy Love.
Unfortunately, Love's charm wears out quickly and the film starts to return
to Murphy's vulgar roots. We get sit-com-esque scenes of Love and Purty
arguing with each other even as he seduces her. Then zany scenes as Love
proceeds to become a wiseass who cracks on every person he sees, and even
gets into a fist fight (that's not funny!). I found myself somewhat laughing
at these parts, but I felt like I've seen it all before. The scenes with
Klump had an innocent charm I hadn't experienced in a while, and just as it
started to grow on me the entire film changed and became just another
screwball comedy.
At times the film can be quite gross and offensive to say the least. In
fact, isn't its entire premise a little too politically incorrect for the
times? Fat jokes are funny in passing, so having an entire film revolve
around them is not. Consider the scenes in which Murphy plays every member of
the extremely obese Klump family. All we get is a family arguing with each
other and having farting contests. I laughed at the time, but in retrospect
this type of comedy is pandering the lowest common denominator and who likes
to be pandered to?
Most of the plot of the film involves Klump's struggle to control his
personalities and not get fired and Purty in the process. The battle between
the personalities is what creates for most of the jokes, but the formula
repeats itself often. It all depends on how much of it you can take.
"The Nutty Professor" is pretty funny at times, but is just too contrived to
be taken seriously. The comedy relies a little too much on special effects
and makeup instead of zany situations and dialogue.
[Note: I highly question the PG-13 rating. There is little sex or violence
in this film but there is a great deal of profanity. Not vulgar profanity,
but just disgusting, lowbrow dialogue which proves this is really an R-rated
Murphy flick in disguise.]
please visit Chad'z Movie page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz 

Title
Review for Singles (1992)
Singles
Chad'z rating: *** (out of 4 = good)
1992, PG-13, 100 minutes [1 hour, 40 minutes]
[romantic comedy]
starring: Campbell Scott (Steve), Kyra Sedgwick (Linda), Bridget Fonda
(Janet), Matt Dillon (Cliff), produced by Cameron Crowe, Richard Hashimoto,
written and directed by Cameron Crowe.
The problem with dating is that it can be great for some people, but torture
for others. It's hard to meet someone that's both good looking and genuinely
interesting, and "Singles" is a good, funny film that plays up the anxiety of
this dilemma.
First there is Steve and Linda (Campbell, Sedgwick), who meet cute and are
attracted to each other, but must go through the typical flirting games. The
way this is shown is both typical and original: typical because scenes like
these happen all the time, but original in the way it is portrayed here with
the actual flirting games. You really believe these are two, actual people
because they don't have perfect chemistry, but we can tell there's potential.
There are other characters with problems like Steve and Linda's, but the
film does not become a gratuitous mess of whining and complaining, instead
it's a funny, romantic, character study. Janet (Fonda) is a waitress who
dates a struggling rock star named Cliff (Dillon). Their problem is
commitment: Cliff doesn't want to commit to one woman, although Janet has
essentially decided they are, in fact, a couple. She even goes as far to
visit a plastic surgeon to get breast implants to save the relationship, but
eventually realizes it's the little things that count. Cliff's not worth the
trouble... or is he?
Although we don't get to know the characters as well as we could, it's hard
not to care about them. Steve and Linda's relationship becomes quite rocky at
times, but we still hope they'll stay together because we can sympathize with
their conflicts. I'm sure this film will remind everyone of a relationship
they had - you're not sure where it is going, who is the one afraid of
commitment, or who is the problem. And thankfully, we don't get sappy
apologies and predictable make-up scenes. There are no piss-off scenes or
tear-jerkers, it treats a breakup in a more believable way than most movies
of the sort.
The only problem I had was the fact the film seemed to have an identity
crisis: Is it a commercial comedy, a serious romance, or an offbeat,
light-hearted drama? Nevertheless, it is still  interesting to watch because
of its originality and sweet charm.
You could say "Singles" concludes with a happy ending, and it seems
appropriate. Crowe has done what only a few mainstream filmmakers are able to
do; tap into the mind of Generation X and portray their true feelings and
emotions in a believable way. 
Please visit Chad'z Movie Page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz
E-mail: ChadPolenz@aol.com
(C)1997 Chad Polenz

Title
Review for Cell, The (2000)
It's difficult to sell a serial killer movie these days. Audiences want 
another "Silence of the Lambs" or a "Se7en" but more often than not end up 
with scripts some second-under-sub-assistant-co-producer was using to keep 
his kitchen table sturdy. They're a way to win a box office for a weekend or 
two and usually fade away without much recognition. "The Cell" is along the 
lines of those flicks only this time there's a real effort made on part of 
the director and producers to come up with something original and shocking - 
they accomplish that but that doesn't make it a great movie. 
This film is basically your run-of-the-mill mystery thriller about cops and 
the Feds trying to track down a really sick and twisted serial killer. The 
story wastes no time with a lot of details and instead just jumps right in to 
the authorities' hunt for the madman and within two or three scenes they've 
already tracked him down. We already know who he is - a nutty loner with a 
penchant for drowning women and turning them into his own personal dolls. 
He's one of the most mentally disturbed villains I've ever seen in a movie 
(and that includes supernatural horror flicks). The guy gets off on dangling 
his own flesh from chains while watching his victims die. 
Of course for every bad guy there has to be a hero or at least a few 
wannabe/mini-heroes that add up to one almighty solver of the problem. 
Jennifer Lopez plays Catherine Deane, a child psychologist who can literally 
enter the mind of other people in a really high-tech futuristic lab that only 
exists in sci-fi movies and the like. Vince Vaughn is FBI Agent Peter Novak - 
a relatively weak character without much motivation other than the generic 
story of how a criminal walked on a technicality and he's dedicated his life 
to making sure that doesn't happen again. Somehow Novak and his crew learn of 
Deane's process and want to use it on the killer who is in a deep catatonic 
state when they catch him. There's a lot of jive about how he suffers from a 
rare form of schizophrenia and he'll never snap out of it. That sucks because 
there's one more still-living victim to be found and she'll die if they can't 
find out where she is. Put two and two together and you've suddenly got a 
journey into the mind of a madman on the slight chance they might be able to 
reach his logical side for a moment to discover the girl's location. 
Now that that's said and done we can get to what the REAL point of the film 
is - the dream sequences. Actually it isn't so much a dream as it is an 
exploration of the subconscious. The human mind is a strange and fascinating 
thing we'll never be able to understand fully, which means if you're going to 
make a movie about the inside of a killer's mind it's a license to go hog 
wild. At least "The Cell" succeeds on this level. For large bulks of time 
it's basically a filmed acid trip - an animated M.C. Escher or Salvidor Dalî 
painting. It's sci-fi, horror, fantasy and drama all mixed into one. There's 
a lot of disturbing, creepy images that go beyond S&M and are just plain 
psychotic. It's shocking and it's not - shocking because the art direction 
and production design are so meticulous in detail to convey such an 
atmosphere that would and should be terrifying if it didn't seem like such a 
cliche horror movie set. We see what made the killer who and what he is and 
we're supposed to feel sorry for him. 
What keeps the film from being great is that this is pretty much all it has 
going for it. There's virtually no characterization and the screenplay is 
pretty mediocre. How the mind transferring process works isn't explained (and 
should be because the reality of the film is the same as our own, it's not 
like the reality from "The Crow" or something). Lopez's character doesn't 
seem like a psychology professional at all, just a cartoony heroine. Vaughn's 
character at least has some built-in motivation due to the fact he's an FBI 
agent and the case is personal to him (has there ever been a movie where the 
FBI agent didn't take the case personally?). All the supporting characters 
are simply pawns with no apparent free will of their own - they just do 
whatever Lopez and Vaughn tell them to. 
Their purpose of going into the killer's mind is to find the girl's location 
- they don't learn that directly. Instead, a symbol in his mind points out 
something to the detectives and starts a chain reaction. Had they done better 
police work to begin with the whole mind-meld thing wouldn't have been 
necessary in the first place (but then the film would only be about 10 
minutes long). 
Although "The Cell" has something of an original plot and direction going for 
it, the screenplay is too weak and cannot support it. There's a lot of 
interesting stuff to look at here but it's mostly gratuitous art direction. 
Chad'z Movie Page is back 
after heavy renovation. Reviews of ALL mainstream movies playing today! Surf 
on over to my web page today and take the poll on which is the better way to 
rate movies.

Title
Review for Hunt for Red October, The (1990)
***1/2 (out of 4 = very good)
1989, PG, 134 minutes [2 hours, 14 minutes]
[thriller]
starring: Sean Connery (Captain Marko Ramius), Alec Baldwin (Jack Ryan),
Scott Glenn (Captain Bart Mancuso), Sam Neill (Vucily Borodin), written by
Larry Ferguson, Donald Stewart, produced by Mace Neufeld, directed by John
McTiernan, based on the novel by Tom Clancy.
"The Hunt For Red October" is a very technical, almost mathematical story
about the modern cold war, and amazingly it is more exciting and suspenseful
than most movies of the genre because it never sensationalizes. This is one
of the definitive examples of what real thrillers should be, as it depends on
the viewer's intelligence to put the pieces together and doesn't become
confusing despite its complexity.
Sean Connery stars as Captain Marko Ramius, a Russian submarine commander
who is taking out their latest typhoon - The Red October. Immediately the
film surprises us, as we witness Ramius do something tragic that seems
without reason... we can only guess what his motives are and what is going to
happen.
We learn more about Ramius and his ship through a conversation between CIA
analyst Jack Ryan (Baldwin) and CIA executive Admiral Greer (James Earl
Jones). The Red October is an enigma to them, it has a new design that
frightens them because they can't figure it out. It's little things like this
that make the film great. Just the fact that everything seems so realistic,
like this might have  actually happened (or could someday) gave me goosebumps
because it is a "scary" idea. 
As Ryan further investigates, he learns the Red October could carry hundreds
of nuclear warheads and cruise through the Atlantic undetected because of its
technology. We already know something strange is happening aboard that ship -
has Ramius gone insane? Does he plan to use the ship for its intended
purpose?
Another great aspect to the film is its dialogue, as certain words are
emphasized to make the situation seem intense, especially during a meeting
with Ryan and the Joint Chiefs. Ryan believes Ramius intends to defect, which
seems crazy, but perhaps the solution is just this simple.
>From here on the film is a complicated story of a delicate situation in
times of unspoken hostility. Ryan heads into the Atlantic trying to convince
people Ramius is trying to defect, but no one believes him. At the same time
aboard the Red October there seems to be a saboteur at work, this only
complicates matters more. Sometimes it's difficult to tell if things are
happening because of the saboteur or if it's just part of Ramius's plan.
The final act concludes with a great underwater battle. Commanders from the
U.S.S. Dallas, along with Ryan, board the Red October and work together to
save themselves from another Russian typhoon. Even during all this fighting
we are never given a straight story, and this is how the film acts as a
whole. We have learned so much about naval tactics it becomes exciting even
through its technicality.
"The Hunt For Red October" is a great education in military diplomacy. I
never knew submarine warfare could be so exciting. 
please visit Chad'z Movie Page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz

Title
Review for Silence of the Lambs, The (1991)
The Silence Of The Lambs
Chad'z rating: **** (out of 4 = excellent)
1991, R, 118 minutes [1 hour, 58 minutes]
[mystery/thriller]
Starring: Jodie Foster (Clarice Starling), Anthony Hopkins (Dr. Hannibal
Lector), Scott Glenn (Jack Crawford), written by Ted Tally, produced by
Edward Saxon, Kenneth Utt, Ron Bozman, directed by Jonathan Demme, based on
the novel by Thomas Harris.
There have been a lot of mystery movies over the years, but none so grim and
calculated as "The Silence Of The Lambs." This is one of the most suspenseful
films I've ever seen, as we are placed into the investigators' shoes and try
to put the pieces together. The film also adds a strange, but powerful
element of taking us inside the mind of one psychopath to study another. The
fact such difficult storytelling devices are used as well as they are here is
a sign of genius.
Jodie Foster stars as Clarice Starling, a potential FBI agent who is about
to complete her training. Because of her impressive records she is called in
to help out on the case of serial killer known as "Buffalo Bill." Her
superior, Jack Crawford (Glenn), informs her of the facts surrounding the
case, and right from the get-go it seems like a scary and dangerous project.
But the film does not have a straight "thriller" mood to it, its hook is its
off-camera graphicness. Just hearing what Buffalo Bill has done establishes
everything. Not only does this create a great desire for justice, but it also
makes for a subtle Gothic mood.
Starling is sent to interview the infamous Dr. Hannibal Lector (Hopkins), a
psychiatrist who has a fetish for cannibalism. The way Hopkins portrays him
is very frightening because it is so believable. The atmosphere itself adds
to the drama, as we are just as afraid of him as Clarice is. Lector analyzes
the case and sends Clarice away with hints and clues. He is purposely making
her do more work than she has to do just to experiment with her mind.
Most of the film involves detailed detective work by Starling and the FBI.
We do meet the killer, but he does not become a vital character because he
isn't nearly as cunning or vile as Lector. It's interesting to watch Starling
track down clues and sources, and most of those on slim leads and hunches. 
Starling thinks Lector knows who Buffalo Bill is, but in order to get him to
talk she must tell him about her own life. Lector gets inside her mind by
analyzing all the details of her life. If anything, the film works as a great
character study and terrific interaction between these two actors and their
characters.
Although the film had been a great drama and mystery, the actual ending tops
it off and and defines the genre of "thriller." Of course justice is
ultimately served in the end, but perhaps something even worse than Buffalo
Bill happens...
"The Silence Of The Lambs" works so well because of its mood factor alone.
Films that can be this emotional, disturbing, and exciting by using typical
mainstream mystery elements don't come along everyday. 
Please visit Chad'z Movie Page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz
E-mail: ChadPolenz@aol.com
(C)1997 Chad Polenz

Title
Review for Gone with the Wind (1939)
Chad'z rating: **** (out of 4 = excellent) 
1939, G, 222 minutes [3 hours, 42 minutes] 
starring: Viven Leigh (Katherine Scarlett 
O'Hara-Hamilton-Kennedy-Butler), Clark Gable (Captain Rhett Butler), 
Olivia De Havilland (Melanie Wilkes), Leslie Howard (Ashley Wilkes); 
written by Sidney Howard; produced by David O. Selznik; directed by 
Victor Fleming; based on the novel by Margaret Mitchell. 
Seen July 8, 1998 at the Crossgates Cinema 18, (Albany, NY), theater #7, 
at 8:15 p.m. with my mom using Hoyts Cinema Cash. [Theater rating: 
***1/2: very good sound, picture, and seats] 
It's very rare that any medium of entertainment can give one an 
authentic, vivid sense of reality and life. All stories are about select 
moments of time and places in the characters' lives, but only the truly 
great ones are able to define their realities well enough so the 
audience can experience it just as the characters do. Therefore, "Gone 
With The Wind" deserves accolades for its ability to tell the epic story 
it does, in such a crafted, intricate, and entertaining manner. It's a 
crowning achievement, not only in filmmaking, but for storytelling 
itself. 
The film takes place in Georgia before, during, and after the Civil War. 
This plays a major factor in the film's success. To use such a historic 
setting presents many possibilities and problems since no one was alive 
at the time to verify its accuracy. It might also seem cliche, boring 
and other such deterent factors to potential viewers. Can a story set so 
long ago be relatable now? The film confronts all these problems, 
paradoxically, by not cronfronting them. It doesn't simply plug in the 
"right thing" at the "right time," it creates an entire reality where 
everything makes sense and said concerns are irrelevant. 
Building a strong foundation is important to all forms of media, without 
which, what is there to build on? We're given some backstory here and 
learn a little about our characters, especially our main character, 
Scarlett O'Hara (Leigh), a beautiful Southern Belle with a will of 
steel, a cunning wit, and a tremendous sense of liberty in such an 
oppressive time. She knows how her society works, wherein everything she 
does can and will play a role in the shaping of her life and those 
around her. 
Right from the beginning we realize how determined she is to have her 
way no matter what the consequences may be. Being the most sought-after 
woman allows her to manipulate men (and their women) to ensure she gets 
her way, whether it be obvious (i.e. who will be the one to get her 
food), or subtle (i.e. getting married just to spite someone). The man 
she claims to love is Ashley Wilkes (Howard), a modest gentleman who 
does not seem to have the same passion for her as she does for him. He 
isn't so arrogant and demanding as Scarlett, in fact, he's engaged to a 
woman with a personality much more like his. Her name is Melanie (De 
Havilland), and she is one of the sweetest, kindest, and most likable 
characters one will ever see. She and Scarlett become very dear friends, 
but she never suspects the jealously Scarlett has for her, and the love 
she has for her husband. Her meekness is both her strongest and weakest 
characteristic - it defines who she is, but doesn't give her much 
emotional self-defense. 
Acting a catalyst to the love triangle, and to the story as a whole is 
the daper, stong-willed, cunning, cocky Southern business and military 
man Captain Rhett Butler (Gable). He's quite a character all right - 
everyone listens to what he has to say even though he's got a bad 
reputation. Butler makes no apologies for his vast amount of money nor 
his behavior. He tells everyone the much-needed truth in the rigid 
caste-like society where freewill doesn't seem to exist, everything is 
done out of honor and tradition. For example, in his first appearance 
Butler tells his fellow Southerners there's no way the South could 
defeat the North if war were to break out. This angers them, not for his 
lack of faith, but because he has the gall to say it aloud and 
boastfully at that. "Do we have ammunition factories? Do we have food? 
Do we have a navy? All we have is tobacco." All true statements and yet 
the South still insists he's wrong. 
Butler is a shifty character to be sure, but he takes such pride in his 
arrogance it's appealing. Scarlett notices this too when she first sees 
him, and from the look Butler gives her, we know he's not going to stop 
until he has her. But Scarlett can't get past her need for Ashley, and 
during a scene which sets the stage for the grand story, Butler learns 
of this and continues to throw it back at Scarlett forever. 
And so the story goes on, with Scarlett being thrown obstacle after 
obstacle in her life. The conflicts she must overcome range from taking 
care of her entire family to finding a proper husband, especially after 
she is "marked" for life when her first husband dies. This gives the 
film many opportunities to bring in more characters into the epic story. 
Some are vital for only a few scenes, but their true signifcance will 
endure throughout the film. In most films only a few characters exist 
for support in background, but this film is more realistic and 
believable as it incorporates a supporting cast the size of a small town 
and everyone has signficance. Even people in the background seem more 
than just extras wandering the set. The costuming design is outstanding
 so that the film makes for a real sense of time and place. The 
filmmakers could have easily set more scenes indoors and narrowly 
focused to avoid having to show the outside, real world, but these types 
of simple approaches are never taken. 
The first half of the film depicts the traumatic experience the South 
faced at the last days of the Civil War. Fleming is able to convey the 
horror of it all by painting an image of destruction and letting the 
viewer decide just how bad it is. One scene has Scarlett working as a 
nurse at a military hospital while we hear a soldier in the background 
screaming, "No! Not my leg! Don't cut off my leg!" Another scene shows 
her simplying trying to cross a street, but as the camera pulls back, we 
see that her path is blocked by hundreds of wounded soldiers, but it is 
their moaning that's more graphic than all the bloody gore could ever 
be. 
As the second half begins, the film concentrates more on Scarlett as a 
completely independent woman who single-handedly takes care of her 
family and Melanie just to spite the tyrany of the North. She manages to 
resurrect the family plantation, but all the willpower she has can't 
help her when she must pay exuberhant taxes set by the North after the 
South's ultimate defeat. This brings Rhett Butler back into the picture 
and thus begins their torrid love-hate relationship. 
Most of the second half of the film is somehow related to the 
relationship (or lack thereof) between Rhett and Scarlett. Each uses the 
other for personal gain, but at the same time they still feel an 
intimate connection with each other. Scarlett continues to use her 
manipulative powers over men to get what she wants and because Rhett 
can't help but want her more every time she tries to one-up him such as 
marrying another man and taking over his business. 
They say opposites attract, but the conflict between Rhett and Scarlett 
goes way beyond opposing personalities, it borders on magnetic 
polarization. They need each other and know this, yet they never seem 
truly happy together. Perhaps they mistake love for passion, and the 
film leaves it up to us to make this call. Both have things the other 
wants and vice versa, but when they compromise, is it just to get their 
own way or because they actually care for each other. Love and the 
perception of love are two completely separate things and throughout the 
final act of the film, we're left wondering if Rhett and Scarlett ever 
truly loved each other and why. Gable and Leigh do have great chemistry, 
always leaving the viewer wondering which emotions were authentic and w
hich were manufactured. All? None? Either way is possible and it's a 
mystery that cannot be solved even upon repeated viewings. 
It's safe to say most of us won't live such overly dramatic lives as 
those in "Gone With The Wind," but it's still a masterpiece for its 
ability to give us a sense that we've just experienced a life's worth of 
joy and pain. 

Title
Review for Usual Suspects, The (1995)
The Usual Suspects
Chad'z rating: **1/2 (out of 4 = OK)
1995, R, 108 minutes [1 hour, 48 minutes]
[mystery/crime]
starring: Kevin Spacey (Verbal), Gabriel Byrne (Keaton), Stephen Baldwin
(McManus), Chazz Palmintari (Customs Special Agent Dave Kujon), produced by
Bryan Singer, Michael McDonnell, written by Christopher McQuarrie, directed
by Bryan Singer.
If O. Henry was alive today, "The Usual Suspects" might be the type of story
he would write. This film is jam-packed with details, detective work,
conspiracies, action, adventure, and most of all mystery. It's interesting to
watch because of the way that the story is told, but what holds it back is
the fact it's too much of a confusing Hollywood mystery to take seriously.
The story is a generic crime/mystery story. We  work our way up  to "now"
through a series of flashbacks. We meet our main character, Verbal (Spacey),
a small time hood who is about to post bail in L.A., but Customs Special
Agent Dave Kujon (Palmintari) thinks there's more to the story than he's
telling them. He interviews Verbal about the history leading up to the
incident that is the climax and most important part of the story. 
Basically, the story surrounds five different hoods who are arrested because
they are, as the title states, the usual suspects. Gabriel Byrne is fine as
Keaton, the so-called leader, while Stephen Baldwin goes a bit overboard as
the wannabe psycho McManus. But considering the casting of such characters,
the film's first major flaw is evident (Kevin Pollack as a dangerous, wanted
felon?). In fact, the characters themselves seem very out of place.
Eventually the story gets past this and starts to tell its complicated story
of international crime and conspiracies.
The gang is confronted by a European businessman who works for Keyser Soze,
supposedly the most ruthless gangster on the Earth (although no one has heard
of him). The man leaves behind evidence that could convict them all without a
shadow of doubt. It turns out each of them had all stolen from Soze, but didn'
t know it at the time. In order to make restitution, they must destroy a
Hungarian ship supposedly carrying $91 million in cocaine from one of Soze's
rivals. This is could be considered a typical gangster movie plot device, but
it's not told in a typical manner. 
The element of the mythological, devil-like Soze is creative, but it doesn't
have as much effect on the mood as it wants to. It's almost as if the film is
trying to take some of the things that made "The Crow" excellent and apply it
to a more realistic setting.
Most of the film is a serious of crimes and other events between the gang
and associates of Soze. There's a lot of action, but it's not always exciting
because it's so difficult to tell what's happening and why. The ending is a
real shocker though, it almost makes you want to watch the whole thing over
again.
"The Usual Suspects" is a well-made picture, but it just tries too hard...
period.
Please visit Chad'z Movie Page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz - over 140
new and old films reviewed in depth, not just blind ratings and capsules.
Also, check out The FIRST Shay Astar Web Page @
http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz/ShayAstar.html

Title
Review for Bless the Child (2000)
Oh boy, when is Hollywood going to grow up and stop making these supernatural 
thrillers about Satan trying to take over the world using methods that can be 
stopped simply by bullets? 
Here's the lowdown: this is another quasi-horror/quasi-action flick about 
seemingly innocent people who find out they may be, as the tagline reads; 
"mankind's last hope." This time it's Kim Basinger as Maggie O'Connor - a 
nurse living in New York City whose drug-addicted sister leaves her with her 
baby. Basinger raises the child as her own, a girl named Cody who is a bit 
different than other children. We even get such trite lines like "It's like 
she's listening to something we can't see." Oooh. There's a subplot going on 
about a series of child murders which are somehow related to New Age guru 
Eric Stark (Rufus Sewell) who is being hunted by FBI agent John Travis (Jimmy 
Smits) who happens to be a former seminary student and specializes in occult 
crimes. 
It's really easy to see what is going on here and where the story will go. 
Will Maggie - a normal, average every-day woman be able to defeat a rich cult 
leader whose boss happens to be the devil? Will Travis finally be able to get 
enough dirt on Stark to make a conviction stick? Will Cody learn how to use 
her powers to spin plates and light candles by telekinsies to save the world? 
The film isn't so much about the answer to that as it is the process. It 
attempts to play it safe by concentrating more on Maggie then bombarding us 
with a lot of cliche occult tomfoolery. Yeah, those symbols everyone has 
tattooed on their arms are pretty scary and yeah all that Catholic mysticism 
is fascinating because of all those stained-glass windows and Renaissance 
paintings and the dusty old books in the exiled Jesuit priest's sanctuary. 
And yeah the showdown at the end really had me believing Satan himself was 
going to win this time (the big cheese even makes a CGI cameo). 
What it all comes down to is that there's not an original idea to the film. 
The screenplay is as trite and predictable and full of cliches as any horror 
flick released in 20 years. The special effects seem very half-assed and 
aren't all that impressive (dark grey is not a scary color). The villains 
have no motivation other than the fact that they're villains and therefore 
they are bad. 
Just another movie released on an otherwise dead weekend and will be 
forgotten about in a few weeks. 
------------------------------------------------------------------------ 
You can also read this review at: 
http://www.epinions.com/mvie-review-1B02-25D1C49-39CCF478-prod1 
And other reviews on the same topic at: http://www.epinions.com/mvie 
Check out my profile page at: http://www.epinions.com/user-chad9976 
*****
Chad'z Movie Page is back! 
In-depth reviews of nearly all mainstream films playing at your local 
cineplex. There's also reviews of a few classic films and some of your 
personal favorites.

Title
Review for Bring It On (2000)
If you're going to make a comedy about teens you really have to keep it 
satirical enough from expecting us to take the characters and their 
situations seriously. All the battles of the cliques and the who-likes-who 
subplots aren't exactly original or taxing on the intellect. "Bring It On" is 
a teenage comedy that half realizes this. It's got campiness to it but not as 
much a it needs to keep it fluffy and tongue-in-cheek. It's difficult to tell 
what's supposed to be taken seriously and what's not. 
The setting is a high school outside of San Diego where mostly rich white 
preppy kids live. The Ranche Carne Toros are a lousy football team but they 
boost the best cheerleading squad in the country and they have the trophies 
to proove it. As the film opens the out-going captain "Big Red" passes the 
torch to her successor - Torrance - a cute blonde with a lot of ambition but 
little brains played by Kirsten Dunst (the teenage Cameron Diaz). 
Torrance is the least stuck-up and snobby of the cheerleaders and she decides 
to hold an audition for a vacant spot instead of just giving it to one of the 
other cheerleader's little sister. There's a funny sequence of kids trying 
out for the team that don't know what they're doing which proceeds to 
introduce the next major character, Missy. She's a gymnastics expert who 
doesn't really want to do cheerleading but it's as close to a gymnastics 
work-out she can find. She's very rebellious-looking with braids and all dark 
makeup so not surprisingly the other girls hate her but Torrance sees 
something in her and lets her join. 
The conflict soon crops up when Missy accuses Torrance of ripping off their 
cheers from a school in East Compton. The two even drive over 100 miles to 
L.A. to see for themselves and nearly get pummelled when the all-black 
"Clovers" cheerleading squad say they're sick of being spied on and  having 
their routines ripped-off (by Big Red for years). They'd enter the national 
competition too but their school can't afford to send them. 
And so Torrance and the gang must decide to either stick with the winning 
moves they know how to do, hire a choreographer or make up new routines 
themselves. All three of these scenarios happen, respectively. 
Meanwhile there's a subplot involving Torrance's relationship with her 
boyfriend and another boy named Cliff (Missy's brother) who likes her too. 
The dating triangle starts out cute at first because Cliff's funny and does 
things to make Torrance like him that you usually don't see in teenage 
movies. When he finds out she already has a boyfriend he turns from having a 
crush on her to loathing her which makes Torrance realize she likes him 
better than her boyfriend (when someone DOESN'T like you, that's when you're 
attracted to them?). 
This is what I'm talking about - who cares about this dating triangle stuff? 
It's been used everywhere else, why repeat it? And if so, why make it so 
blatantly obvious and over-the-top about where the relationship is going and 
who's going to wind up with who in the end? 
The screenplay has other problems, mostly in its white guilty feeling. We're 
supposed to pity the East Compton Clovers because they really are a good team 
but don't have the resources to compete nationally. When Torrance hears of 
this she actually gets her father to write a check so they can go. The 
Clovers don't take the check though, instead they write to an Oprah-like talk 
show host and get the money. 
I have a strong feeling the writer of this film is white and has little 
experience in writing for African-American characters. She's trying to play 
the race relations card very P.C., but it's more like pandering to the 
audience. Stereotypes are abundant and they're not necessary at all. 
A lot of people on the Net are already describing "Bring It On" as the 
"Rocky" of cheerleading movies but that's not a fair description at all. 
Rocky was a poor guy who worked his way up, the Ranche Carne Toros are 
national champions five years in a row and they're going for a sixth - aww, 
the poor rich kids might not become champions again, boo hoo. 
I could point out a lot more flaws but they're all just part of the same 
principle - that these teenagers' challenges and personal lives are taken a 
bit too seriously and the story takes shortcuts wherever it can. 
-------------------------------------- (here's where my e-mail ends and my 
signature begins)---------
Chad'z Movie Page is back 
after heavy renovation. Reviews of nearly all mainstream movies playing 
today! Get my reviews of everything playing at your local cineplex so you can 
better make an informed decision on what to see. Don't forget to vote on my 
poll and sign the guestbook!

Title
Review for Truman Show, The (1998)
Chad'z rating: **1/2 (out of 4 = okay/average)
1998, PG, 104 minutes [1 hour, 44 minutes]
starring: Jim Carrey (Truman Burbank), Ed Harris (Christof), Laura Linney
 (Meryl), Noah Emmerich (Marlon); written by Andrew Niccol; produced by Edward
 S. Feldman, Andrew Niccol, Scott Rudin, Adam Schroeder; directed by Peter
 Weir.
Seen June 5, 1998 at 9:30 p.m. at Rotterdam Square Mall Cinemas (Rotterdam,
 NY), theater #2, with Casey Rivers for free using my Sony/Loews critic's pass.
 [Theater rating: ***: very good sound and picture, average seats]
 All genres of storytelling must establish and define the reality in which
 their stories take place. This challenge is even more difficult and thus more
 crucial to satire, where in the "comedy" lies mostly in style and theme. It is
 these basic principles upon which "The Truman Show" is based - the story of a
 reality within a reality, but neither are defined well enough to create for
 theme or substance. It's certainly clever, but not executed as such.
 Entertainment in the 1990s has become more and more polarized. The big-budget
 movies and TV shows have continued to inflate in all aspects. More emphasis is
 placed on style over substance - who needs acting and writing when you've got
 special effects? Some efforts have been made to counter this inflation, most
 notably a rapid increase in independently-produced comedy and drama which
 claim to be driven by minutia of some sort, but with some exceptions, have
 exploited their "hooks" the same way the blockbusters exploit their budget. 
 Perhaps this film serves as some kind of ultimate alternative to the major
 forms of entertainment. It presents us with an antithesis of fiction -
 reality.  Truman Burbank (Carrey), has been on television every day since his
 birth (hence the title) and has never suspected as much. We're invited to
 experience everything he does since there's no way of truly knowing what could
 happen. He lives in a small coastal town where everyone either directly or
 indirectly affects him since they're all actors who have been told what to do,
 but must improvise what they say and how they do things. 
 What would it be like to watch an ordinary person? One would think it would
 be boring, after all, isn't that the point of entertainment - to escape
 reality? Jerry Seinfeld said it best, "Everyone on TV is doing something
 better than you. You never see people sliding off the edge of the sofa with
 potato chip crumbs on their face." But this film would have us believe that
 would be completely fascinating, or at least in its reality. Viewers are glued
 to their television sets afraid to miss anything, while the corporation behind
 the project basks in the continued success of the show. Unfortunately, it is
 in this aspect the film is severely flawed. Little attention is given to the
 kind of world which would not only condone the whole idea of the show, but be
 enthralled by it. The few viewers we see are of the exaggerated, cartoonish
 sort, which does keep with the overall attitude, but there's no authenticity
 to anyone's motivation. The show's creator and director, known only as
 Christof (Harris), seems to care about Truman, yet he never hesitates to
 exploit him, even to the point of killing him, just because he can.
 Another major flaw is in the storytelling itself. It's obvious as soon as the
 film opens what the premise is (as if the massive promotion hadn't already
 given it away). There's no sense of mystery since Truman is clued into the
 truth of his reality right from the get-go, and thus the plot is all about
 Truman's awareness of his situation and his attempt to escape it. The story
 would have worked better if we were just as clueless as Truman and had to
 figure it out too. Instead, everything is obviously phony, but it would have
 been interesting to see that phoniness presented as a reality.
 Truman's world is that of "Nick At Nite" combined with every commercial ever
 made, which creates for many comical and satirical situations such as Truman's
 friend Marlon (Emmerich) who's always coming by with a six-pack of beer and
 says things like "it doesn't get any better than this," and his wife Meryl
 (Linnley) who only says bubbly, encouraging things to him. Besides losing his
 "father" in a boating accident as a child, his life has been peachy.
 It would seem only natural for themes about the mass hypnotism of television
 and the media to crop up, but the film doesn't take advantage of the
 situation. Truman is a prisoner, and this idea of imprisonment by the media is
 one of the film's predominant themes, but it's not as powerful as could be due
 to the jumbled script. There's just not enough motivation to justify the idea
 of "The Truman Show;" why it was created, why it is successful, why any of the
 cast or crew members are involved with the show, and most importantly, why the
 show has run smoothly for 30 years without Truman catching on.
 Not to say that "The Truman Show" is without resonance. It is interesting and
 thought-provoking due to its premise, but premise alone isn't a bankable
 niche. 


Title
Review for Almost Famous (2000)
There's a scene towards the end of "Almost Famous" wherein the main 
character, William, is sitting at his typewriter with a terrible case of 
writer's block. He's just been on a great adventure touring America with a 
popular rock band and even with all the experiences he's gone through he 
still can't figure out how to begin to write about it.
I'm kind of in the same position myself. I've put off writing this review for 
two weeks, due partly to the fact I'm a lazy schmuck. Then again, a lot of it 
has to do with the fact "Almost Famous" is a film that makes you think about 
it for quite a while after you've seen it (both the flaws and the good 
points).
The movie tells the story of a 15-year-old boy named William Miller who's an 
accelerated student and is a natural writing wiz. The setting is San Diego in 
1973 and he's a huge rock and roll fan who's witnessing first-hand the 
changes the music is undergoing at the time. He's hired by Lester Bangs, the 
editor of Creem Magazine, to cover a Black Sabbath concert. His work is so 
impressive an editor at Rolling Stone offers him a high-paying job to do an 
in-depth piece on an up-and-coming rock band named Stillwater. William takes 
the job (much to his mother's refusal) and proceeds to experience the music 
lifestyle very personally. In a few weeks he gains more life experience than 
some people do their entire lives.
Writer and director Cameron Crowe made this film as a sort of 
autobiographical piece. He was writing for Rolling Stone when he was a teen 
and toured with some big bands in the early 70's. You certainly get that 
feeling of authenticity when it comes to the rock lifestyle. But this is also 
a commercial dramedy and character study plays a major role in how it works. 
There is no real plot to speak of, just experiences. I'm not sure what stuff 
actually happened to Crowe and what has been plugged in for the sake of a big 
Hollywood movie, but for the most part it all works well.
Crowe's films all have an emotional center to them, and "Almost Famous" 
certainly doesn't stray from that formula. Not one major character or major 
characteristic dominates - it's a push-and-pull, give-and-take, yin-and-yang 
amalgam. 
William is the straight guy for the majority of the film, trying to be a true 
journalist and staying out of the story but it's impossible to do that 
completely. He meets Penny Lane, a teenage rock groupie who truly loves the 
music and isn't out to be the dish all the rockers fall for. She's shallow in 
some respects but quite deep in others. She reminds me of the Jenny character 
from "Forrest Gump" - a slave to the flesh's desires and temptations but she 
still has some heart and truly cares about those close to her. There's 
Russell Hammond, the lead guitarist for the fictional band Stillwater who 
likes Penny a lot but doesn't have a lot of direction in his life. He thinks 
he's better than his bandmates and doesn't seem to appreciate a lot of things 
he should.
Not surprisingly there's a sort of love triangle going on between these three 
characters. Penny is a mysterious and charming girl, it's easy to see why 
William likes her but why Russell does isn't explained very well. This is one 
of the film's biggest flaws. One of the major plot arcs involves Penny and 
her other teenage friends who go with Stillwater everywhere. You have to 
wonder why these men in their late 20's like having teenage girls around so 
much (they don't come off as perverts or anything). You also wonder what the 
girls' home lives are like that they would leave their families to be with 
rock stars. Chalk it up to the fact it's the early 70's and it was just part 
of the time, or that teenage girls have always loved celebrities and would 
probably do anything to be with them. I'll take that as a given but I think 
Crowe could have explained this just a little better (the closest we get is a 
scene in which Penny tells William her real name).
The majority of the film revolves around William's adventure with the band. It
's a backstage look at what it's like to be in a struggling rock band. 
They're doing what they love but they haven't "made it" yet (hence the 
title). They live the rock lifestyle so perfectly it's a cliche, but the 
scenes are so genuinely good it's forgivable. Yup, there's quite a lot of 
references to alcohol, drugs, promiscuous sex and the sheer decadence of it 
all. Surprisingly it's not as abrasive as you would think - probably because 
Stillwater is a progressive rock band, not a hardcore metal band or anything 
like that. They are basically normal guys who happen to play music for a 
living.
And that's what "Almost Famous" is really about - the music. More 
specifically, the great prog-rock of years gone by. Crowe is a huge rock fan 
and has used it well in all his previous films, here it's a film all about 
rock and none of it is gratuitous. I felt like this film was made just for me 
and my friends who love "classic rock" (no references to Pink Floyd or Rush - 
my favorite bands!). Crowe simply basks in the beauty of the music. An 
excellent example of this is the final sequence that closes the film. Led 
Zeppelin's "Tangerine" is playing in the background when the scene ends and 
the screen fades to black. Instead of cross-fading to a different song or 
abruptly ending it, the screen remains black for a good 10 or 20 seconds so 
that the piece may finish - THEN the credits roll. This is also the first 
movie EVER to feature a Led Zeppelin song on the soundtrack (four of them 
actually), that tells you how authetic it must be if Robert Plant and Jimmy 
Page okayed the use of their music.
Not that this film is perfect, upon seeing it a second time I noticed many 
flaws. The scene in which all the band members reveal their secrets seems 
contrived and forced. I also noticed a lot of unnecessary little scenes and 
shots and some of the editing appears choppy. Newcomer Patrick Fuqit is 
pretty good as the innocent William but the scenes in which he has to express 
true emotion are awkward especially since Billy Crudup, Kate Hudson, Phillip 
Seymour Hoffman and Frances McDormand are so excellent in their roles. 
Still, there's a lot of great things to say about "Almost Famous." It's 
enjoyable from start to finish, refreshingly original and funny and dramatic 
at the same time. It IS about the music, man!
You can also read this review at: 
http://www.epinions.com/mvie-review-1959-7332A0C-39D95601-prod1
And other reviews on the same topic at: http://www.epinions.com/mvie
Check out my profile page at: http://www.epinions.com/user-chad9976
*****
Chad'z Movie Page is back! 
In-depth reviews of nearly all mainstream films playing at your local 
cineplex. There's also reviews of a few classic films and some of your 
personal favorites.

Title
Review for Akira (1988)
*** (out of 4 = good)
1987, not rated, 124 minutes [2 hours, 4 minutes]
[animated - science fiction]
Starring the voices of: Jimmy Flanders (Tetsuo), Drew Thomas (Kenada),
Barbara Larsen (Kaye), produced by Ryohei Suzuki, Shunzo Kato, written by
Katsuhiro Otomo, Izo Hashimoto, directed by Katsuhiro Otomo.
The Japanese probably have the wildest imaginations and the greatest spirit
for action and adventure. They see animation in a much different manner than
we do, and "Akira" is proof positive of that.
The story takes place in the far future, in post-Apocolyptic "Neo-Tokyo."
Stories that take place in these settings tend to have the same atmosphere:
crime out of control; corrupt government; revolutions: and/or science and
technology worshipped as gods. This film takes a bit of all of these aspects
and mixes them together so we get a good sense of an abstract reality and an
intense reality.
We meet our main characters, a motorcycle gang of high school-aged boys, but
they are not villains, in fact, they are quite likable. Immediately the film
jumps into a high speed action sequence, which is probably the best scene in
the movie. The animators pull no punches in depicting the graphic violence
that takes place, such as: decapitation; a man being shot by hundreds of
rounds; blood and gore; and total mass destruction. Perhaps what's most
fascinating is the graphicness to it, because we don't get to see this stuff
in America.
The first half is a mad romp through Neo-Tokyo, defining the setting and
introducing the main characters. Kenada (Thomas), the leader of the gang, is
a wisecracking delinquent but is adorable. He and his gang are searching for
their friend Tetsuo (Flanders) who was taken away by the military in a
previous scene.
The story drops hints of some kind of background, through a military Colonel
and a scientist (who looks like Albert Einstein), who bicker with politicians
over the violent society they live in and why it came to be like this. There
is some sort of secret government project called Akira that could change the
world and give tremendous power to its beholder, and this element will later
play a key role. 
Meanwhile, Tetsuo realizes he has special powers, and is told by other
"gifted children" who they are and where they came from. Eastern ideology
plays a major role in defining these powers, we might consider it pure
fantasy but I'm sure the Japanese hold some validity to the concept.
There's really no single plot driving the film, it's basically a dizzying
journey through many characters and storylines that are loosely connected.
The film is story oriented, but it is the characterization and the
spectacular action sequences that make it good.
Still, "Akira" is interesting because we never know what's going to happen
next. Just watching the animation and the fact that it has a pretty
intricate, detailed story makes it all worthwhile. 

Title
Review for Stand by Me (1986)
Stand By Me
Chad'z rating: *** (out of 4 = good)
1986, R, 87 minutes [1 hour, 27 minutes]
[drama]
starring; Will Wheaton (Gordie), River Phoenix (Chris), Corey Feldman
(Teddy), Jerry O'Connell (Vern), written by Raynold Gideon, Bruce A. Evans,
produced by Raynold Gideon, Bruce A. Evans, Andrew Scheinman, directed by Rob
Reiner, based on the novella "The Body" by Stephen King.
        We all had our best friends with whom we went on great adventures as
children, but did we experience a loss of innocence with them? "Stand By Me"
is a good movie that tires, perhaps a tad too hard, to answer that question
by combining a sense of youth adventure with the seriousness of the loss of
innocence.
        The films stars Will Wheaton as Gordie LaChance, a typical kid growing up in
a small town in the 1950s, which makes for a real American atmosphere. Gordie
and his three best friends have a secret club of sorts, but each member is
quite different. There is Chris (Phoenix), the leader of the gang and
part-time troublemaker; Teddy (Feldman), the hyper kid with an over-active
imagination; and Vern (O'Connell), the geeky fat kid they all pick on. The
boys are all 12 years old, but they seem a rather mature for their age as
they constantly smoke and swear like old men. 
        One day Vern tells the guys he overheard his brother figure out the location
of a missing child, who everyone assumes is dead and the town is upset over
this. They all become excited when they realize they could become heroes if
they find the boy's body. They set out on a long hike through the woods and
mountains, covering over 20 miles, but they consider it an unrealistic goal.
But the film is not about finding the body, it's about the journey itself,
and this provides for the good sense of innocence.
        Meanwhile, a group of bullies who are much older but less mature than Gordie
and his friends have come up with the same plan. The entire film is
essentially a study to compare and contrast the two sets of characters and
what they represent: Gordie's gang = innocence and adventure; the bullies =
being brutal and desensitized for sake of doing so.
        Most of the film depicts Gordie, Chris, Teddy, and Vern's quest and many
things happen to them on the way, both funny and serious. They get into a
fight with a junkyard owner and his dog, they out-run a train on a bridge,
they tell stories of their future sexual conquests, and they have a traumatic
experience with leeches. No plot forms, instead, everything is just
characterization, dialogue, and camaraderie which makes for a good,
lighthearted story. The only problem is sometimes it goes overboard and
becomes sappy. All the boys break down in tears at least once as they talk
about something bad that has happened to them. They realize they're growing
up, and when they finally see the dead body their lives are changed
instantly.
Please visit Chad'z Movie Page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz
E-mail: ChadPolenz@aol.com
(C)1997 Chad Polenz

Title
Review for Gladiator (2000)
Another Hollywood wannabe epic film made mostly for the sake of wooing Oscar 
voters with its classic
story of eternal love and quest for vengeance. 
It's a guy movie and a chick flick at the same time. It has many exciting and 
bloody battle scenes which
service the plot about a Roman war general named Maximus (Russell Crowe) who 
was about to become
the next leader of the great empire until heir-apparent Commodus (Joaquin 
Phoenix) has him removed.
Commodus becomes an arrogant, selfish emperor who uses his power to service 
his own desires instead of
doing what's good for Rome. 
At 150 minutes the film is a bit overlong but at least its story is full of 
detail so pay close attention. The basic
plot is familiar and very Shakespearean, but the gladiator life Maximus finds 
himself trapped in is the most
interesting aspect of the film. Not as good as "Spartacus" or "Braveheart" 
but it's a fine effort. 
Chad'z Movie Page is back! 
New reviews of the latest movies in easy-to-swallow capsule form with the 
trendy, Entertainment Weekly-style of letter grades instead of the old star 
system. Have I sold out? Visit my page and decide for yourself ;-)

Title
Review for Pay It Forward (2000)
The concept of "Pay It Forward" is a simple plan developed by a 12-year-old 
boy to change the world. You'd think that would be more than enough plot for 
a major motion picture to work with wouldn't you? Imagine the possibilities 
of a movie showing how performing random acts of kindness could better the 
world - in the right hands it could be pretty powerful. Unfortunately this 
story was trusted with the wrong people who opt to make a sappy tearjerker 
instead of a poignant message. 
This movie wins the First Annual "'American Beauty' Award for How Many 
Over-the-top plot points, characteristics and trite scenes you can Put in One 
Movie And Still Try to Market It As a Thematic Drama." 
Okay, that was kind of a mouthful, but I'll elaborate. "Pay It Forward" is 
about a young boy named Trevor McKinney living in a trailer park in the hills 
overlooking Las Vegas with his recovering alcoholic mother Arlene. Trevor is 
an over-achiever who takes everything literally and is easily discouraged 
when he fails or when things go wrong. He attends a blue-collar middle school 
somewhere in the outskirts of the city where even 7th graders are subject 
to metal detectors at the doors because some are as violent as adult gang 
members. 
One of the main influences in Trevor's life is Mr. Eugene Simonet, a slightly 
arrogant social studies teacher whose face is disfigured by burns. Simonet 
gives his class an assignment to think of an idea that could change the 
world. He does actually expect them to do it, he just wants to see them put 
in the effort. Trevor comes up with the idea of "pay it forward" in which he 
must help three people out in pretty big ways (something they couldn't have 
done without his help) and in turn they must pay the favor forward to three 
other people instead of just doing something nice for him. 
"Pay it forward" is a great idea and one that could easily be put into 
practice in the real world if people were willing to give it a chance and 
swallow their pride. Why do we as humans think of personally helping the less 
fortunate as a humbling and embarrassing duty? It's one thing to write a 
check to charity, it's a much different thing to volunteer your time and 
actually perform labor in the name of kindness and goodwill. But this 
Hollywood we're talking about, the only way the filmmakers think they could 
turn this idea into a good movie is by going the melodramatic route. They'd 
rather appeal to our emotions instead of taking the idea seriously and making 
us think. 
Trevor starts out by bringing a bum home and allowing him to sleep in the 
garage until his mother finds out and nearly blows the bum's head off. She 
then proceeds to rip Mr. Simonet a new one when she finds out where Trevor 
got the idea. When you have a man and a woman who both have severe personal 
problems and meet in an awkward setting and immediately disagree it's clear 
they're going to fall head over heals for each other. I don't think that's 
too much a spoiler because this movie is just that predictable and sappy. 
When we meet Arlene she's an unlikable character not only because of her 
personal demons with alcohol but she's just a bad mother. She's trying to 
protect Trevor from the cruelty of the real world but she's in total denial. 
She works as a part-time burlesque waitress and a part-time casino clerk 
always staying late and coming in early to work if she can get the time. 
We're told she's been known to just jump into bed with men and that she spent 
years with an abusive alcoholic husband. She can't understand why Trevor 
doesn't respect her much less like her (gee, I wonder why?). There's a scenes 
where the two argue and Arlene slaps Trevor and then feels guilty and shocked 
she did it. I can't believe the filmmakers try to pull this one over us. An 
alcoholic floozy mother who DOESN'T beat her kid is a lot more surprising to 
me. 
The story is slowly-paced and the screenplay jumps all over the place between 
Trevor's relationship with his mother and her relationship with Mr. Simonet. 
At the same time there's a sub-plot involving a Los Angeles-based reporter 
who catches wind of "pay it forward" and tracks its roots all the way back to 
Trevor. There's a scene where the reporter interviews a convict who says the 
idea gave him all this clarity like a religious awakening. Uh huh. Anyone can 
just SAY they're a changed person, the film fails to fully detail this. The 
man let a girl go ahead of him in the emergency room but you still never 
believe he's about to become the next Mother Theresa of the ghetto as he 
claims he would be. 
After the halfway point of the film the "pay it forward" concept is 
essentially gone and instead the film is a laboring melodrama of conflicts 
between the characters, most of which are blown out of proportion. Eugene and 
Arlene start dating but don't have much chemistry. I guess we're supposed to 
simply assume that they're lonely and are together because they sympathize 
with each other, not so because they genuinely like each other. A few more 
conflicts arise such as when Trevor tries to run away from home and when his 
father returns after a long asbsence, claims he's sober, and Eugene flips 
out. 
There have been quite a few dramas about alcoholism in families and how it's 
cyclical and genetic. "Pay It Forward" uses that concept for its drama but 
takes it rather lightly. There's a few scenes of screaming and yelling 
between the characters about how screwed up their lives are but after they're 
done nothing has really changed. 
This film was directed by Mimi Leder who also directed "Deep Impact," one of 
the most unapologetic tearjerkers of our time. I didn't think the level of 
pandering and sappiness in that movie could ever be topped but I 
underestimated Leder. Maybe it's not her fault for how ridiculously 
over-the-top the ending to this movie is, but I'd like to think one of the 
producers might have suggested a better way to end it. For all its 
philosophies and ideas about goodness and kindness in the world "Pay It 
Forward" can't come up with a single positive and realistic illustration of 
its themes and instead cops out by trying to send you home weeping. 
I don't think "Pay It Forward" is going to be a hit. I think people are going 
to see right through it. I hate to stomp on a movie but at the end of this 
one so many people in the cinema were making that "tsk" sound it was like 
being in the cricket house at the zoo. 

*****
Chad'z Movie Page is back! 
In-depth reviews of nearly all mainstream films playing at your local 
cineplex. There's also reviews of a few classic films and some of your 
personal favorites.

Title
Review for Lost World: Jurassic Park, The (1997)
Chad'z rating: ** (out of 4 = fair/below average)
1997, PG-13, 134 minutes [2 hours, 14 minutes]
starring: Jeff Goldblum (Dr. Ian Malcolm), Julianne Moore (Dr. Sarah
Harding), Vince Vaughn (Nick Van Owen), Arliss Howard (Peter Ludlow); written
by David Koepp; produced by Gerald R. Molen, Colin Wilson; directed by Steven
Spielberg; based on the novel by Michael Crichton.
Seen November 29, 1997 on home video (rented).
They say when you've got a winning strategy don't change your game plan.
That's good advice, unfortunately the one place it doesn't work is Hollywood,
or else "The Lost World: Jurassic Park" might have been something original.
Instead, it's just a repeat of everything Spielberg's done before and proves
some things are only impressive once.
The film opens in typical Spielberg fashion with a supposedly charming scene
that also shows the advances made in special effects. Initially, it is
interesting to watch, but within a few minutes we get a lot of screaming and
off-screen bloodshed, and it's apparent the film is going to be much like the
original "Jurassic Park."
That feeling of deja vu continues to manifest itself as the story unfolds
much like another mediocre sci-fi thriller, "Aliens." We catch up with Dr.
Ian Malcolm (Goldblum), who has apparently been shunned from the scientific
community for "telling stories" about what happened on that South American
island four years ago. He visits Dr. John Hammond (Richard Attenborough), the
owner and curator of the park who tells him there is another island full of
dinosaurs which he is in danger of losing to either the government or
poachers (I couldn't really tell from all the jargon). He wants Malcolm,
along with palentologist Dr. Sarah Harding (who just happens to be Malcolm's
girlfriend), and photographer Nick Van Owen (Vaughn), to go there and make
sure the park is stable. Of course Malcolm panics when he realizes Harding is
already down there, and agrees to go "rescue" her.
It's not surprising how quickly the opening act is paced. This film is meant
to be a special effects thrill ride, so it doesn't want to waste anyone's
time with a story (God forbid!). Only the bare essentials are necessary, such
as Hammond's arrogant newphew Peter Ludlow (Howard), who constantly berates
Malcolm, or the fact Malcolm is a bad father to his adopted daughter. The
dialogue between these character is trite and blatantly foreshadowing. All
the characters are generic, and thus Goldblum sticks out like a sore thumb
since he's the only character with depth.
Once the main characters reach the dinosaur island the film practically
becomes a remake of the original. We get many shots of dinosaurs roaming the
island which are impressive visually, but almost boring intellectually
because of the bland story. It's no surprise that once a team of hunters
invade the island all Hell breaks lose and the film becomes a 100-minute
chase scene. We get another scene of the dinosaurs pushing a vehicle off a
cliff with our characters inside dangling by a thread. There's more
hide-and-seek scenes with those nasty raptors, who are conviently delt with
by the daughter's gymnastics talent. And of course the brave, mighty hunters
turn into cowards and many are eaten as they flee.
But the film's problem isn't just the fact it repeats itself (and its
predecessor), it's the way it does so. There is no sense of satire here,
which means the film wants to be taken seriously, which is hard to do
considering how corny and contrived the screenplay is. It often wanders from
the main characters for large blocks of time just to show other people be
eaten by the dinosaurs (which is just an excuse to dodge the story and show
off the effects). Not to mention how badly it over-doses on the cliffhangers.
The last act somehow shifts the setting to San Diego and much like a modern
"Godzilla," we get a T-Rex wreaking havoc there. Not surprisingly, the ending
isn't quite resolved which could (and probably will) leave room for another
sequel.
It seems like "The Lost World: Jurassic Park" was meant to be a genuine,
intense thriller, but it's too ridiculous to take seriously. 
Please visit Chad'z Movie Page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz - over 180
new and old films reviewed in depth, not just blind ratings and quick
capsules. Also, check out The FIRST Shay Astar Web Page @
http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz/ShayAstar.html
To receive Chad'z movie reviews directly, send e-mail to ChadPolenz@aol.com
with "subscribe" in the header.

Title
Review for Unstrung Heroes (1995)
Unstrung Heroes
Chad'z rating: *** (out of 4 = good)
1995, PG, 93 minutes [1 hour, 33 minutes]
[lighthearted drama/comedy]
Starring: Nathan Watt (Steven/Franz Lidz), John Turturro (Sidney Lidz), Andie
McDowell (Selma Lidz), Michael Richards (Uncle Danny), Maury Chaykin (Uncle
Arthur), produced by Susan Arnold, Donna Roth, Bill Badalato, written by
Richard LaGravenese, directed by Diane Keaton, based on the novel by Franz
Lidz.
"Unstrung Heroes" is another one of those coming-of-age films that are
intended to touch your heart and make you feel good, and films does that
without becoming sappy or contrived (well... maybe a little bit). It's a
interesting story about characters we don't usually get to see, yet they seem
very recognizable.
Everyone thinks their family is strange, but Steven Lidz (Watt) may actually
have the claim to that fame. His father, Sidney (Turturro), is a strange
inventor who believes science can solve any problem. His mother, Selma
(McDowell), is a beautiful, chain-smoking housewife who is slowly dying of
cancer. But these elements are not played upon too heavily, which allows us
to get closer to the characters without being distracted by the tense
situation and their basic eccentricity.
Steven's uncles are even more bizarre than his immediate family. Uncle Danny
(Richards) believes someone is constantly following him, especially
anti-Semites. There is also Uncle Arthur (Chaykin) who lives with Danny and
is just as strange because he has the mindset of a child. He is amused by
simple things such as balls, old newspapers, and garbage. He's a fascinating
character because of his sense of innocence.
Steven ends up staying a summer with his two uncles because his home has
become such a cold place. He has no bond with his father, and he cannot see
his mother because of her condition. He learns about the outside world
through his uncles, who don't even live in the "real world" themselves. He
accepts their strangeness as truth since it seems to make more sense than the
complicated, scientific rhetoric his father constantly spews. 
There is also a sub-plot involving a philosophical battle of faith versus
science. Steven starts to learn about his Jewish roots, as he was denied them
by his atheist father. He is renamed Franz and refuses to go by his old name.
I'm not really sure who the "unstrung heroes" of this movie are supposed to
be. Maybe the uncles because of their innocence, or perhaps Steven/Franz
because of his exposure to so many different aspects of life. Maybe even Mr.
and Mrs. Lidz who love Steven and care for him, but just don't know how to
express their love. 
Although there isn't much to "Unstrung Heroes," thankfully, it doesn't make
the mistake of becoming too sappy like most other stories of the sort. It's
want you're looking for in a disposable drama - but I'm not sure if that's
good or bad.
Please visit Chad'z Movie Page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz - over 140
new and old films reviewed in depth, not just blind ratings and capsules.
Also, check out The FIRST Shay Astar Web Page @
http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz/ShayAstar.html

Title
Review for Toy Story (1995)
Toy Story
Chad rating: *** (out of 4 = good)
1995, G, 81 minutes [1 hour, 21 minutes]
[animated - fantasy/comedy]
starring the voices of: Tom Hanks (Woody), Tim Allen (Buzz Lightyear), Don
Rickles (Mr. Potato Head), Erik von Detten (Sid), written by Joss Whedon,
Andrew Stanton, Joel Cohen, Alec Sokolow, John Lasseter, Andrew Stanton, Pete
Docter, Joe Ranft,  produced by Bonnie Arnold, Ralph Guggenheim, directed by
John Lasseter.
"Toy Story" is a good movie that remembers the fun and simplicity of
children's stories but adds an intelligent, mature theme that everyone will
love. It tells an innocent, plausible story about toys who come to life when
no one's around.
The entire film is composed of computer-generated animation, and it is the
exquisite detail that makes the film work so well. Tom Hanks stars as the
voice of Woody, a talking cowboy rag doll who happens to be Andy's (the
little boy who owns all the toys) favorite toy. Every single line he says has
reason and purpose, not so much to build character or make for plot, but just
to tell the story. It's adorable to watch him act as a leader because he
seems so mature and intelligent for just a toy.
A big problem occurs when Andy gets the latest, coolest toy for his birthday
- a Buzz Lightyear Space Ranger action figure (voiced by Allen), who has
lasers, wings, and a voice chip! When Buzz introduces himself to the group he
actually believes he's a space ranger, the other toys think so too, except
for Woody. 
There are many funny scenes between Woody and Buzz as they fight for the
"favorite toy" position. But what's also great is Woody's cynicism as he
tries to explain to Buzz that he's just a toy and not real, but Buzz can't
comprehend this. The vocal chemistry between Hanks and Allen is excellent, as
Hanks sometimes yells hilarious dialogue, Allen is able to counter with a
deadly serious attitude.
The rivalry between the toys eventually results in the two of them getting
lost a few times while fighting over who gets to play with Andy. They go from
Andy's room, to the car, to a gas station, to an amusement park, and then to
the evil-kid-next-door's house.
There's always that one twisted kid everyone stays away from, and Sid
(voiced by von Detten) is the epitome of that character. His voice makes for
the perfect bully as it is clear and high-pitched, but with just the right
emphasis to make him menacing. I've never seen such a realistic evil kid in a
film before.
What disappointed me was the way the toys ultimately escape Sid's house.
It's fun to watch, but it essentially contradicts the premise of the film.
Still, "Toy Story" is original and fun, not only in its animation, but its
storytelling. Just watching the toys go through their motions if quite
fascinating, and it really makes us stop and wonder - are we playing with the
toys or are the toys playing with us? 
Please visit Chad'z Movie Page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz - over 140
films reviewed in-depth, not just blind ratings or quick capsules.

Title
Review for Rush Hour (1998)
Chad'z rating: ** (out of 4 = fair/below average)
1998, PG-13, 94 minutes [1 hour, 34 minutes]
Starring: Chris Tucker (James Carter), Jackie Chan (Detective Lee), David
Warner (JunTao), Tom Wilkinson (Thomas Griffin); written by Ross LaManna, Jim
Kouf; produced by Roger Birnbaum, Jonathan Glickman, Arthur M. Sarkissian;
directed by Brett Ratner.
Seen October 3, 1998 at 6:30 p.m. at the Rotterdam Square Mall Cinema 6,
(Rotterdam, NY), theater #3, with my brother John for free using my Sony/Loews
critic's pass. [theater rating: **1/2: okay seats, sound, and picture]
        If it's true society is losing its attention span, and appreciation of the
finer things in life then it makes perfect sense a film like `Rush Hour' would
be a big hit. It has two big stars, a classic premise and promotions that
promise both comedy and action, and yet there's almost nothing to it. It's
Hollywood's definition of productivity - to put in the least amount of effort
as possible and be successful with it.
        This film capitalizes on what I refer to as `the dead weekend monster,' a
film that wouldn't succeed during the war of the special-effects-summer-movies
or during the holiday seasons. A smart Hollywood exec knows when movies make
money and when they don't, it's all a matter of timing and the right timing
can anything look good.
        Let's look at the facts: it's a `cop-buddy,-but-not-really' movie starring
two semi-big celebrities who have become quite popular due to starring and/or
co-starring in several smaller films. Chris Tucker seems to be marketed as the
next Will Smith while Jackie Chan, who is a legend in overseas martial arts
flicks, is just now getting the attention he deserves. Neither have a thing to
lose by being in this film, no matter how bad reviews it gets it's guaranteed
to win at least a few weekends' top gross. Everyone involved with this film
will most likely go on to do just slightly better next year and every year
until they reach the top. In the meantime, we'll just have to stick it out.
        To say the film is paint-by-numbers is an understatement to be sure. At least
it tries to have a little fun with the hand it's dealt. We start out in Hong
Kong, the last day of British rule where the basic plotline is set up and some
of the main characters are introduced. There's a little action on Chan's part,
he plays a Detective named Lee who's been tracking a notorious villain named
JunTao (Warner) for years. We never learn much about JunTao except that he's a
really mean guy and has a bad reputation, whether he's into a specific vice
such as selling drugs or weapons or the whole mob scene isn't quite clear.
What is clear is that he's the one who always gets away from Lee and follows
his friend, a Chinese diplomat named Han (Tzi Ma) to Los Angeles and kidnaps
his daughter for a hefty ransom (dut dun duh!)
        At least the film is consistent in its flaws. The Chinese aspects are
portrayed as quite serious with the whole system of honor and everything and
immediately we cut to the American counterpart - LAPD Detective James Carter
(Tucker), who's a trash-talking, hyperactive, loose canon that isn't afraid to
break the rules, risk lives and property damage, but that's what cops in L.A.
in the movies do (you don't think they actually find clues and follow leads do
you?).
        And then there's our friends the Feds, who are supposedly the smartest
criminal-catchers in the world and have access to advanced technology, but
still can't figure out how to get out of unusual personnel moves. After Han's
daughter is kidnapped, the FBI steps in but the feds are almost outraged when
they learn Detective Lee is on the way to help them out, so they somehow get
Carter to `babysit' him because `he'll just get in the way' while they handle
business.
        Naturally the first act is concentrated mostly on the comedic aspect with
Tucker doing his spiel while Chan handles the action. The film wastes a large
chunk of time with a chase scene in which Lee runs from Carter all the while
making for comedy and action with the mix of stunts and one-liners and
slapstick. Eventually the two start to work together towards solving the case,
even though it's quite clear they've been asked not to and don't know where to
start.
        Throughout most of the duration of the events, as silly as they often seem,
they're at least consistent and full of energy. Tucker can be funny, as his
appeal lies in his delivery and attitude, not the script. The said can be said
of  Chan, who has almost nothing to do, he's either getting into fights or on
the verge of tears when he spits out rhetoric at the villains. Watching his
fight scenes are more interesting on a mathematical level than they are as
pure adrenaline excitement. He uses everyday objects to disarm his enemies and
always has perfect timing. No matter how by-the-book the story is, Chan's
action always seems spontaneous and improvised.
        Eventually the film does begin to concentrate a little harder on the more
taxing elements such as the plot and the mystery of where the little girl is
and how Carter and Lee are going to find her when the feds can't. A few
interesting detective skills are thrown in that give the film a ray of hope
every once in a while, but they all end up following the same lead - ending
with zany fight scenes. Not to say the fight scenes are all that bad, it just
seems repetitive after a while.
        And what's an action film without a major action-packed finale with a twist
of the ol' timebomb and the villain-almost-gets-away and the hero-almost-dies?
Surprisingly, the ending here is quite weak. Throughout the film the action
had always been coupled with comedy, but here it's mostly just chaos.
        There's just not much of anything of any value to `Rush Hour.' Will anyone
think much of it a year from now? There's nothing insightful or innovative to
it, and yet it's just part of a trend. Movies shouldn't be made as fast food
for the eye.

