Authors
Leong Heng Cheong
Number of Reviews
4

Title
Review for Shu shan (1983)
     ZU, WARRIORS OF THE MAGIC MOUNTAIN (Chinese Title: ZU MOUNTAIN: THE
NEW ZU MOUNTAIN SWORDSMEN) is a 1983 HK movie.  Directed by Hsui Hark,
this film stars Liu Songren, Zheng Shaochiu, and Lin Qingxia (of THE
SWORDSMAN II).
     This is not a martial arts film.  Rather it is a fantasy set during
China's civil war of 1740s, featuring a dozen flying swordsmen, a
hell-within-the-mountains, and some quite difficult-to-believe fights.
ZU, WARRIORS OF THE MAGIC MOUNTAIN can be better described as wu-xia
rather than gong-fu (Kung Fu).
     Partly based on the novel, and a earlier version of the same film, ZU,
WARRIORS OF THE MAGIC MOUNTAIN helped Tsui Hark and Lin Qingxia achieved
the fame of today.  It also started the movie style of combining special
effects with martial arts.
     Made with an impressive HK$30,000 at that time, this film offers
some 1983-style HK special effects.  Viewed today, these special effects
look cheesy and stupid.  Editing seems choppy, revealing how the special
effects were done.  "Cheap" models were used extensively, and the same
mountains were used over and over again.  However, being a very original
concept at that time, Tsui Hark received instant fame for directing this
film.
     Lin Qingxia was actually quite famous during the 1970s.  However
she was type-cast into playing the girl next door in Taiwan romance
movies.  When these movies ceased to be popular, her career died.  It
was this film that managed to re-start her acting career, and she has
starred in various movies since then, the most recent being THE
SWORDSMAN II.
     ZU, WARRIORS OF THE MAGIC MOUNTAIN is about the forces of good vs.
the forces of evil.  Set in the Zu Mountains, a soldier discovers a
world of evil.  However, the good force is closing on it, preventing the
evil from dominating the world.
     However, the story gets stranger and stranger from then on.  The
plot also gets messier.  The second half of the story lacks common
sense, even in the fantasy world of wu-xia, and it looks hurried.
(Somehow, it seems to have many last-minute hacking...  :-))  Although I
don't think there is any last-minute change to the ending -- we know
there is going to be a happy ending at the very beginning of the story
-- the ending still looks tagged on.
     Characterization again is lacking.  Nothing in the film explains
the romantic interest in the film.  The characters are one-dimensional,
and new characters are introduced more or less randomly.
     This is not a film that I would recommend -- unless you are a very
great fan of Hsui Hark or wu-xia.  Watch it only for historical reasons.
However, if you do watch the movie, catch the cameo appearance of Tsui
Hark towards the very end of the movie.  This film is rated PG in
Singapore.  A few killings, but with no graphical violence.

Title
Review for Wong Fei-hung ji yi: Naam yi dong ji keung (1992)
     ONCE UPON A TIME IN CHINA II (Chinese Title: WONG FEY-HONG II: MEN
SHOULD STRENGTHEN THEMSELVES) is one of the latest martial arts movies
from Hong Kong: the Hollywood of the East.
     Directed by Tsui Hark, who also co-wrote the screenplay, this film
stars Jet Li, from ONCE UPON A TIME IN CHINA and THE SWORDSMEN II.  This
film is in Cantonese, with Mandarin dubbed versions available.  Film
length is about 110 minutes.
     All the elements of Tsui Hark's martial arts movies are again
featured in this film: the "wooden" hero, the side-kick cum comic
relief, the women that needs to be rescued by the hero....
     However, unlike many movies, there isn't a good-vs-evil
one-force-againist- another plot.  We have the hero: Wong Fey-Hong, who
knows justice, but doesn't approve of revolution.  There is Sun Yat-sen
and his follower, who wanted to save China.  There is a Qing minister,
who just wanted to do the job he is paid for.  And there is the White
Lotus sect, who made used to the chaos condition in Canton to cheat
others -- and in the end, cheated themselves.
     These recent installments of Wong Fey-Hong's legends are also very
different from the past 99 episodes.  Here, the foreigners are no longer
the only bad guys, and not all Chinese are good.  Instead, we see better
portrayed characters which are no longer one-dimensional.
     But, that doesn't mean they are three-dimensional.  :-)  Character
development is not a strong point of Tsui Hark, and here, he avoided it
altogether.  The romance was quickly introduced, and quickly disappeared
into the background.  A scene which Wong taught his aunt (the romantic
interest -- the other way round) martial arts looks stiff and
out-of-place.  The rescue of the children from the Language School looks
routine, and fail to evoke any drama.
     The story: Wong Fey-Hong is invited to Canton for a medical
conference, but got himself involved in the chaos of revolution.
Meanwhile, the White Lotus sect, bent on destroying all "evil" stuff
from the West, cheats the people by proclaiming they are there to save
the people with help from God.  There isn't any suspense in the movie --
everything is almost predictable...
     Fans of Chinese martial arts movies would not be disappointed.  In
fact, fans of action movies shouldn't be disappointed.  There are fights
all the way from the beginning till the end on various different kinds
of props ranging from ladders to tables.  The movie is rated PG in
Singapore -- no nudity, but some violence and blood.  Masters of
martial arts like to cut vital veins that spurt blood of their
opponent....  :-)
     A brief knowledge of China's history during the turn of the century
can help enhance the enjoyment of this film, but viewers should note the
disclaimer displayed at the beginning of the movie after the credits:
the story is by no means historically accurate.
     Overall, a standard project by Tsui Hark -- but an entertaining
movie all the same.  Not much depth, but who will expect that in such a
fast-paced movie?
     The next project by Tsui Hark, already completed, is a remake of
DRAGON-GATE INN.  Currently, Tsui Hark is in China filming ONCE UPON A
TIME IN CHINA III (you are guaranteed a sequel with the box-office
success of the second in the series in Hong Kong, Taiwan, and
Singapore...) and GREEN SNAKE (translated title).

Title
Review for Ah-Ying (1992)
(This review contains a small spoiler at the end, marked by control-L...)
     MING GHOST (Chinese title: AH-YING) is directed by Qiu Kangjian,
and starred Joel Wong (of A CHINESE GHOST STORY fame) in the title role.
Rated PG in Singapore, this film contains explicit language and an adult
theme.  Note that the English subtitles are more explicit than the actual
dialogue used.
     MING GHOST reminds me of JU-DOU, and it is not only because the
Chinese title of both films refers to the lead character's name.  MING
GHOST is also slow-paced, and concentrates a lot on cinematography.  A
friend of mine who watched with me remarked that this looks more like
the usual China production with a slower pace than the usual fast-paced
Hong Kong action film.
     In the film, a Ming minister was killed outside the city, while his
wife, Ah-Ying, might or might not have been raped.  An eyewitness was
found, and he quickly identified the murderer.  However, the accounts of
the eyewitness, the "murderer," and Ah-Ying were all different.  What is
the truth?
     A very standard storyline, but not your standard HK direction
style.  The pace is deliberately slowed down, allowing the viewer to
think, or to enjoy the visual it presents.  Depthwise -- my friend
"claimed" that he knew the solution to the mystery very early during the
movie, and I have to agree that it is not really that difficult to
figure out.  The story is not resolved the way I would have liked it to
be,  but it is not unfit nor tagged on.  (I liked the ending scene
though....)
     However, this film also features some beautiful visuals.  Like
Zhang Yimou (director of JU-DOU), Qiu Kangjian made an effort to create
beautiful visuals.  In some parts of the movie, these efforts seem
overdone to me....  However, there are quite a few scenes that worked
with me.  Many of these scenes are not original in the international
scene, but is quite an achievement for a Hong Kong movie.
     Acting is generally good.  No exaggerations on the part of the
actors -- probably due to the fact that this film doesn't resolve to
using slapstick humour to bring in the crowds.
     And I don't think I should miss mentioning about the soundtrack,
one of the most beautiful element of this film -- it presented a very
haunting effect.  And, unlike in most movies, the music fits into the
movie very well.
     Over all, quite an enjoyable film.  It should interest those
looking for a story, and those looking to be entertained by visuals.
Problem is: can you find the film?  In Singapore, it only played in the
Singapore Film Festival this May.  It is in general release here last
weekend, but the very limited run in several theatres ended a few days
later.  (Very poor box-office).
     The English title of this film is actually a small spoiler to the
ending and the true identity of one of the characters in the film.

Title
Review for Jing cha gu shi III: Chao ji jing cha (1992)
     This summer, Hollywood brought us LETHAL WEAPON 3 -- a movie about
two buddy cops out to get the villain.  Hong Kong brought us POLICE
STORY III -- a movie about two undercover cops out to get the villain.
     POLICE STORY III: SUPER COP (same Chinese title) stars Jackie Chan,
one of the hottest HK action movie actors at the moment.  It also stars
Michelle Khan, together with Maggie Cheung in a very very minor role.
It is directed by Stanley Tong.
     POLICE STORY III: SUPER COP is about a Hong-Kong police/detective
who was sent to China as an undercover cop against an international
druglord.  There, he was paired with the Chinese counterpart in the
mission.  By the end of the movie, the two had travelled back to Hong
Kong, then to Vietnam/Thailand border, and Kuala Lumpur of Malaysia with
the villain of the movie.
     For those who are looking for a tight plot, you won't find it here.
I don't think there is much of a plot anyway.  Even by the end of the
movie, I still am unsure of what exactly is the objective of the
mission.  And then, there are many various plot holes all the way from
the beginning till the end of the movie.  You really have to heavily
suspend your belief when watching this movie.  Or better still -- don't
think.
     And if you ceased to use your brain power, you will find POLICE
STORY III: SUPER COP a very fun and entertaining action movie.  The
stunts are spectacular, and the action coordinating tightly packed.
Those who are bored by the action sequences in LETHAL WEAPON 3 will find
POLICE STORY III much more energetic.  This is the strength of HK
action movies: they pack in all the wonderful stunts with almost no
regards to the plot or feasbility.
     Except for a few jokes that are linked to the previous films, this
sequel is almost an independent film.  Jackie Chan, who directed the
earlier film in the series, concentrated on the action and the acting in
this sequel.  Almost all of the stunts are performed by the actors
themselves, which is quite rare in Hollywood productions.
     So far, I've only seen two type of films that can attract (almost)
all of the audience to stay throughout the closing credits.  One of
which is from the producers/directors/writers of NAKED GUN and TOP
SECRET!  The other: Jackie Chan's movies.  As usual, after the end of
the movie, the audience are treated to outtakes of the show, and scenes
where the stunts failed.
     In short, POLICE STORY III: SUPER COP is a very entertaining piece
of action film.  Audience should never look forward to the plot nor the
acting in these kind of HK films.
