Authors
Michael Rich
Number of Reviews
4

Title
Review for Love and Death on Long Island (1997)
Directed by: Richard Kwietniowski
Written by : Richard Kwietniowski, based on a novel by Gilbert Adair
        Love and Death on Long Island, based on a novel by Gilbert Adair, is the
story of an eccentric
British author, Giles De'ath, played by John Hurt, who is completely
disconnected from the world around
him. He understands neither the simple conveniences of modern life nor the
interactions which a modern
man makes with those conveniences. To him, a microwave oven may as well be a
VCR, and the necessity
of a television in order to watch a videotape is a surprise.
        The movie begins with a voice monologue by De'ath, who informs us that
he is about to tell a
story, but he doesn't know how to start because he already knows the end and we
do not. So, he begins
with the end of another story. Or so he says. We initially see Giles
participating in his first radio
interview, and making a fool out of himself by the comic extent to which he is
out of touch with reality.
        Fortunately, this modestly humorous beginning does not foretell the rest
of the movie. In fact,
while the fish out of water episodes that dot the movie do provide some comic
relief, the idea of someone
trying to come to terms with the modern trappings of society is an age-old tale
and thankfully does not
provide the centerpiece here. Instead, this is the story of a man coming to
terms with loneliness and
isolation, and the way he finds an escape from it.
        The vehicle for Giles' transformation is teen heartthrob Ronnie Bostock,
played by Beverly Hills
90210's own Jason Priestley. Giles first encounters Bostock while attempting to
see his first film in years,
a screen adaptation of E.M. Forster's work. Through a mix-up, De'ath ends up in
the wrong movie, a teen
flic in the spirit of Meatballs and Revenge of the Nerds. About to  leave the
movie in disgust, Giles sees
Bostock, covered with ketchup, tragically splayed out on the counter. De'ath is
fascinated, and proceeds to
purchase, steal, and rent anything he can to immerse himself in "Bostockiana."
Finally, at the urging of
his agent, worried about his client's detachment from his work, Giles decides to
take a vacation to
Chesterfield, Long Island, home of Ronnie Bostock and his girlfriend.
        To tell anything more would be to ruin the story, but let me simply say
that Giles' fascination
with Bostock is intense, complete, and brilliantly painted. Giles wants to take
control of Bostock's career
and take him to the top of the film world. He sees in Bostock a talent analogous
to Shakespeare's and
believes that his talent will be wasted without Giles' close guidance.
        In the hands of any other actor, Giles' obsession with Bostock may have
come across as
incomprehensible. All logic argues against his feelings, but Hurt's completely
believable and subtle
performance renders Giles' unquestioning love real. Every tic and every facial
expression fleshed out the
character of Giles De'ath. By the end, I felt for De'ath like I would a real
human being, and I can hope for
nothing more than that from any great performance.
        While the movie is without question a one-man show, Priestley managed to
impress me by his
portrayal of Bostock. Possibly drawing on his own desire to become a "serious
actor," Priestley solidly
depicts Bostock's hopes and aspirations. In fact, the complexity of his acting
in the crucial, climactic
scene showed me that he might be able to make it on the big screen in more meaty
roles. As Bostock's
girlfriend, however, Fiona Loewi gives only a serviceable performance, but the
script never allows her
character never gets off the ground.
        In the end, Love and Death on Long Island is a character study. We watch
as De'ath comes to
terms with the death of his wife years before and, through his entirely
misplaced, yet entirely genuine,
love for Bostock, realizes that he not only can but must continue to live in the
world around him. Giles
travels through an arc not uncommon in movies, but on the strength of Hurt's
performance, his story rings
true with touching hope.
        Note that this is not a perfect film. Much of the humor is unnecessary,
and all the characters
beyond Bostock and De'ath come across as either cardboard cut-outs or murky
shadows. However, the
focus of the film remains so firmly on De'ath that these distractions are
ultimately unimportant. For those
willing to enjoy lots of dialogue and little action, the rewards of this film,
and John Hurt's performance,
are well worth it.

Title
Review for City of Angels (1998)
        I didn't come into City of Angels expecting greatness. I've
never seen Wim Wenders' Wings of Desire, the classic movie upon which
City is loosely based. Then again, I have seen enough stories which are
based upon a similar plot device, with The Little Mermaid (both the
Disney version and the original folktale) being among them, that I had
some high expectations about the possible power such a story of
impossible love can hold. Unfortunately, City of Angels ended up
fulfilling few of them.
        The plot, for those that couldn't tell from the previews,
revolves around the angel Seth, played with an almost creepy intensity
by Nicolas Cage, who, in the midst of his angelic duties, falls in love
with a heart surgeon named Maggie (Meg Ryan in her most endearing
performance since When Harry Met Sally). Of course, his being an angel
prevents him from doing much about his love except appearing at random
times to talk to her, watch her buy groceries, only to disappear in the
blink of an eye. Their love must remain unrequited unless Seth decides
to make the ultimate sacrifice and become human. Using this framework as
a jumping-off point, the movie attempts to veer through some heavy
philosophical ruminations on the nature of desire, the joys of being
human, and the definition of perfection.
        The first half of the movie succeeds on most points. Cage
excellently plays the eminently difficult role of an angel who doesn't
know feelings so can't really express, preventing the character of Seth
from getting boring despite his limited repertoire of intent looks and
hang-dog expressions. Unfortunately, Cage takes the intensity too far
sometimes, and then Seth comes across as more creepy than sensitive. As
Maggie, Ryan manages to be convincing as a heart surgeon who has trouble
coming to terms with her having lost a patient on the operating table
despite having done everything right. Her beauty, unlike her unbearable
cuteness in French Kiss, is mature, intelligent, and winning.
        Likewise, some interesting ideas float around at the beginning
of the film. When the camera pans through traffic jams and libraries and
we get to hear the thoughts of the random people who flash across the
screen, the audience experiences a little of what it must be like to be
an angel. The beautiful camera work, shooting down onto the hectic world
of Los Angeles from the improbable perches of the angels, also gives us
a sense of the unique wonder angels feel.
        The film begins to lose its way, though, when the focus tightens
more and more on Seth and Maggie. The grand, angelic perspective gets
lost, except for some idly tossed lines about the incredible beauty of
the world through an angel's eyes. The movie devolves into an
examination of how Seth can't feel the world or, more importantly, he
can't feel Maggie: he can't smell her hair, feel her touch, or taste the
pears she eats.
        This change in focus attempts to capture the audience in Seth's
intense longing, but in doing so, the conflict disappears. If he wants
Maggie so badly, then why doesn't her just make the leap and become
human? After all, what's so great about being an angel? Sure, you get to
sit on Marlboro signs, but what's that compared to getting to be with
Meg Ryan?
        And from there, once the yearning has been established and the
romantic denouement must occur, it's all downhill. The philosophy
becomes heavy-handed, the dialogue pedestrian when it tries to be deep,
and the plot twists simply attempt to yank a few more tears into the
audience's hankie. It's the last thirty minutes of the movie, then, that
wrecks the film. I feel like the writer, by pulling out all the
melodramatic stops, has robbed me of what could have been a genuinely
powerful movie experience on both the romantic and the philosophical
level. I came out feeling robbed, seeing so much possibility in a film
becoming nothing. I could go on longer, but I don't want to "ruin" the
end by revealing any of the cheap plot devices the film relies on.
        City of Angels, then, is a paradox. It's a well-acted
(particularly look for Dennis Franz cutting against type-casting as a
happy-go-lucky fallen angel), well-filmed, and based on a wonderful
idea. All these possibilities, though, are what make the film so
unredeemable when the closing credits come up.

Title
Review for I Know What You Did Last Summer (1997)
        I think of I Know What You Did Last Summer as the movie that
Scream and Scream 2 could
have been. Mind you, though, I mean this in the worst possible way. I
Know What You Did Last Summer
is a typical slasher flic without the smarts of the Scream's. As a
result, it's even worse than some of your
better campy horror pictures (see Nightmare on Elm Street) because it
thinks it's about thirty times
smarter than it is.
        Based on a teen book of the same name and, disappointingly,
adapted by Scream scribe Kevin
Williamson, I Know What You Did Last Summer begins with appropriately
angsty modern rock music
combined with some startling cinematography of a cliff along the ocean
and an angsty sort sitting at the
top. The appropriate mood being set (this is angst-horror for the 90's),
we cut over to the July 4th parade
in a small North Carolina town. From there, we see the blond, female
protagonist, Helen Shivers
(woodenly played by Sarah Michelle Geller), getting crowned Croaker
Queen as the blond male "hero,"
Barry Cox (woodenly played by Ryan Phillipe), and matched brunette pair
of protagonists, Julie James and
Ray Bronson (woodenly played by Party of Five's Jennifer Love Hewitt and
Freddie Prinze Jr.,
respectively) cheer her on.
        After getting drunk at a party, going to a beach to wittily
discuss urban legend and indulge in
some foreshadowing, and having some meaningful sex (if you believe what
the characters say), the four
run down some guy crossing the windy cliff road at night. His face is
mangled so they can't tell who it is,
and they come to the decision to dump him in the ocean so as to not ruin
any of their future chances for
success in the world.
        Cut to one year later. The lives of our protagonists have gone
from annoying to bad. Main
brunette female, the bright one of the bunch, has been plagued with
guilt and almost failed out of college.
Blond female has forfeited her dreams of starring on Guiding Light, and
now works at the family store in
town. Brunette male is a fisherman, living off the land. Blond male has
become a complete jerk and
quarterback on some college football team. Then, predictably, their past
comes back to haunt them.
        It all begins with an irrational murder, followed by some
taunting of protagonists by the
mysterious killer, bad acting by a good actress (Anne Heche), an
improbable plot, bad acting by the main
bad actors, some more killing, concluding in a climactic scene, mostly
climactic in the relief at the end of
the movie. All the while, the actors and actresses spout off bad lines,
and main brunette male does his best
Keanu Reeves imitation.
        Not that the movie was without pleasure. Count the illogical
plot twists and bad lines for some
fun. Mostly, though, note the costumes of main females and how trendily
unattractive they make the
otherwise eye-catching pair look.

Title
Review for Gingerbread Man, The (1998)
Directed by: Robert Altman
Written by: Al Hayes (Robert Altman), based on a story by John Grisham
        I saw The Gingerbread Man in an art-house theater, where it was
showing alongside Ma Vie en Rose, Mrs. Dalloway, and Men With Guns. The
latter two were sold out, which is why I ended up watching a movie I can
only describe as a prettily-dressed, well-directed John Grisham flic.
Not a surprising description, I suppose, all things considered. It's
directed by Robert Altman, stars Kenneth Branagh, Embeth Davidtz, Robert
Downey, Jr., Daryl Hannah, Robert Duvall, and Tom Berenger, and was
based on an original story by John Grisham. Which all adds up to mean
that the movie should have a pretty sheen (much like the glistening of
sweat in A Time To Kill), but not much underneath.
        True and false. There really is a surface to this movie that,
when poked through, reveals nothing more than illogic. The shell,
though, isn't pretty. The movie focuses on high-powered Savannah lawyer
Rick Magruder (played with a convincing Southern accent by Branagh),
who's just won a suit condemning a police officer who shot a civilian.
At a party celebrating his victory, he manages to argue with his ex-wife
and her boyfriend / divorce lawyer, shoot off some sparks of sexual
tension with his assistant Lois Harlan (Hannah), and initiate a mating
dance with caterer Mallory Doss (Davidtz).
        However, by the time he's gotten to bed with Mallory, all signs
already point to there being something wrong in Savannah. First off,
Mallory's dad stole her car, then returned it to her house. Second,
Mallory inexplicably strips to her birthday suit within two minutes of
being home, and while she and Rick are arguing about whether or not she
should do something about her insane, fanatical father.
        Now, while I say that the surface of the movie isn't pretty, I
don't mean that it isn't good. Altman injects mood into each scene, and
the camera-work, while not radical, maintains interest in more subtle
ways. Altman has a particular fascination with shooting scenes through
windows, particularly with ever present rain trickling down them.
(Courtesy of a tropical storm brewing close by, ready to strike when the
plot requires.) This trick, along with others, builds upon the
servicable script to create enough tension to make me know something
about this neatly-tied story was wrong, even if I couldn't figure out
exactly what.
        Unfortunately, the twist is another one of those that sub-par
writers use in order to feign complex characters and plot: it's the
twist which no one could reasonably figure out. Even after it happens,
you could go back and watch the movie ten more times and not see any way
you could have divined that this ball was going to fly in from left
field.
        And it really is too bad that the plotting is so illogical,
because the acting, like the directing, is pretty damn good. Branagh
makes more out the run-of-the-mill Southern, Grishamesque lawyer than
I've seen before. In fact, Magruder is down-right seedy at times, but
the seediness only makes him more sympathetic by the end. Downey, Jr.'s
also strong, his natural charisma oozing through the one-dimensional
drunk, womanizing private detective. Hannah's fine in her underwritten
role, and Duvall manages to force at least a little depth from a villain
the audience never gets to know.
        All in all, though, the movie feels too much like watching
hand-drawn cardboard cut-outs run around on a two-dimensional board,
chasing and shooting at each other. Too bad the board-game's so
well-conjured and the actors are good enough to even make some of the
stock-paper come to life time to time.
