Authors
Kleszczewski, Nicholas
Number of Reviews
40

Title
Review for Ronin (1998)
Ronin sports one of the best car chases in recent memory.  The chase
(the film's third) has cars speed in and out of tunnels, in wrong
directions on major highways, and through narrow, scenic
pedestrian-littered streets.  It conjures up memories of _The French
Connection_, _To Live and Die in L.A._ and _Speed_ all at once, and
further transcends them due to its distinctively Euro look.  The ride is
thrilling.  The accidents are devastating.  And yet, there's something
so, so, plastic and nihilistic about the whole setup.
I mention this because _Ronin_ wants to be the first _Pulp Fiction_
clone hitting the foreign espionage circuit.  Like _Fiction_, it sports
an excellent diverse cast, each character with mixed motives.  Robert
DeNiro is the American, Jean Reno (_The Professional_, _Godzilla_) is
the Frenchman, Stellan Skarsgard (_Breaking the Waves_, _Good Will
Hunting_) is the German, and Natasha McElphone (_Truman Show_) is the
mysterious Irish ringleader.  The cast plays off each other with the
standard personas each has been associated with.
The film even has a _Fiction_-esque McGuffin--a mysterious silver
briefcase.  "What's in the case?" asks DeNiro, repeatedly.  Perhaps the
mathematical "process" described in _The Spanish Prisoner_.
But, also like _PF_, there is such a casual disregard for human life
that it is ultimately off-putting.  What made _Pulp Fiction_ work and
_Ronin_ less satisfactory is that _Pulp Fiction_ worked on a much
smaller scale, with every death in that film being economic and
significant in its storyline/shock value.  _Ronin_ spends too much of
its time shooting, crashing, and killing that it gives us no reason to
care for its central characters.  Or charicatures.
Back to that car chase.  The camera captures the car running down a few
pedestrians.  Cut to: interior look of car, McElphone is unfazed.  No
dialogue.  No fear of getting caught.  Cut to: car no. 2, with Jean Reno
in the driver's seat.  Six cars crash right behind him, yet he keeps
going, expressionless.  The audience's adrenaline is pumping, but both
characters and their passengers, are sedate.  What gives?
This goes on for nearly ten minutes.  The city is destroyed.  Innocent
bystanders die.  Fifty cars get demolished.  Yet very few police cars
respond.  (Were they on strike?)  And the oncoming traffic seems
incomprehensibly calm over the ensuing havoc. ( Did the traffic reports
prepare them?)
I suppose we, as imbecillic movie patrons can watch that and think,
"Wow, that's so cool."  James Bond doesn't flinch, why should they?  My
take: for a film that is meant to be taken with a grain of salt, it has
a devastating ancillary tone.  It takes everything way too seriously,
from its travellogue/historical settings, to its
every-day-is-a-rainy-day cinematography, to the let's throw in every
hard-to-understand accent we can find in its dialogue, to its wink-wink
references of the CIA, KGB and (here's the clincher) IRA.
The final scene ruined it for me.  Without spoiling the film, there is a
scene terribly reminiscent of _Snake Eyes_, except, at least in _that_
film, the police acted somewhat responsibly, the crowds became involved
with the crime, and, ultimately, justice was served.  Here, a
devastating threat is made, said threat is actually followed through,
and... nothing comes of it.  We see the victims, but the bad guy, at
least that one particular bad guy whose face is concealed, gets away.
Why waste our time?  There's enough illogical madmen getting away with
horrific crimes displayed on our nightly news.
So I could not care for the characters.  Consequently, the story bored
me. Hence, I cannot recommend this film.  And yet... there _is_ that
wonderful car chase.  I'm torn.

Title
Review for Matrix, The (1999)
I have already seen _The Matrix_ three times, and this was within a week and
a half.  I never do that.
Part of it was my fault: I told too many people that I would see the film
with them.  But part of it is my complete fascination with this film,
perhaps the first truly original sci-fi film with mass audience appeal
since, dare I say it, _Star Wars_.  Oh, I'm sure there are many others, but
my head has a low attention span.  Very few films can create a world so
entirely different from our own, and push the boundaries of plot
development, mythical references and special effects as this.  
The first time I saw it, it was solely as one being totally envelopped by
the story and them phenomenal action sequences.  When we first meet
"Trinity" (Carrie-Anne Moss), she effectively disarms the four policemen
around her, running up walls, kicking people in mid-air, and using her
karate kicks.  If that sequence didn't wake you, nothing will.
But then the story kicks in.  And without detailing too much, it's about the
hacker Neo (Keanu Reeves, perfectly cast, but still can't act), who comes to
understand that this current world isn't really what it seems.  He is
introduced to Morpheus (Laurence Fishburne), the leader of a small troupe of
cool-looking rogues out to save the world.  
The "big secret" will not be spoiled by me.  How can I?  It is impossible to
really explain the film within a space of a couple of paragraphs, and it
takes up more than an hour to do so.  I will, however, name it's influences:
_DreamScape_, _Brainstorm_, _The Terminator_ films, Greek mythology, _Tron,
_Blade Runner_, martial arts films, _Die Hard_, _Soul Food_, the Plasticman
cartoon, the Superman phone-booth, and the Bible.  Whew.
The second time I saw it, I was contemplating its references.  Neo.
Morpheus.  Nebuchadnezzer.  Trinity. Zion. The Traitor.  "The One." An
argument can be made that this is a modern retelling of the coming of Jesus
in the New Testament.  (The articles in www.hollywoodjesus.com/matrix.htm is
highly recommended).  I enjoyed it even better the second time.  (I can't
say no to action films with religious themes).
The third time, it was starting to be a little overkill, I admit.  I
focussed more on the acting of the film, and it resulted in a resounding
thud.  It's easy to pick on Keanu, but he's not the stinker of the bunch.
Like I said earlier, he can be perfectly cast, and still not act.  The
screenplay fully exploits his lack of emotion in anything he says, or his
monotone voice.  There's one sequence that's totally laugh out loud as he
fights with a baddie with the most laconic expression on his face.
No.  The stinker actor is, sadly, Laurence Fishburne.  Ouch.  He combines
Shakespeare with Shatner.  "I know, (pause) EXACTLY, (pause) what-you-mean."
His methodical annunciation of every line only serve to add to the mundanity
of the script.
Even so, it is rare for my every emotion to be engaged while watching a
big-budget popcorn flick.  It presented a world that fully held my mental
attention.  Then the special effects came in to dazzle me.  Then the action
sequences came to thrill me.  Little nuances between the characters came to
humor me.  The underlying story came to inspire me.  And even a little
romance came in just the right dosage, at the right point.  My prediction:
The Matrix will change moviegoing, and inspire plenty of imitators.  
P.S.  Whoever you are, stop blaming "The Matrix" for the trenchcoat look
that inspired the Littleton massacre.  The movie had hardly been out a week,
and these horrible kids were wearing the coats for _years_.

Title
Review for Antz (1998)
I wanted to review these two films together, because of all the
similarly-themed movie pairings of the last two years (volcanos,
asteroids, and Morquito's syndrome-afflicted pre-teens), this pairing
held the most intrigue for me.  When Katzenberg left Disney for
DreamWorks, no doubt a synopsis in development stayed with him--a
quirky, insignificant ant saves the colony and gets the girl due to his
peculiar strengths, which were earlier mocked at.
Both films are flighty and predictable, made significant due to the
tremendous advances in computer animation since _Toy Story_, and due to
the politics behind the scenes.  Has Disney been beaten at its own game?
With Katzenberg at the helm, _Antz_ is the strongest contender yet for
the popular animation throne (until, of course, DreamWorks' _Prince of
Egypt_).
What follows is a detailed analysis of the two films.
_Story_
Antz: It begins on a psychiatrists' couch, as Z (Woody Allen) complains
about being insignificant.  Within time, he would be smitten by Princess
Bala (Sharon Stone), who is heir to the throne.  Due to circumstances
beyond his control, he inadvertantly saves the colony from the
double-crossing of General Mandible (Gene Hackman).
Bugs: A colony is threatened by a gang of grasshoppers, led by the
menacing Hopper (Kevin Spacey, perfectly cast).  Flik (David Foley)
offers to round up a posse of gifted fighter bugs to stand up to the
gang.  Unknown to him, the posse he finds are _really_ cowardly circus
bugs from a low-rent flea circus.  Guess who wins.
_Characters_
Antz: Besides the humanish life-like ants, we are treated to wasps, dung
beetles, Starship-trooper type termites, and a rollercoaster ride with a
worm and an apple.  Further, we have a human (presumably a kid) although
we don't really see too much of him.
Bugs: The Disneyfied ants are color-coded by sex.  Further, we are
treated to butterflies, praying mantis, black widow spider, a tough male
ladybug, and many others.  Also, a beautiful red and yellow bird, whose
mannerisms are dead-on, and whose terrifying stance runs counter to its
beauty.  No humans.
_Humor_
Antz: Its jokes have enough innuendos to warrant an older audience.
(Woody Allen isn't really kiddie fare anyway).
Bugs: Far more slapstick--demonstrated visually with a stickbug and a
slap.  The amount of groaner jokes are much higher too (as if you need
to know that).  The end credits, if you wait patiently, attempt to make
up for the groaners.
_Visual Style_
Antz: The ants in the former film are a starkly orange color, with heads
that resemble oh-so-slightly that of the actors themselves (Jennifer
Lopez, Sylvester Stallone, and Danny Glover are the most recognizable).
The face of the Z is strikingly (but not so coincidentally) similar to
that of E.T.
Bugs: Far brighter, but also more generic.  The bugs are distinguished
by their colors.  Eyes are much bigger and chirpier. It appears that
they were designed as if they could be sold as plush dolls.
_The Moral Of the Story_
Antz: Celebrates individuality over conformity.  But is it just me, or
is there something moronic about a mass movement of characters
celebrating individuality?
Bugs: If you don't succeed, try, try again.  You've probably never heard
of this theme before.
_Summary_:
Both films are of good quality, and are suitable for most family
viewing.  Of the two, I like _Antz_ better, because its' visuals had
more style than _Bugs_, and it's jokes didn't fail as often.  Watching
me groan from another Bugs' "joke", my girlfriend told me that for all
the "humor" she's been subjected to, I've gotten what I deserved.

Title
Review for What Dreams May Come (1998)
Years ago, Robin Williams made _Jumanji_, a brilliant achievement in
special effects, but a travesty on nearly every other level.  The same
can be said for _What Dreams May Come_, a boring, illogical,
weepie-wannabe that left my senses numb.
Don't get me wrong:  I love breathtaking special effects and
pulse-pounding imagery.  _Brazil_ is on my personal top ten.  _The City
of Lost Children_ is a great film because of its outlandish scenarios.
I even love _2001_ and _Last Year at Marienbad_, being in the minority
amidst my friends.  _What Dreams May Come_, imagery aside, has little
daring thought to complement its imagery.  The daring thought it _does_
have is never fully realized.  It's idea of a plot is so lukewarm, that
it insults the bigger questions it raises.
It would have been better if the filmmakers rid the film of the live
action sequences, put on an electronica soundtrack, and sell it as one
of those popular _Mind's Eye_ videos.
Robin Williams plays Chris Nielsen, who dies too prematurely--not only
in the story, but before we have a chance to really know and care for
him.  The director, Vincent Ward, and the screenwriter Ronald Bass, have
chosen to tell his life story in flashbacks while having the foreground
story focus on his experience with the afterlife.
Big mistake.  It would have been far better to take the half-hour or so
needed to tell his life story first (ala _It's a Wonderful Life_), so
that I can build up respect for him, so I could know and possibly care
for him, his children, and his long-suffering wife (played superbly by
Annabella Sciorra). Instead, the filmmakers insult my intelligence by
rushing into the story, expecting that the film to grow in depth as it
progresses.  It doesn't.
So in the afterlife, Chris learns that (a) people still don't meet God,
(b) that our thoughts are reality, and (c) time does not exist there.
Hmm...  I+ll grant one of those silly giant ideas for the sake of  the
narrative.  (The "not meeting God" part still irks at me, but perhaps
there was no possible way to film it and give it due respect).  That
said, this alternate reality still makes no possible sense.  Read on...
Chris' wife commits suicide.  Since suicides go to hell, Chris would be
separated from his wife forever.  The important question is, is heaven
really heaven if you are separated from the one you love?  Good
question.
And I like good thought-provoking questions.  I don+t like it when the
filmmakers deviate from the question.  I _loathe_ it when the filmmakers
deviate from the question so that the film becomes a popular rescue
film, especially a rescue film which does not take its underlying
premise seriously.  I _really_ loathe it when it+s story is no longer
run by logic, but by special effects.
Hey Chris: did you forget?  Your thoughts are _real_.  They are more
_real_ than the physical world, according to the new-age screenplay.
So, why don+t you conjure up positive thoughts of Annie, and let that
run wild?  And then she would appear before you, and you two would live
in happy bliss for eternity?
Because there would be no movie, that+s why.  And Albert the angel
(played by miscast Cuba Gooding, Jr.) says bluntly: "That+s fantasy."
Umm... if your thoughts are more real than the physical, then fantasy is
not fantasy, but real.  Surely some Eastern meditation specialist would
be able to tell you that.  And if you happen to think that you are an
unimaginative person, and that your thoughts aren't big enough to
sustain you for eternity, well, in all due respect, that's why I don't
subscribe to this theology.  All due respect.
Another idea, based on "Time, (pause), does not exist here!"  So Chris,
spend your eternity with Annie, as she is on earth, reliving your
favorite memories, or hang out with her when she was growing up.  You+ve
got eternity: perhaps you can hang around long enough and learn not to
freak her out.  And forcing her to write "I still exist" in her diary,
IMO, is just too tacky.
There are many other ideas, all of which are a hundred times better than
what+s unraveled in the plot.  The great aforementioned question is
sidetracked into gimmicky subplots that have been done before, and just
come out stale.  Most insulting is the subplot where important people in
Chris+ life appear in heaven differently than he expects, so when they
finally show themselves, he realizes they were with him all along.  And
when this happens, the film runs in slow motion, as if to build emotion.
_Gag me with a spoon_.
So the only things for me to like are Sciorra+s effective performance,
who rises far above this mundane material, and the special effects.
Please note that while I enjoyed some of the visuals, I did not enjoy
_all_ of them: some of the images looked like Sandy Duncan universe,
everybody floating up and down in invisible strings.
It sounds like a joke, but it+s really true: I really tried to block out
the dialogue, and figure out what music would best work as an
alternative soundtrack.  My vote goes to a rare CD called "Never Say
Die"(1981) from Petra, a Christian rock group.  It+s pretty good, and
they have a song about Annie, who commits suicide.  (It+s too late for
Annie/she+s gone away for good/there+s so much we'd have told her/and
now we wish we could/but it+s too late...).  Melancholic, yes.
Depressing, yes.  But far more entertaining...
So, in case you don+t know, let me be straight.  Suicide--BAD.  _DON+T
DO IT_.  No.  No.  No.  (Got it?--you shouldn+t have to pay $7.50 to
hear this in an awful Robin Williams schmaltzfest.)

Title
Review for Simple Plan, A (1998)
Lifelong drinking buddies, from a small town in the middle of nowhere,
accidentally come across a ticket to financial freedom. In order to
secure the millions that they+ve discovered, one devices a plan, which
they unanimously pursue.  One lets his wife in on the secret, and while
she initially is against it, relents, and becomes a partner in the
crime.  Needless to say, complications arise, and these everyday folk
find themselves committing vices that they never dreamed of committing.
The men struggle against all sides to prevent the possible prison
sentences.  Suspicious outsiders close in, and (I+m not giving anything
away in saying this) untimely deaths occur.
The movie is, of course, _Waking Ned Devine_.  The delightfully droll
English comedy stars Ian Bannen and David Kelly who live in a seaside
Irish village, where they find that the winner of a national lottery has
died, ticket in hand, ecstatic smile on face.  The two plan to collect
the money for themselves, by fooling the lottery officials of the
original ticket-buyers+ whereabouts.  The laughs come from these
complications, the quirkiness of its characters, and through two madcap
scenes of laugh-out-loud slapstick, which I will not disclose here.  And
yet...
And yet, watching this film, I was reminded of _A Simple Plan_, a
cinematic thunderbolt still a-fresh in my mind.  It starred Bill Paxton
and Billy Bob Thorton (an Academy caliber performance) as two brothers
who discover four million dollars on a crashed plane in a nearby
wildlife reserve.  They decide to "hold" the money, and if nobody claims
it, take it for themselves.  That film had tackled the moral
implications of its plot on a much more serious, yet unpredictable
scale.
In both films, greed opens its doors to worse crimes.  In _A Simple
Plan_, the protagonists+ plotting leads to impending doom.  In _Waking
Ned Devine_, the devising takes on a happier note.  In one, the end
result is hell on earth.  In the other, it appears to be a greater good.
What makes this all the more confusing is the differences between the
two sets of plotting characters.  When Paxton and his wife (Bridget
Fonda) want the money, it is for their future plans--a child is on the
way.  But when Ian Bannen and his wife (Fionnula Flanagan) want the
money, they are retired, have been content with frugal living, and face
it--their future is, ahem, limited.  For the former pair, it is criminal
for them to participate in the plan, albeit with honorable reasons.  For
the latter pair, it is not only good, but circumstances appear that it
was divinely-ordained that they receive their fortune, for what appears
to be the paltriest of intentions.
Because it is a comedy, _Waking Ned Devine_ has no room for asking the
greater questions.  Even if you fully root for the characters, and exit
the theater with the light-comedy sign-of-approval--the goofy grin, the
film leaves open the possiblity that, due to simple economics, the
characters+ standard of living will not be affected at all, and all of
that mayhem occurred in vain.  I don+t think the filmmakers intended for
there to be a sting in that film, which is unfortunate, because had it
had one, it would have been a better film.
Still, considering the curse that January puts upon new releases, you
can+t do any worse than these films.  _Waking Ned Devine_ is nothing
more than satire-lite, a "Get out of jail free" card for two-hours of
greed indulgence.  _A Simple Plan_ is more serious, more economical in
delivery, more surprising, more shocking, more thought-provoking, more
memorable, with great performances and a heart-stopping script...   but
with less humor.

Title
Review for Saving Private Ryan (1998)
It was to my detriment that I waited six weeks before finally seeing
_Saving Private Ryan_.  In the interim, I've heard a synopsis, strong
views pro and con, warnings of its graphic nature, and the candidates
for Oscar noms.  Superlatives ("the best war film ever made") are used
extravagantly, and there is this unwritten pressure to follow the media
frenzy.  Oh woe.  If only I had seen this afresh, with no pap.  Fat
chance.
That said, the best way to describe _Saving Private Ryan_ is by use of
analogy.  _Saving Private Ryan_ is to _Schindler's List_ is what _The
Lost World_ was to _Jurassic Park_.  It is a gorier, drawn out excursion
of elements made better in a prior film.  Lucky for Spielberg, _SPR_
doesn't suck like _Lost World_ did.  But Oscar contender?  I dunno.
Tom Hanks stars as Captain John Miller, a dedicated everyman, given the
task to find Private Ryan, so he could be released from duty.  Ryan's
three brothers had all died in the war, and the mother is in terrible
grief.  Such a move, reasons General George C. Marshall (Fargo's Harve
Presnell), should boost morale.
Should, but doesn't.  There's immense resentment amongst the ranks in
Miller's unit, most prominently voiced by Private Reiben (excellently
played by Ed Burns).  Does it make sense for an entire unit to risk
their lives in order to save one man?  Doesn't every other soldier there
have a mother too?
It's a good question, but remains unanswered.  Which puts the film in a
catch-22:  had the film been based on a real event, then a greater theme
of following unjust orders for a just cause would have genuine merit.
Because it's fiction, it's just a plot device, and a lame one at that.
The purpose of this plot device is to show, in vivid detail, the
atrocities of World War II.  Does it succeed?  Well... yes and no.  The
violence in the film is unlike any other World War II film ever made.
But violence doesn't equal realism.  I repeat: _Violence Does Not Equal
Realism_.
An example of this is in the opening sequence, mirrored after D-Day.
Two men are hiding underwater.  Two bullets (and _only_ two bullets)
glide down from above.  Two hits, in both chests.  Sure, it's
ultra-violent, it's relentless, and it's exhausting.  War is hell.  But
was that moment in cinema history realistic?  Me-thinks not.
Meanwhile, the stars of the film could have waltzed in wearing loud
neon-colored bulls-eyes on their helmets.  They're just not going to be
hit.  Oh sure, the red-shirts next to them will, including one who takes
off his helmet, to study the bullet that missed him.  Not a good idea.
The D-Day scene has some interesting camerawork that sets it apart from
(but not superior to) that in _Glory_, _Apocolypse Now_, or _Platoon_.
I liked the eerie slow-motion in real-time effect, which gave a vivid
impression that we were seeing through Tom Hanks' eyes.  We are also
treated to the documentary-verite style of having the camera zig-zag
everywhere, sometimes with splatters of blood on its lens.  If nothing
else, these get some kudos.
Further, the opening sequence is also much gorier than any D-Day
sequence before.  But gore is gore.  Gore does not advance the plot,
increase the tension, or make a better film.  It just weakens the
stomachs of those who would otherwise want to see this film, but won't.
Meanwhile, Fangoria connoisseurs can see where Spielberg lifted his
ideas:  lessee... the intestines hanging out is from _Scream_, and the
man searching for his arm is similar to _Re-Animator_, only the effect
in those films was far more devastating...
Other finer plot points lifted from other films:  there's that
sharpshooter who prays and quotes Scripture before pulling the trigger.
There are elements of _Pulp Fiction_ and _Desperado_ in there.  Tell me,
if you see the Spielbergian shot of an extreme close up from the barrel
of a gun to the eye of the sharpshooter, just to hear him quote a Psalm
("Thou O Lord are my high tower"), do you think he's gonna miss his
target?
Then there's the cowardly everyman, Corporal Upham, who's played vividly
by Jeremy Davies (_Spanking the Monkey_).  The buzz is that he's a
sure-thing Oscar contender.  But his opening scene, where he clumsily
knocks down everything in his path and offers to bring a typewriter to
the mission, is among the worst acting and writing I have seen this
year. Perhaps Spielberg could not resist injecting some humor in the
film, which didn't need any.
The other strong supporting-Actor Oscar contender (they say) is Tom
Sizemore, who plays Captain Miller's gruff assistant, Sergeant Horvath.
Sizemore is okay, but nowhere near the perfection he reached in _Heat_.
Nah.  The best acting in the film is Hanks (a deserved given), with a
close second being that of Ed Burns.  Burns is resentful, thoughtful,
outspoken, tough, and dependable.  Most importantly, he's _real_.
Along the way, there are also nice cameos by Dennis Farina, Paul
Giametti, and Ted Danson.  But I secretly wished that the invisible
shield that surrounded a highly compensated cameo should've been lifted,
and the actor been shot at and died.  Particuarly Danson.  (No such
luck.)
Lastly, it is an unfortunate casting choice to have Matt Damon, fresh
off of _Good Will Hunting_ fame, play the title role.  Had he been an
unknown character actor, as he was when he was cast, there would have
been real suspense in the search.  No dice.  A scene where they find
another "Private James Ryan" is totally useless and from the
Screenwriter's Guide for Curing Writer's Block.  With an unknown actor
in that role, there would have been genuine tension, because you _just
wouldn't know_.
Damon is the only actor in the troupe who did not undergo a vicious
basic training beforehand.  It should come as no surprise that compared
to the rugged, tired, frustrated faces of his pursuers, Damon appears to
be out from walking his dog.  Maybe such a contrast would've worked.
Not here.
I don't want to give the wrong impression.  _Saving Private Ryan_ is a
pretty good movie.  Unfortunately, it's the masquerading as THE GREATEST
WAR MOVIE EVER MADE that's bothering me.  It has too many Spielbergisms
and cliches and screenplay distractions to merit that honor.  In the
final sequence, we see an old man revisiting the gravesite of a fellow
soldier, saying to his wife, "Tell me I've been a good man." I am not
impressed.  Sorry.
It's hard to place superlatives, but for my money, the best war film
ever made is a toss-up between _Paths of Glory_ and (if you have the
patience) _Gettysburg_.  Search for them.  Those are needles in a stack
of needles (at your video store).

Title
Review for Pleasantville (1998)
Allow me to let you into a critic's secret.  When a critic enjoys a
film, and agrees with the films' underlying message, it becomes "the
best film of the year", "a film of daring", a film of "great social
merit."  However, when a critic disagrees with the films' underlying
message, it becomes "preachy", "heavy-handed", and its filmmakers are
out to proselytize you.
Watching _Pleasantville_, I felt like I was being proselytized.
On the surface, it starts out daffy--two 90's kids being sucked into a
50's _Father Knows Best_ clone.  But it changes tone midway through,
and becomes a strong political tract.  The pie is overstuffed; there
are so many issues addressed that the film handles each of them
half-heartedly.
This is a shame, because the cinematography, while not totally
original (remember the old cherry 7 Up commercials?) is the first of
its kind for a mainstream film.  Gary Ross has the black & white
mundanity touched by spurts of color, that slowly begin to dominate
the landscape, the town, the people.
The big joke in _Pleasantville_ is that life is too perfect, too
wholesome.  When Jennifer and David (_Twilight_'s Reese Witherspoon
and _Ice Storm_'s Tobey Macguire) are sucked in by a magical remote
control device (given by a cheerfully off-beat Don Knotts cameo), they
begin to introduce its residents to the modern zietgiest.  It's not
just the sexual revolution, but introduction to modern art,
literature, and music.  Somehow, the "perfect" residents of this
imaginary world begin enjoying the "imperfect" standards and morales
that modern society has taken for granted.
This is where the screenplay gets derailed.  Before the color
revolution, the basketball team gets every shot.  When Pleasantville
begins changing, and "reality" sets in, they begin playing less than
stellar.  Ha ha.
But "reality" never truly settles in.  Premarital sex is introduced to
teenagers, but there's no consequences: no unwanted pregnancies, no
abortions, no sexually transmitted diseases.  Rock is introduced, but
the entire spectrum of modern rock, with all its morales, epithets,
and parental warning stickers, is deeply ignored.  The fifties' sitcom
zietgiest has been replaced by the nineties' sitcom zietgiest, and not
"reality."
Then the film moves in the direction against "book-burners" and
"censorship advocates", and falls prey to its own propaganda.  Sure,
popular censored books-of-the-month are mentioned by name: _Catcher in
the Rye_, _Huckleberry Finn_, _Lady Chatterley's Lover_.  But where's
the anti-Semetic _Mein Kampf_?  Where's the truly offensive
literature?  How about the most banned book in the history of the
world (which is, surprisingly, the Holy Bible)?  The range of "free
thinking" is shallow in ignoring the implications of its thought.
That's why the "censorship" debate is a false one.  Sure, books were
burned, and to this day, protests occur against offensive films and
off-Broadway productions.  BUT... in a society where freedom of
expression is celebrated, then it should be expected that both ideas
should be shared; that those offended have _as much right_ to voice
their discomfort over the art as the artist himself.  Those who burn
the books OWN the books that were burnt.  And if there were to be no
censorship ever in the world, then every library, every bookstore,
every videostore must contain every single book/art/video ever
produced.
The mob's voice isn't censored in _Pleasantville_.  Worse, they are
charicatured.  In the most surreal episode on _Pleasantville_, a nude
painting of Joan Allen's Betty Parker is displayed on a malt-shop
window.  The townsfolk appear, they incite a riot, they trash the
shop.  But no dialogue is heard amidst the screaming.  Possible
statements would include: (1) A painting like this is better placed in
a museum, not a malt shop; (2) Is this the right venue to broadcast to
the world that Mrs. Parker is having an illicit affair with
Mr. Johnson (Jeff Daniels); (3) The painting sucks.  All three
comments are legitimate statements, but are clouded by negative
stereotypes that Gary Ross is more than happy to employ.
Gary Ross wants it both ways ideologically.  In the opening moments,
he humorously recognizes that society is on a downward slope,
partially due to (must I say it?) _sin_.  At the same juncture, he
recognizes that because of the introduction of sin, life is more
colorful, more daring, more free.  This is most apparent in the
not-so-subtle reference to David's eating of the forbidden fruit;
later he is told that that one act is the reason for the downfall of
his surroundings.
So, according to Gary Ross, life is deteriorating because of sin.  But
because of sin, life is freeing and exhilorating.  Um... which is it?
Many moviegoers will want to ignore the theological undercurrent, and
enjoy the film as entertainment.  But that is just impossible.  The
story takes such an abrupt turn, that those expecting lighthearted,
fun entertainment will become bored.  And those looking for great
satire end up with muddled messages.  Perhaps the "happy ending"
syndrome that affects most Hollywood productions has infected this as
well.
That said, I am convinced that Joan Allen and William H. Macy give the
best performances in their careers.  They have impossible roles, of
being etched as charicatured ideal parents, slowly discovering their
individuality and sexuality.  Allen's Betty Parker is the consummate
homemaker who doesn't understand how unhappy and desperate she is.
Macy's George is the opposite, who's love of having dinner ready at
six is thrown into a tumult when that routine is upset.  Because of
them, the film has depth.
The other actors range from the standard (McGuire and Witherspoon) to
the downright embarrassing (Daniels and J.T. Walsh).  The film has
some clever bits--the "No Coloreds" theme is an act of genius.  But
these are not enough to compensate for the film.  All in all,
_Pleasantville_ has laughs, a good tone, an ingenius concept, and some
swell acting, soured by its own muddled, heavy-handed preaching.  Too
bad.
Now, which theatre owner will dare place this and _The Ice Storm_ on
its double-bill?

Title
Review for Election (1999)
Every now and then a movie comes along from a suspect studio, with every
indication that it will be a stinker, and to everybody's surprise (perhaps
even the studio) the film becomes a critical darling.  MTV Films' _Election,
a high school comedy starring Matthew Broderick and Reese Witherspoon, is a
current example.  Did anybody know this film existed a week before it
opened?
The plot is deceptively simple.  George Washington Carver High School is
having student elections.  Tracy Flick (Reese Witherspoon) is an
over-achiever with her hand raised at nearly every question, way, way, high.
Mr. "M" (Matthew Broderick), sick of the megalomaniac student, encourages
Paul, a popular-but-slow jock to run.  And Paul's nihilistic sister jumps in
the race as well, for personal reasons.
The dark side of such sleeper success is that, because expectations were so
low going in, the fact that this was quality stuff made the reviews even
more enthusiastic than they have any right to be.  You can't help going in
with the baggage of glowing reviews, which is in contrast to the negative
baggage that the reviewers were likely to have.  
_Election, a good film, does not live up to its hype.  
What makes _Election_ so disappointing is that it contains significant plot
details lifted directly from _Rushmore_, released a few months earlier.  The
similarities are staggering:
Tracy Flick (_Election_) is the president of an extraordinary number of
clubs, and is involved with the school play.
Max Fischer (_Rushmore_) is the president of an extraordinary number of
clubs, and is involved with the school play.
The most significant tension of _Election_ is the potential relationship
between a teacher and his student.
The most significant tension of _Rushmore_ is the potential relationship
between a teacher and his student.
Tracy Flick is from a single parent home, which has contributed to her
drive.
Max Fischer is from a single parent home, which has contributed to his
drive.
The male bumbling adult in _Election_ (Matthew Broderick) pursues an
extramarital affair, gets caught, and his whole life is ruined.  He even
gets a bee sting.
The male bumbling adult in _Rushmore_ (Bill Murray) pursues an extramarital
affair, gets caught, and his whole life is ruined.  He gets several bee
stings.
And so on.  What happened?  How is it that an individual screenplay
(_Rushmore_) and a novel (_Election_) contain so many significant plot
points, and yet both films were probably not even aware of each other, made
from two different studios, from a genre (the high school geeks revenge
movie) that hadn't been fully formed yet?
Even so, the strengths of _Election_ rely upon its fantastic performances
from Broderick, Witherspoon, and newcomer Jessica Campbell, as Paul's
anti-social sister, Tammy. Broderick here is playing the Mr. Rooney role
from _Ferris Bueller_, and he seems to be having the most fun he's had since
then.  Witherspoon is a revelation.  It's early in the year, it's a comedy,
and teenagers have little clout, but for my money, Witherspoon deserves an
Oscar nomination. And once Campbell's character gets going, like in her
fantastic speech in the gymnasium, then you're won over.
One thing that's been bothering me since I've seen it.  There is an
extraordinary amount of sexuality in this film.  I suppose that, coming from
MTV films, I should expect no less... but the film starts off light and
airy, like a sitcom.  As the screws tighten, and the tensions mount,
Alexander Payne decides to add elements that, frankly, distract from the
story.  It is bad enough that Mr. M doesn't like Tracy's determination to
win at all costs, but did they have to throw in the student/teacher
relationship?  Even so, there's no logical reason why Mr. M has an affair
when he does.  
There's a lot to like in _Election_, but the plot similarities to
_Rushmore_, and the tonal nosedive it takes as it gets explicitly
sex-driven, mark this as a disappointment.

Title
Review for Truman Show, The (1998)
It must be some sort of warped critical nightmare:  the best movie of
the year would be a summer vehicle, a Jim Carrey vehicle at that.  And
so it is.  _The Truman Show_ is the most perplexing, crazed, paranoid
and rib-tickling morality play I've seen since I-don't-know-when.
Don't credit Carrey.  It starts with Andrew Niccol (Gattaca), who
created the script ten years ago.  The story, replete with sublte
religious and philisophical undertones, is about a man who discovers
that every day of his existence has been televised for a mass audience.
(Ironically, it was within these past ten years that "reality-based"
television have become a predominant fixture into our culture.  Who
knew?)
One-upping Niccol, it was when unlikely candidate-director Peter Weir
took the helm that things fell into place.  Weir had the nearly
impossible task to create the unimitible tone, deftly mixing Capra with
Kafka, throwing George Bailey in a universe inhabited by Rod Serling.
It was Weir's first stroke of genius to create Seahaven: a suburban
paradise/prison that would make Spielberg cower in shame. For example,
bystander-extras would walk around the block incessantly with flowers
along with the latest issue of _Dog Fancy_.  The nicest touch are the
plethora of subtle hints for Truman to _not_ leave the island.
Credit Weir for his second stroke: the casting of Carrey.  Carrey seems
to be the type of character actor who would always turn "on" and act
goofy whenever the camera is near.  Not here.  His performance is so
subverted you sometimes wonder if he is ever aware the camera is on.
And although Carrey does not deserve an Academy Award nomination (just
as well, the Academy rarely honors goofy comedians, excepting Robin
Williams), he stretches enough to alter his hyper-silly image
considerably.  Playing one who has the cameras constantly invading his
most intimate moments turns to be quite the role of Jim Carrey's life.
No pun intended.
Better in a smaller, more pivotal role is Ed Harris as Christof, who
mixes the right amount of his Apollo 13 "work the problem, people"
character with Dustin Hoffman's megaglomaniac producer in _Wag the Dog_,
and then only slightly Svengalian.  It is clear that he is torn between
the Nielson ratings and Truman's well being.  Yes, in his own misguided
way he loves Truman as a father to a son, and has provided the best
universe he could provide.  He thinks.
Rounding out the cast is Natascha McElhone (Mrs. Dalloway) as Carrey's
true "forbidden love", Sylvia, very effective in another pivotal small
role.  Laura Linney (Congo) and Noah Emmerich (Copland) have the
unfortunate task of playing Truman's wife and best friend; their
sitcom-ish dialogue allow little room for any authentic character
development.  The exception is at the very beginning, where they speak
into the camera, wholeheartedly believing that their participation is
truly good for Truman, and for society in general.
There are other little problems with the script.  Are we to assume that
toddler Truman had no recollection of hearing the construction of such a
gigantic dome during his formative years?  Was there any reason as to
why in one scene, it rained solely on Truman, even though it never had
to?  How is it they hire hundreds of extras, and none of them could
drive a boat, and yet Truman, fearful of water, is helming a sailboat
effortlessly?  And couldn't Christof have turned off the wind, to strand
Truman at sea?
These little contrivances, however, do not hold a candle to the overall
effect of the work.  The audience gets the feeling that it is watching
the actual show, and we are drawn to Truman's mundane existence for no
other reason than it is there.  The final result effortlessly combines
the emotional happy ending of a mainstream picture with a gnawing
discomfort that hits you square in the gut.  Upon leaving the theater, I
was looking up in the sky, wondering if it was nothing more than a
gigantic dome. Just checking.

Title
Review for Prince of Egypt, The (1998)
The best scene in _The Prince of Egypt_, a modern animated retelling of
_The Ten Commandments_, occurs after Moses visits God at the burning
bush.  He meets his wife, Tzipporah, and giddily tells her the news,
dances with her, and she steps back slowly in a quiet wonderment.  No
dialogue is heard.  This is all done in pantomime, as Hans Zimmer's
score annunciates what's on the screen.
I highlight this to distinguish what makes _PoE_ different from nearly
ANY other animated film I could remember.  It isn't a typical scene.
In any other film, the (redundant) dialogue would be heard, the
violins would screech to represent Tzipporah's response, and all of
this would occur at an extreme close-up.  Not here.  If Orson Welles
had directed this film, he would have done the same thing.
This film is so gloriously _cinematic_ that it's poetry.  There are
scenes in this film work so visually well that it speaks on multiple
levels.  Take the scene where Moses confronts Rameses and firstborn, in
front of the hieroglyphic indicating the drowning of Hebrew children.
Rameses' son is in the middle of the frame, perfectly situated in the
hieroglyphic jaws of death.  Not only is it a conversation of the
terrible past, but it is a foreshadowing of the worst plague to come.
There's a scene where the young Moses confronts "the man he calls
father", Pharoah Seti.  The backdrop is a giant statue of Seti, and
when they speak, Seti's face matches that of the great monument behind
him.  It's as if young Moses were confronting not just Pharoah, but
centuries-old traditions and authority.  Brilliant.
Then there are the technological achievements that weren't even
possible a few years ago.  Not just the parting of the Red Sea--we've
seen that bit in the coming attractions--but how about the water in
the opening sequence, when Baby Moses is placed in a basket in the
river.  The river itself, swishes, rolls, and plain darn LOOKS LIKE A
REAL RIVER.
Much of Pharoah's kingdom has a scope and greatness that has been
compared to David Lean.  Thousands of extras have been replicated, but
there are no false images.  Even those individuals at a great distance
have an authenticity to them.
The voices are also well done.  Val Kilmer is not my first choice for
Moses, but he brings about a fine metamorphisis: from fun-loving
prankster in the opening reel to dynamic leader.  (I have to remind
myself: didn't he get his start with the sophmoric comedies _Top
Secret!_ and _Real Genius_? ) Ralph Fiennes does an admirable job as
the Pharoah Ramses, and Patrick Stewart even brings in some dignity as
the Pharoah Seti.  Michelle Pfieffer (as Tzipporah) and Martin Short
(as the sorcerer Huy) are the least recognizable, while Jeff Goldblum
(Aaron) and Sandra Bullock (Miriam) have more familiar vocal =
mannerisms.
I can now attest that, after trudging several years through
_Anastasia_ and _Hercules_, the songs _are_ memorable once again.
_When You Believe_ is probably Oscar bound, and only lacks when sung
by the divas Mariah Carey and Whitney Houston.  (That's because it
works better if it were sung simply, not throwing in every nuance of
"ooh-whooah-aaah" that Mariah and Whitney are known for).  Also,
Baby's Lullaby and Heaven's Eyes are also catchy.
None of these tremendous advances in animation, catchy tunes and great
acting would be worth a cent if the story driving it didn't demand
such respect.  And here, in the year of the "tell me a story" film
(_Men With Guns_, _Smoke Signals_, even _Saving Private Ryan_), we
have the mother of all stories.  This is a story that, according to
Deuteronomy, was commanded to be told in every household, for all
generations.
Who doesn't want to relate to a reluctant hero with a nearly
impossible task, demand justice and freedom for the oppressed?  When
God calls Moses to pursue this task, you can see Moses' weakness, his
tremor, his uncertainty.  When he initially fails to have Ramses
relent his torture, the Israelites complain that Moses is making it
worse for them.  Yet somehow he's steadfast, he prevails, follows
strange orders (drop your rod--it will turn to a snake, put the blood
of a lamb over your doorposts), and acheives the impossible.  When
Moses was inbetween the Red Sea and thousands of angry Egyptian
warriors, God had made a way where there was no way.
For all that familiarity, the story is still most poignant and
powerful.  It still speaks many things to many different people,
liberals, conservatives, Jews, Christians, Muslims, atheists, rich,
poor, and so on.  Jeff Goldblum, in a radio interview, raved that this
is a story that, the deeper you look into it, the more you get out of
it.  I couldn't agree more.
Will kids dig it?  I hope so.  But this film isn't for kids, but for
everybody.  The makers at Dreamworks have a philosophy that animation
isn't necessarily a category of itself, but a vehicle to bring about a
story, _any_ story.
_The Prince of Egypt_ is a seminal film.  It will be remembered for
years to come, not only on anniversaries during religious feasts, but
for its' landmark understanding of film, period.  I don't think I'm
exaggerating that this may take animation where _Citizen Kane_ took
mainstream film nearly sixty years ago.

Title
Review for Doctor Dolittle (1998)
I cried during _Babe_.  I admit it.  The special effects, the story, the
great dialogue were woven together so delicately and successfully that
my mind lost track that this was a "children's film"--so much so that,
yes, I got a little overly sentimental.  Such, my friend, is the power
of cinema.
When word came out that they were using this newly developed F/X for a
Doctor Dolittle update, in which Eddie Murphy plays the title character,
and many great comic actors supply the voices, my anticipation rose to
great expectations.  They can't possibly drop the ball on this one.
Can't miss.  Can't possibly miss.
What went wrong?  After much thought, I supply three general rules.
(1)  Don't let a television actress-turned-comedy movie director near an
urbanite script (i.e., Penny Marshall's dreadful "Preacher's Wife").
Betty Thomas worked wonders with "The Brady Bunch Movie", but the same
sitcom-airiness doesn't quite work here.
It's as if she lifted a generic sitcom, and iced it with light doses of
modern R&B.  Take away the black cast, take away the atrocious
soundtrack, and you have the residue of some mid-80's Kirk Cameron show.
(2)  The greater the cast, the less the individual cast-member has to do
(i.e., "Con Air").  It is great to have the comic voices of Jenna
Elfman, Garry Schandling, John Leguizimo, Ellen Degeneres, and Gilbert
Godfried in your lineup, but they have nothing to do but improvise their
underdeveloped, stereotyped characters, one-line-at-a-time.  It's even
worse, because sometimes their voices are so unrecognizable that you
don't get the satisfaction of linking the voice to the comedian until
the credits.
Now there are three character actors who do get special treatment:
Albert Brooks brings dignity to nearly every project he's in, and the
scenes as a depressed tiger do resonate a certain poignancy.  Norm
McDonald fares nearly as well, as a stray dog who learns to bond with
Dolittle.  But there's little humor here.  That rests on the shoulders
of Chris Rock, sorely miscast and unfunny as the voice of their wise-ass
guinea pig.  Even the mouth is ill-synched.
(3)  Don't let the Special Effects technicians walk away with the
script.  There's a certain timing that's mandatory in comedy.  To have
this timing usurped by the brilliancy of computer generated mouths or
lifelike creations of Jim Henson's Creature Shop, is a travesty.  This
is not to say that special effects filled comedies or Muppet movies
aren't well-timed laughfests; with the right director, they can be and
have.  Here, Betty Thomas is clearly over her head.
I wish I could commend the special effects, but they're merely average.
Count the number of times where the animal's mouth is turned away from
the camera, or too far to notice, or ill-synched.  This is less a "Babe"
and more of a "Look who's Barking" clone.
You may be wondering, 'How does Eddie Murphy fare?'  Well, he came back
with the exceptional "Nutty Professor", and I don't doubt he can come
back again.  Here, he's tied into a straight man and given little to do.
The exceptions are when he fears he's going crazy:  a far cry from his
smarter-than-you'd expect routine that he's more adept at.  It's
unfortunate that he is where Richard Pryor was ten years ago, making
lame comedies without the same bite he had given in his early years.
After all this, what's left?  Butt jokes.  A _lot_ of butt jokes.  I
guess for kids that may be funny, but I was stone-faced.  If there's a
lesson the film may be telling us, is that animals have feelings too,
and they care way too much for your butt.

Title
Review for Elizabeth (1998)
I had held myself back from seeing this prestigious film, a spicy
historical narrative on the early years of Queen Elizabeth+s reign,
because I perceived that it was going to have certain anti-Catholic
elements.  For the record, I don+t participate in industry-wide
boycotts, (nor do I condemn such), but I am sensitive in what I consider
to be personally offensive.  A critic being _offended_?  Mmm hmm.
But ultimately, my voice was being demanded to be heard, especially from
some close friends who (1) saw it/liked it, (2) pointed out that history
can+t be debated with.  The cheapie theatre had it playing.  The
nominations came in, and it unseated _Truman Show_.  Okay, okay, twist
my arm.
The movie opens with a tragic scene: three individuals, devout
Protestants, are being burned at the stake for heresy.  We don+t know
who they are.  Immediately our hearts go out to them.  Dying for
ideological differences is unheard of in the free world (but still
commonplace in Communistic and Islamic societies), and besides, they+re
praying.  And burning is gruesome.  Such is the opening point of the
film; controversial, but a sad truth.
For this to be the beginning, it is assumed that the film will keep the
religious element strong throughout the entirity of the film.  Not so.
The auspicous beginning is only a MacGuffin.  As the film progresses, it
loses interest in the ideological elements, and gains interest in
Elizabeth+s transformation from promiscuous lover to "virgin queen."
Violence first, and when it gets talky, switch to sex.  And back again.
Does that make the screenwriters unfair to Catholics?  Hmmm...  Late in
the film, another public execution occurs.  This time, three Catholics
having their heads chopped off and put on sticks.  It is clear that at
least one of them is very devout, and was in this dilemna because he
followed through with his religious convictions.  Fairness in
translation?  Not quite.
They were sentenced, not for heresy, but for being secretive political
adversaries of the Queen.  (Note that we don+t know if the ones killed
in the beginning had done the same).  Also, by this time we are jaded,
and the focus of the story at this juncture is far more interested in
the Queen+s personal love history than in the "deeper issues" of
ideology.  When one of the Catholic martyrs says, that they expect to be
remembered, Geoffrey Rush+s character smirks... "No they won+t."  Sadly,
he+s right.
This isn+t the only incident of awkward jabs where the Catholics are the
"bad guys".  They are scattered throughout, with little pricks, here and
there, as if they weren+t big enough to warrant a notice.  Take the
initial scenes at the Vatican.  You hear that ominous minor-key chord.
The rooms are dark and gloomy.  The bottom text is in Bigger letters, in
CAPS, THE VATICAN.  You see the Pope, played by John Gielgud, who+s not
Italian, and who sneers his way through the brief cameo.  Not a mention
is made about the historic changes about to occur in Trent, where a
Catholic Counter-Reformation revival was about to occur.  It is there
that reforms were made to stop the abuses that occurred in the clergy,
such as the misuses of indulgences.  But you wouldn+t know that from
this film.
Then there+s this Spanish friar, wearing a black garb, has a disheveled
appearance and is at times walking in slow-mo, with that same droning
minor-key chord.  Technically, this character+s only sin is that he+s
Spanish, and represents a threat to the queen that she will marry the
Spanish Duke.  And the sins of the Duke?  That he is crazy, has an
obnoxious laugh, and is a transvestite.  Yep.
I+ve heard Evangelical Protestants praise the film, but it does no
justice to them either.  Elizabeth+s chief aide, played by Sir Richard
Attenborough, is initially a powerful ally, but he degenerates into an
inept politician.  A nice guy, means well, but consistently making the
wrong calls.  He persuades the Queen to fight France in one scene, and
little children soldiers are killed.
Who+s the positive point-of-reference?  It+s not the Catholics, they+re
the ominous enemy.  Not the Protestants, they+re inept.  And not
Elizabeth.  She is totally dependent upon her aides.  The only character
who understands the fullness of the political dilemnas is Rush+s
character, a scheming, murderous, lothario.  Because he+s agnostic,
thus, not tied to any religious affiliation, he is the strongest hero in
the film.  And all Elizabeth does is rise up to the challenge of
trusting him.
I do not doubt that Elizabethan history has its high and low points, as
does Christian history.  But what _Elizabeth_ does is it takes all the
most campy elements of that historical period, and display it as much as
a sexual thriller as possible.  It+s the _Insider Edition_ hitting the
textbooks.
This is unfortunate, because there is something very deeply profound
that occurred during that period.  Elizabeth, in establishing
Anglicanism, declared perhaps the most major political and ideological
settlement in world history.  The phrase "VIA MEDIA" (In the Middle),
long the anthem for Anglicans and Episcopalians, is not uttered, not
once.  It means that the Anglicans are schisming with Papal authority,
but they are retaining the liturgy.  It means that they become Catholic
_and_ Protestant.  It is the triumph of compromise.
For a film that begins with the burning "heretics" at the stake, it
loses its focus.  The proper climax would be the instituting of
Anglicanism, the power of "Via Media", and the ensuing political calm.
But it doesn+t.  Instead, it shifts focus once it gets too talky, so
that when this issue is finally resolved, apathy had already settled in.
When the three Catholics are beheaded, we could care less whether they
had deep religious devotion or not.
I must re-emphasize: I am speaking for myself, and not for any existing
watchdog group.  If it sounds that I am reactionary, or overly
sensitive, so be it.  I recognize that art criticism is a subjective
experience, and there is no doubt that there may be devout Catholics out
there who have seen this film, and probably enjoyed it.  Subjectively
speaking, what I saw is enough for me to be lukewarm, in the worst of
ways.  The acting is great, the direction is unique, the cinemotography
is colorful... YAWN.  So what.  _Birth of a Nation_, among the most
racist movies ever made, is an artistic triumph too.

Title
Review for Winslow Boy, The (1999)
Hitchcock would never claim to be an actor's director.  His emphasis was in
letting the casting do the work, and was far more interested in the
structure of the film, with each of the actors being used as pawns.  
David Mamet once wrote that his style is built on the same premise.  Never
mind with emoting or getting into character, or finding the person's
interior motivation.  Whooey.  Come up with an ingenius screenplay, an
intricate puzzle, and cast actors who you trust will be believable from the
get-go.  
To say David Mamet's name is to conjure up some of his great works.  Not
only is he an accomplished playwright (_Speed-the-Plow_,_GlenGarry Glen
Ross_) and screenwriter (_The Untouchables_) but he has two movies in his
repertoire that would have made Hitchcock proud.  _House of Games_ and last
year's _The Spanish Prisoner_.  If you haven't seen them yet, do so.
So it is with this anticipation that I went to see _The Winslow Boy_, his
latest.  It is altogether unique that it is the first film I've known in a
long, long, while that is rated G, but the film is really for adults. The
foul-mouthed characters of his R-rated films must be giggling somewhere.
Want a simple plot? Pre-teen Ronnie Winslow has just been expelled from
military school, with accusations that he has stolen a postal order.  He
claims innocence.  His father believes in him, and spends his estate's
riches to prove so.  That's _it_.
Want a cruel joke?  This film has all the components of a Hitchcock film,
only without Hitchcock.  You have the premise of the wrongly accused, only
to not follow it up with who actually did it.  We don't even see the too
much of the courtroom, and the triumphant climax is performed off-screen.
Instead, Mamet is far more concerned with the tensions within the family.
The patriarch (played effortlessly by Nigel Hawthorne), is quirky and
dignified, tough, caring, but a little reckless.  So the daughter (Rebecca
Pidgeon) has no dowry for her engagement.  So the elder son (Matthew
Pidgeon) can't go to college.  
Okay, fine.  But if false expectations can ruin a film, it certainly does so
here.  The film is passable, but I long for the bite of the earlier Mamet.
This has nothing to do with the G rating.  It has to do with showing scenes
that I expected to see.
Back to the actors-as-pawns directing methodology.  Such a style works as
far as the actors themselves are well cast.  Hawthorne--brilliant.  Jeremy
Northam--fabulous.  Rebecca Pidgeon--huh?  
The poor girl just plain can't act.  It would have been better if her words
were annunciated by a monotone voice-emulator than for her to say her lines.
I gave her the benefit of the doubt in _Prisoner_, only because I just
didn't know who she was.  But here she is, at the beginnings of the suffrage
movement, angry that she cannot marry, and she has the same, pause,
utterance-of-lines-and-no-more schtick.
I can enjoy period pieces as the next guy, and I can appreciate it when the
director goes out on a limb to try something new.  However, _The Winslow
Boy_ bored me.

Title
Review for Beloved (1998)
I haven't read _Beloved_, but I can see why it was a prize-winning
novel.  The story is of Sethe, her daughter Denver, and Paul D., who are
former slaves being terrorized by a poltergeist.  Digging deeper, the
"ghost" aspect serves as a complex allegory of the past, and it evokes
sentiments of mystery, awe, beauty, and repressed horror.
The film "Beloved" evokes no such sentiment.  If ever there were to be a
textbook case of a film with noble intentions, a stellar cast, a
reputable director, and a stellar Oscar-baiting campaign, doomed,
doomed, doomed, due to the miscasting of that single pivotal figure,
this is it.
That character is played by Thandie Newton, and her performance is
god-awful.  She isn't mysterious.  She isn't horrifying.  She doesn't
evoke the central metaphor of repressed emotions of slavery.  She evokes
the cheese of Roger Corman and Ed Wood, sans charisma.
For example, to evoke terror, she speaks in breathy monotone, shifting
her jaw to the right.  Scary?  Why, it's flat-out hilarious!  Gusts of
laughter were heard in the screening I attended.
The rest of the cast is in an entirely different league.  Oprah Winfrey
is good as Sethe, but this is familiar terrain for those who have seen
her in _Native Son_.  Danny Glover suffices, though he's just playing
himself.  The real surprise is Kimberly Elise.  She's fantastic, in the
same way that Natalie Portman and Claire Danes are beyond their years.
When she's onscreen, you see her performance abosolutely riveted, filled
with resentment and fear, and never enjoying her childhood.  Elise's
performance was the single reason why I weathered the entirity of the
film.
At three hours, the film is too long, and perhaps could do without some
scenes of Grandma preaching in the woods.  Further, it could have done
without the multiple gross-out scenes that have nothing to do with the
central theme of slavery.  Ants crawling on a young woman?  A dog's eye
poked out?  Oprah urinating?  A pregnant naked woman shrieking in
public?  Still reading this?
Back to the title character.  Perhaps the character was so hard to
portray that no casting could have sufficed (a possible exception would
be the Caucasian Emily Watson, who treaded familiar ground successfully
in _Breaking the Waves_).  Perhaps it would have been better to
underwrite Beloved's character so completely, that all we see is an
invisible person, and the family's reaction to her.
My point being, as long as the mysterious Beloved is described with
words, she would remain an indelible creation of our own imaginations.
But because Jonathan Demme and Oprah had chosen to be explicit in the
film's portrayal of the title character, the mystery is gone, and what
results is the impossible fusion of the important period piece and a
campy horror film.  And like oil and water, they just don't mix.
Who was this film made for?  Patrons who enjoy campy horror fluff would
not want to sit thru a three-hour self-important message film, and the
prestigious artsy types would not want any campy gore with their
delectable Oscar-bait delight.
_That_ is the reason why this film bombed.  It's not that viewers prefer
the dumb antics of _The Waterboy_.  It's that if we want to laugh at a
movie, we want to make sure that the film was _supposed_ to be funny.

Title
Review for Lock, Stock and Two Smoking Barrels (1998)
Out of England comes perhaps the most visually exciting and fresh film in
the Tarantino ouvre, except it is hardly a copycat.  Within it's two hours
come some of the most fresh characters, intriguing plot twists, and
mesmerizing photography.  The soundtrack's cool too.
If there are problems with the film, it's that the story can appear more
confusing than it has any right to be.  There are no less than twenty
significant characters in the film, and them cockney accents don't help. Any
detailed synopsis of the story will help.  And I'm tempted to not give it,
to have the viewer discover it for themselves.  But give it I shall,
dummied-down:
There are five groups of individuals, plus two knuckleheads and Sting.
Group A consists of  four friends who pool their money into a high stakes
poker game.  They lose.  They owe a heck-of-a-lot-of-money to Group B.
(Group B consists of a local porn king, and two enforcers who collect the
money or else).  Group A, fearing for their lives, accidentally overhear of
a plan from Group C (robbers) to steal from Group D (marijuana growers).
They conspire to surprise Group C after the holdup, take the money, and
repay group B.  They succeed. Group E, (Rastafarian dudes whom Group D rely
on for protection) wants revenge.  
Now: add a significant subplot involving the two knuckleheads hired to steal
two priceless antique guns, and you have the film.  It is a given that at
one point, it appears that these two smoking barrels will pass hands to
nearly every character.
What _Lock Stock_ loses in the American translation, it more than gains in
visual style, witty characterizations, great dialogue, unique camera setups,
and all-around coolness.  I was fortunate to catch this without seeing any
commercial for it, and didn't expect the camera to fill me with exhilaration
the way it did.  Every move is carefully mapped, carefully thought out, for
maximum viewing enjoyment. 
So many memorable scenes!  When the boys first walk into a specialty bar,
only to be greeted by a man set on fire.  The dazed camerawork in the poker
sequence.  The drugged out girl.  And my favorite: the face-off between an
uzi and a b-b gun (guess which holds its own for a while).  
A lot of films have been compared to _Pulp Fiction_ throughout the years,
but this is the only film that truly deserves the compliment.  And it
deservedly won the British Oscar for Best Picture last year.  
One more thing: the very final scene will stick to your head like no other
recent film.  Genius.

Title
Review for Rushmore (1998)
I like the character of Max Fischer.  He loves his school, and is
totally dedicated to nearly every single extracurricular activity that
could ever be dreamed up.  So he joins them all, as his grades suffer.
He campaigns to save Latin from being dropped from the curriculum.  He
stages elaborate school plays with explosives and miniature subway cars.
Then something extraordinary happens.  Max falls in love.  Of course,
Ms. Cross, the First Grade teacher, is too old for him and has married
once before, but nevermind.  Max will win her heart by campaigning to
have an aquarium built in her honor.
So he enlists the aid of Herman Blume, a local steel tycoon.  Blume,
played by Bill Murray, is depressed, unhappy with his family, and nearly
has all the vigors of his youth nearly taken from him.  Then he falls in
love with the same teacher.
Thus begins the setup of one of the year+s most engaging comedies.  A
multi-generational love triangle between an underaged, overly active,
under-achiever and a successful schmuck with the wind taken out from
him.  Other than the minor references between _The Graduate_, _Good Will
Hunting_ and _Revenge of the Nerds_, this is totally original
entertainment.
Bill Murray has not only made a comeback, but has delivered the goods
with compounded interest.  It+s as if he+s read too many negative
reviews over his last several projects, and had it gone to his head.
The result is the most engaging, mature character in the entirity of
Bill Murray+s career.  While a few individuals are having a hard time
retaining their personas as they age (Eddie Murphy, Dan Ackroyd) while
others become more obnoxious (Woody Allen), Murray takes this original
character to the next logical step.  He interiorizes every bit of rage
we know is there, converting it to a dispirited demeanor, who cannot
believe the complications that ensued.  And yet he marvels and admires
Fischer+s ingenuity.
Max Fischer is played by newcomer Jason Schwartzman, the son of Talia
Shire, and cousin to Nicolas Cage and Francis Ford Copolla.  It is hard
to retain go neck and neck with Murray, with a complicated character
that+s on screen most of the time, but he succeeds.  He has the
endearing task of appearing smarter than he actually is ("Do they speak
Latin in Latin America?").  We root for him, but we root that he will
grow, not necessarily that he gets the girl in the end.
_Rushmore_ more than anything else, is a triumph of its creators Wes
Anderson and Owen Wilson.  It moves quickly, with a major plot secret
occuring within the first half-hour.  And when it+s all over, you will
be surprised how easy it was to take it all in, and find it hard to
forget a few precious moments.

Title
Review for Hope Floats (1998)
        A friend invites you to a movie.  This film would evade the
explosions and special effects of standard summer fare, and be grounded
in reality.  The plot is as follows: after a terrifying incident, a
mother and her independent daughter separate from the father and move
away from the city.  They need fresh air to get some perspective, maybe
to start over.  Romance begins to brew, however, as one of the locals,
played by an international superstar in rugged clothing, sparks things
up, (especially at a country-western slow dance).  It stars a rising
young starlet, helms a good cast, and is directed by one of the better
actor-turned-directors in Hollywood.
You accept.  You jump at the opportunity to see, what you
believe to be, _The Horse Whisperer_.  But, poor moviegoer, you have
been conned.  Alas, you find yourself watching, incredulously, _Hope
Floats_.  Oh, woe.  Your hope has sunk.
Why was this movie made?  Why was it released?  It is a travesty
on nearly every level, and has the authority to sink the careers of
nearly everyone involved.  At the hands of a better script, the film
could have been a gem.  But it is clueless as to what it is about, and
only succeeds in transferring same cluelessness to us poor viewers.
_Hope Floats_ stars Sandra Bullock as Birdy, who, after
discovering her husband has been cheating on her with her best friend
(on national television no less), takes her daughter and drives back to
her home, helmed by a countryish bumpkin eccentric played by Gena
Rowlands, (she decorates with stuffed wildlife).  Birdy's nephew, Travis
(played by _Leave it to Beaver_'s Cameron Finley), is under her custody,
and in one of the film's many failed in-jokes, is always seen wearing a
different Halloween costume.
What is the point of this?  Does it make any sense?  Is it
supposed to be funny?  The point of the film is to show that the family
is eccentric, but I was convinced that the grandma should have been
locked up for endangering the mental welfare of a child.
All of this undercuts the plot, of which there is none.  There
are only many scenes that are supposed to register emotion.  There's the
scene where Birdy, who used to be the prom queen, is humbled by
approaching a peer she once mocked, for a job.  There's the scene where
Birdy dances with her father, in the hospital for Alzheimer's.  And then
there's the sentimental scenes with Justin, played by Harry Connick Jr.,
who is taking a liking to her again, showing her a beautiful pad that he
built from scratch.
And during each of these scenes, I was sidetracked by my earlier
question.  What sort of eccentric grandmother go through such great
pains as to provide a dog costume, a Kermit costume, a cowboy costume
(with whip), and a full furred Barney costume for her grandson to wear
during dinner? What sort of warped ramifications would this lead for the
rest of his life? 
Outside of this, there are other sure signs of screenwriters
block.  When the daughter stands up to the bully at school.  When Birdy
almost loses her job.  When the family pulls in a goofy lip-synch to
cheer someone up.  When someone dies.  When the daughter cries, (no,
wails) in exasperation that her father is not coming back.  In a movie
like this, you notice the strings being pushed, and you sit there,
comatose, hoping it will end.
Who can survive such a debacle?  I worry for Bullock's career,
which has been running on auto-pilot for the last few years.  She has an
attitude, a solid perkiness, and can drive a bus--but she can't handle
the emotional scenes, much less hold a Southern accent.  Harry Connick,
Jr. is worse--stick with singing, or get some acting lessons, please!
Gena Rowlands is the best part of the film.  But she's such a
good actress, that it staggers the mind that she's weighed down by such
lukewarm material here.  It would be a severe tragedy if the recurring
star of John Cassavettes' great films is known for this film.
Two notes to Forest Whittaker:  (1) Cut the slow-motion
sequences.  There are twelve times where you undercut your own direction
by such a failed trick.  Have you done so, you could have shaved off
ten-minutes of this almost unbearable debacle.  (2) You've had to know
something was wrong if your cinematographer's filter makes the
candlelight appear like little "x"s.  You're not a bad director, but you
can't change a terrible script.
There's a recurring scene where Birdy, working at the
neighborhood Fotomat, finds the machine go wrong, and image after
destroyed, warped, dark image appear.  Think about it.  A succession of
destroyed images may have been more entertaining than this movie.

Title
Review for Vita  bella, La (1997)
What a great film.  What a stunning, touching, heart-wrenching,
heart-warming, life-affirming, miraculous film.
>From its opening moments, _Life is Beautiful_ walks that fine line
between serious tragedy and uplifting comedy.  A car with no brakes
speeds through the town, and Guido (Roberto Benigni) motions people to
move out of the way.  They mistake him to be the Fascist president,
traveling to their town that day.  Heil! Heil!  Huh?  Shortly
thereafter, the president drives through, and people stare, with blank
faces.
This is standard, but somehow fresh and postmodern stuff: the clown
who is also a Jew, triumphs over the anti-Semitic society in which he
= lives.  Granted, _The Great Dictator_ comes to mind--Charlie
Chaplin+s almost masterpiece.  I think LIB (which Benigni wrote and
directed) trumps GD in one essential point: Chaplin+s Jewish Barber
gives a great speech at the climax, but to do so, he had to break
completely from character.  Benigni is given a similar situation: he
is mistaken as a Fascist dignitary, and must explain to a classroom
filled with schoolchildren = on how scientists have concluded that
Aryans are the superior race.  Benigni+s Guido stays in character, and
delivers the speech, keeping = the subject matter intact while showing
the absurdity of its concept.  It = is one of the great satirical
scenes in modern cinema.
There are many other scenes, especially in the first half, which are
bright and loopy and funny and silly.  Slapstick reigns, and although
the film is subtitled, there was no doubt that a universal language
was being conveyed.  And although it+s focus is on the courtship of
Guido = to Dora (played by Nicoletta Braschi, Benigni+s real life
wife), a silent undercurrent creeps in.  This is clearly a racist
society, evidenced by the aforementioned scene and others, and it will
soon affect him and = his family.
The second half of the film takes place five years later, in an
unnamed concentration camp, where Guido, Dora (by her insistence), and
their five-year old son, Giosu=E9 (Giorgio Cantarini), are deported.
Guido, seeing the horrors, is desperate to protect his wife and child.
For = his wife, who is separated from him, he must find ways to
communicate to = her that he is all right.  For his son, (and this is
the most controversial part of the film) he convinces the youngster
that this is all one big elaborate game: it+s rules include hiding,
being very quiet, and learning to not ask for seconds.
Which raises the big questions: How do we deal with pain?  With
persecution?  With injustice on the worst level?  It+s said that
tragedies bring out the best in people, finding strengths they did not
realize they had.  Other times they deteriorate, become overwhelmed =
with little strength or incentive to swim.  Sometimes even, people
giggle in these moments, as if there were a vacant emotion behind
them, yearning for some brightness to soothe their wounds.
Benigni+s Guido realizes this.  He is the clown, but he is not a fool.
He sees the slurs and the vandalism, and while feeling the weight of =
the verbal attacks, he still has the audacity to see if everyone
around = him, perhaps even the antagonists, laugh.  His liberty is
stripped, but not his dignity, and certainly not the dignities of
those around him.  It+s obvious from the onset that here is someone
who is very much against Fascism and the preposterousness of an Aryan
nation, but does so with a grinning, joyful demeanor.
Perhaps that is a form of denial.  Perhaps his alternate reality is
all that he could muster (not unlike the very different _Brazil_).
Or...  perhaps this is an example of great fortitude, with no weapons
but = wit.  Whatever his purposes is subject to debate, but also a
sure sign that this is one of the great three-dimensional characters,
stranded amidst = a terrifyingly risky concept.  Surprisingly, it
works.
It is an important footnote that this film was not intended to be an
accurate reflection of the holocaust.  It+s not that the atrocities
are trivialized, far from it.  They don+t have to be broadcast and
explicitly shown to muster the same horror--less is more. I believe =
that Benigni was cautious to preserve the tone, and I like the theory
that = it is Guido+s alternate reality that we+re seeing.  However,
any criticism that this is rewriting history, that the holocaust
wasn+t as bad as it seems, is simply off-target.
Benigni+s film has won audience awards at Cannes, at Toronto, and is a
definite shoo-in for Best Foreign Language film (hopefully for Best
Picture as well).  He has been made an honorary Jew by a Jerusalem
film society.  It swept the Italian Academy awards.  Controversy
notwithstanding, it is one of the great films this year, and as of
this writing, the one to beat for best film.  Masterful.  Miraculous.
A must-see.

Title
Review for Pi (1998)
How the heck can I describe the visceral experience that is "Pi"?  It is
a film I thoroughly enjoyed, but I recognize it contains too many
elements that will intimidate those used to, say, more traditional fare.
I can only hope that a movement will begin, whereas individuals will
resist the temptation of the bland, assembly-line studio product, and
try for something totally unique and delectable.
The Greek letter "Pi" equals the ratio between the circumfrence of a
circle to its diameter.  Since this is something learned by
tenth-graders, and most movies are made on a fourth-grade level, it
should be expected that its core audience is limited.  But even for the
mathematically deficient, Pi is less about mathematics as it is a study
in obsession, a visual representation of madness.  It is "Eraserhead"
meeting "Taxi Driver" with some "Wall Street" and "Yentl" thrown in for
good measure.
It's protagonist, Maximillian Cohen, believes that mathematics is the
true language of nature, and that every action in the world, no matter
how random, is intricately ordered and patterned.  Given this thesis,
why not use this knowledge to try to predict the stock market?  Such
research draws attention from some shady investment banker types.
Although Max is an agnostic Jew, his faith more accurately reflects that
of an "atheistic Calvinism".  Even so, he draws the attention of Lenny
Meyer, a Kaballah Jew, who explains that the Hebraic language is numeric
and replete with symbolism, perhaps with the key to the meaning of life.
Curiously, Max joins their sect, only to find that even they have
ulterior motives.
Still with me?  There's more.  Max's computer, which occupies most of
his apartment, crashes, leaving behind a printout of random numbers.  Or
are they?
And Max suffers from chronic headaches.  And hallucinations.  And drugs.
And nosebleeds.  And he spends far too much time isolated in his
apartment.  And I'm still not sure what he does for a living.  And he
may be going a little... mad.
Hello?  Still there?  Try this. The film was made for an astonishing low
budget ($60,000), in a glaringly strong black and white.  And is
pulverized by a hypnotic, techno-soundtrack.  This film screams, "Cult
movie!"
Rarely does the majority of the moviegoing public go to a movie to,
gasp, learn something. This audience may be intimidated by the apparent
dryness in _Pi_'s plot.  It's anything but.  First timer Darren
Aranofsky gets a lot of mileage out of his limitations.  The picture is
one of the most mesmerizing claustrophobic creations ever put to
celluloid.  The cinematography is stunning, the editing is superior, and
there are fantastic close up images that we take for granted: a
trembling thumb, an ant on a microchip, a dismembered brain.  He
deservedly won the director's prize at Sundance this year.
It's not impossible to make a good film based on mathematics (Good Will
Hunting, The Spanish Prisoner, heck, even Jurassic Park).  But rarely
has a film been so engrossed in its own world, that you feel immersed in
an entirely new reality.  There's a lot of interesting ideas in _Pi_,
coupled with some of the most breathtaking imagery and editing I've seen
in a long time.  Sean Gullette, playing Max, has a strong, eerie
presence, and Ben Shenkman adds wonderful color as Lenny.
I have two problems with the film.  There is this glaring gaffe where
Max walks down a subway platform, where he is initially at the 50th
Street station, and winds up at the exit for Prospect Park (only New
Yorkers will catch that).  And, oh yeah, the ending is a tiny cop-out.
But these issues are microscopic in comparison to the greatness of this
movie.  Search it out.  Now.  Go to the latest showing. Please.  Trust
me.   I double-dog dare you.
Nick Scale:   9 (if you're interested in mathematics, theology, stocks,
board games, New Yorkers, philosophy, and non-conventional film-making).
        7 (if not).

Title
Review for Go (1999)
Yes, another film in the Pulp Fiction genre.  
Is _Go_ good?  Depends.  If you loved _Pulp Fiction, then perhaps you'd like
_Go_.  Or come out disappointed.  Or wonder how many plot twists from the
latter were lifted from the former.
_Go_ details the events that occurred before and after a disastrous drug
deal.  The word "go" is, to my knowledge, uttered three times, at three
significant points, meaning three different things.  These three stories are
told, within the same twenty-four hour time frame.  
Because the stories are incredibly loony, with coincidences abounding, the
film falls into the terrible trap of coming up with as many vices that could
be conjured up within the small time frame.  More than once, you hear one
character say "Don't do this..." only to have it done later.  For these
moments, the film is predictable.
But to its credit, many of the plot twists are totally unprecedented.  Kudos
goes to William Fichtner, (great in _Contact_, terrible in _Armageddon_).
His role is so well executed that when the punch line comes, it's from a
totally unexpected track, that is both maddening and hysterical.
The same goes for the rest of the cast:  not a stinker in the bunch.  Katie
Holmes and Sarah Polley show true star potential, far different from their
previous work.  Jason Flemyng has come a long way from _Scream 2_, as the
heinous drug-dealer, who is as concerned with getting his fare share as how
bad "Family Circus" is.
But because of its setup, you can't help but recognize how totally
artificial the exercise is.  Hear me out.  Sarah Polley's character is being
kicked out of her apartment.  Christmas Day.  And she works three shifts in
a row to help make ends meet.  Excuse me?  And that's before the story kicks
in.  Suffice it to say, you can only wonder what got into the heads of Doug
Limon (director) and John August (screenwriter) who have her go through much
more, only to return to work the next day.
And what to make of the total role-reversal that Holmes' character goes
through?  She is kept at Flemyng's grungy apartment as bait, until Polley
gets back.  She is terrified of him.  Later, she makes a series of decisions
that contradict everything we had seen before.  
_Go_ doesn't exist to fully make sense.  It exists as a throwaway vehicle
for its stars, all of which have a good future before them.  It (thankfully)
doesn't take itself seriously (the scene where the Macarena is playing is a
prime example).  So it's fun, and it's incredibly busy, even though the film
in general doesn't follow the rules of ordinary logic.

Title
Review for There's Something About Mary (1998)
It was with great trepidation that I approached +Mary+, the Farrelly
brothers+ latest film.  I knew the film would be funny--the trailer
alone had me laugh harder than the actual comedy I went to see.  But I
also knew the film would be an equal-opportunity offender, attacking the
sensibilities of the politically correct with reckless abandon.  I
figured the film would be raunchy, maybe another lucky escapee from
NC-17 hell.  I may laugh, but would I feel better in the morning?
I needn+t have worried.  +Mary+ is the sweetest, warmest, all-out
laugh-and-grossfest this side of _Animal House_.  Surprisingly, the
Farrelly brothers have walked that very tight line of making a touching
romantic comedy on the side, and filling the details with five or six
outrageous howlers.  They make laughter, the toughest job for a
filmmaker to do, look easy.
The plot is typical.  Thirteen years ago, geeky Ted (Ben Stiller) lucked
out in having dazzling Mary (Cameron Diaz) go with him to the senior
prom.  As luck would have it, on that very day, he was hospitalized.
Why, I shall not tell, but I assure you, it isn+t pretty.
He hires a private investigator to find her: Pat Healy (Matt Dillon).
He becomes one of the great comic villains.  Upon finding her, he too is
lovestruck, and so pursues her, lying about his occupation and getting
his teeth capped.  It is only a matter of time before Ted finds out that
he had been double-crossed, and goes to get her for himself.
Would the geek get the girl?  Puh-lease.  The ending is pure Hollywood;
no surprises there.  But the absolute joy in this film is how this
simple premise allows for humor in zippers, hair gel, the mentally
disabled, the physically handicapped, interracial marriages,
homosexuals, skin conditions, serial killers, tanning, and drugged-up
dogs.  The dog on speed sequence alone is worth the price of admission,
and belongs in the Film Comedy Hall of Fame.
And yet, for all the targets that are hit, the film maintains its sweet
tone.  Mary, playing the straight role, is as sweet and caring as she is
beautiful.  She is totally devoted to caring for her mentally
handicapped brother, Warren (W. Earl Brown--miles away from the
cameraman in _Scream_).  Mary+s sunniness carries the film here--it
compliments the below-belt gags that come at you.  Cameron Diaz makes
her totally charming, and the audience respects her, even though women
in general do not usually undress before an open window.
Ben Stiller also fares very well, totally changing his image from his
_Reality Bites_ and _Flirting with Disaster_ straight men to being a,
(how to say it?), a complete loser.  Braces, greasy long hair, not too
bright, and very very funny.  Dillon is exceptionally creepy, especially
with his capped teeth.  And rounding out the cast is Ted+s friend Dom
(Chris Elliot), tanning addict Magda (Lin Shaye), modern troubador/Greek
chorus Ron Lichman, and Mary+s sweet mom, Markie Post (where has she
been?!).
Not everything works.  Chris Elliot+s role, skin blemishes and all,
becomes merely tasteless and boring.  There+s lousy dialogue about
eight-minute vs. seven minute exercise tapes.  And there are long
stretches without much going on.  But the wait is worth it.  When those
extraordinary sequences hit, the entire theater erupted with howls,
tears. belly-aches, that in some sequences carried over to the following
scene.
The Farrelly brothers have finally done it.  Yes, there are some raunchy
bits, but when it is all over, it+s not nearly as bad as it could have
been. While tasteless, it didn+t cross any lines, at least not with me.
While raunchy, it wasn+t nearly as bad as _Porky+s_ or _Boogie Nights_.
And it is sweet enough to be considered a date flick.  After the funny
but sour _Kingpin_ left a negative aftertaste in my palate, comes the
funniest sex farce since _A Fish Called Wanda_. Approach this with an
open mind, and you will reap the benefits hugely.

Title
Review for Mighty, The (1998)
_Freak The Mighty_ (original title) received such a response at last
year's Cannes Film Festival, that our friends at Miramax picked this
film up on impulse.  And rightly so.  Like _The Spitfire Grill_ before
it, here is an honest tearjerker that contains breakthrough
performances, a good (if not quirky) cast, and some moments that I
declare "magical."
Then PR got its hands on the film.  Bad news.  It seems like every
decision made to promote _FTM_ has only furthered to draw people away.
Mistake No. 1:  Rename it _The Mighty_, which means absolutely,
positively... nothing.  (Mighty what? Mouse? Ducks? Aphrodite?)  Is it 
a superhero?  Is it a baseball player?  Is it an earthquake?
Mistake No. 2: Bill this as a Sharon Stone vehicle.  Sharon Stone, to
her credit, delivers a solid, if not Oscar worthy performance.  But it
is merely a supporting role.  She doesn't need to have her portrait
dominate the ads for this vehicle.  Astute moviegoers and Sharon Stone
voyeurs will not be impressed.
Mistake No. 3: Release it weeks after the better-hyped _Simon Birch_.
Personally, after I saw the previews for _Birch_, I became convinced
that I had seen more than my fair share of gawky adolescent buddy films
with screaming violins and public sermons that, apparently, the
Hollywood community is hearing for the first time.  All this delivered
by overly short, wretchingly cute know-it-alls plus grin.  Gary 
Coleman, anyone?
Mistake No. 4: Have its own previews usurped by a commercial
advertisement that has _nothing_ to do with the film.  If memory serves
me well, it's that movie-based ad where the kids are content watching
television while in a van, and the camera pulls back to see the van
driving through some breathtaking imagery of the Rocky Mountains.  Which
begs the question: why would the parents allow their kids to miss
awe-inspiring scenery for a _video_?
Why do I spend so much of this review panning Mirimax's PR campaign?
Because the film is good.  Really good.  And every misstep Mirimax makes
is lessoning the availability of this feature.  I traveled a great
distance to see it, only to find that the theater wasn't even
quarter-filled.
_The Mighty_ stars Elden Hensen and Kieran Culkin as the two misfits
that bond.  Kieran, younger brother of Macaulay, plays Kevin Dillon, a
cute, smart boy with Marquio's syndrome.  Hensen plays the hulking,
withdrawn Max Kane, who stayed behind in seventh grade twice.  Kevin
becomes Max's reading tutor, and introduces him to the legend of King
Arthur.  Their friendship blossoms.  They recognize that their strengths
in unison, more than make up for their deficiencies.  Max plops Kevin 
on his shoulders, and with the gift of imagination, they become
super-human.
What truly makes this film unique is its fondness for all things
Arthurian.  The knights of the round table, the quest for the grail, the
tales of Taliesin and Merlin, each story is filled with magic and
timeless wonder.  What director Peter Chelsom and writers Charles
Leavitt/Rodman Philbrick have accomplished is that monumental task of
bringing King Arthur to the slums of Cincinatti, without being cloying
or sentimental.
By using this element (and not overplaying this hand), it brings the
rest of the film into perspective.  Suddenly, those bullies at school
aren't nearly as terrifying.  Honorable deeds, such as returning a
woman's purse with money intact, are pursued with valor.  And when Max's
inner demons materialize in his room, both he and Kevin conjure up the
strength and ingenuity to be able to conquer them.
This all sounds cliched, but it is not.  Chelsom directs this film with
immense restraint, with every character being authentic.  Hensen, whose
character begins as brooding and silent, undergoes a transformation that
almost had me in tears.  Stone plays her limited screen time with the
resonance of Dee Wallace Stone.  Gena Rowlands redeems her dreadful
overacting in _Hope Floats_ with a quiet, effective persona.  Most
surprising of all is Gillian Anderson, barely recognizable from her
_X-files_ alter-ego, as a floozy played to the hilt for comic effect.
She's the only one allowed to overact, but it works.
If I have any reservations for the film, it is that the film does tread
somewhat familiar terrain (bullies at school, life-threatening illness,
fatherless homes), and that there were moments where Kieran Culkin is
just barely too cutesy for my taste.  Even the final showdown had
moments of creative implausibilities, but at least kids will like it.
That said, _The Mighty_ surprised me in how much I was drawn in, and how
effective the denouement was.  I was reminded of Stephen Lawhead's
Pendragon trilogy, or C. S. Lewis' Narnia series, and how those books
affected me growing up.  Hopefully, it would inspire new converts to 
the cult of reading, with the honesty and thrill that Macaulay Culkin's
_Pagemaster_ retreated from.

Title
Review for Impostors, The (1998)
Comedy is the most volatile topic to write about.  There have been
innumerable instances where I laughed wholeheartedly at a film, only to
stare blankly at a second viewing.  I don't know the criteria for making
comedy "timeless", and very few comedies make me laugh over repeated
viewings.
That said, _The Impostors_ made me laugh a whole lot.  It is light,
whimsical entertainment--a throw-back to the silent comedies of Keaton
and Chaplin.  It doesn't take itself too seriously, and that's a relief.
It's about two unemployed actors who find themselves in crazy
circumstances beyond their control.
Stanley Tucci and Oliver Platt (his credits are erratic--from Flatliners
& The Three Musketeers to Bulworth and Simon Birch) play their own
rendition of Laurel and Hardy, unemployed actors who, in running from
Jeremy Burtom, an irate established actor (Alfred Molina--Boogie Nights)
hide in a crate, only to find themselves as stowaways on that very same
ship that Burtom is on.  Ha ha.
Afterwards there are deceptions, takeover plots, mistaken identities,
cross-dressings, broken hearts, and the worst subtitles joke I+ve seen
since _Monty Python and the Holy Grail_.  It+s so bad, that you can+t
help but laugh at the inanity of it all.
The great cast includes Lily Taylor (Ransom), Billy Connolly (Mrs.
Brown), Steve Buscemi (Fargo), Hope Davis (Next Stop Wonderland),
Campbell Scott (The Spanish Prisoner) and Isabella Rossellini (Big
Night).  They are all given roles that best exploits (or drastically
alters) their standard screen personas.
Granted, ensemble casts don't mean as much as they used to.  (Take a
"Cannonball Run" film, or a Leslie Nielson film, and count the
recognizable actors with the "doin' this for a paycheck" mentality).
Here, however, it appears that the cast is game.  The atmosphere is
contagious.  The actors are having fun. We have fun too.
_The Imposters_ was produced, directed, and written by Tucci, who
enthralled moviegoers with _Big Night_ two years ago.  I felt _BN_ was
overrated, but I liked _The Impostors_ a good deal more. Tucci has
crafted a very light, very funny comedy that works in its own right.

Title
Review for Last Days of Disco, The (1998)
Disco, by nature, is brainless, silly entertainment.  By contrast, _The
Last Days of Disco_ is mature, thought-provoking entertainment, about
smart, young individuals who danced their nights to such brainless,
silly entertainment.  I suppose it may mean something deeper and more
significant, but I have yet to figure out what that may be.
The film chronicles a few weeks in the lives of Alice (_Kids_+ Chlo
Sevigny) and Charlotte (_Cold Comfort Farm_+s Kate Beckinsale).  Alice
is shy, a bit nave about the new city culture, whereas Charlotte is
saucy, brash and patronizing as she educates Alice.  The two work as
assistants at a publishing house; within time they move in together with
Holly (Tara Subkoff) into a railroad apartment.
The rest of the film is general enough that it could have been written
by a Cliff+s notes text.  Loves come and go, only as an excuse to raise
issues.  One gets a sexually transmitted disease.  The other gets
pregnant, and then suffers a miscarriage.  One of their friends thinks
he is gay, but he may not be.  One fears he may lose his job; actually,
every major character fears this - only a matter of time until there+s a
scene in front of the Unemployment office.  Yawn.
What carries the film from subterranean plot hell is its wonderful
dialogue.  Director/writer Wilt Stillman is supposedly at the top of his
game, pulling no punches with it+s starchy, opinionated, rat-tat-tat
style.  The range of discussions go from G-rated fare (The Lady and the
Tramp sequence is a classic), to more vivid adult waters.  The dialogue
is not for everyone, but is always intriguing and revealing.
Standouts in the cast include the aforementioned Beckinsale, Stillman
regular Christopher Eigeman as Des (who may or may not be gay), and
Matthew Keeslar as Josh, who would spontaneously sing an old hymn if
desired.  Other actors include three individuals from the "Where are
they now" files:  The Facts of Life+s MacKenzie Astin (looking too much
like Michael J. Fox),  _Dead Poets Society_+s Robert Sean Leonard, and
(gasp! Too old!) Jennifer Beals in a terrible, throwaway role.
Unfortunately, the real weak link in the film is Chlo Sevigny+s
character  (I can+t pinpoint whether it is her acting, or the writing).
Of all those in the cast who have strong coherent thoughts and are able
to bring those out at a wonderful pace, Alice is the exception.  She
seemed to waltz in from another, more serious movie, and disrupts the
flow of Stillman-doing-Hawks style.  Maybe she is to be the point of
contrast to everyone else, but it just doesn+t work.
And the music.  There is a huge soundtrack with over twenty classic
tunes.  And there isn+t a single song from the Bee Gees.  Shock!  There
must be _somebody_ out there who+s disappointed.
All in all, I liked much of the film.  But except for a few strains of
dialogue, the film is mostly forgettable.  Just like disco itself.

Title
Review for Babe: Pig in the City (1998)
The original _Babe_ was my favorite movie of 1995, a sleeper hit that
transcended its target audience.  Being a surprise commercial and
critical success, it had no marketing tie-ins, which limited its final
take.  Thus, Babe 2 arrives, with a budget greater than the money made
in Babe 1.  Plush dolls, vending machines hawking t-shirts, and Macy's
Thanksgiving Day Balloons arrive for holiday money-grubbing.
This is a sad review to write, because Babe 2 not only does _not_ live
up to the original, but it doesn't even come to a fraction of it.  I
shouldn't expect that sequels to modern fairy tales to match their
predecessors' magic, but this film tries too hard, and loses its charm.
Consider a driver applying the accelerator with great intensity, unaware
that his car is in neutral.
Imagine with me, if you will, _Scream_'s Jamie Kennedy, explaining the
"rules" for sequels like Babe 2.
(1) There must be _more_ talking animals.
(2) There must be _more_ slapstick comedy.
(3) There must be _more_ songs for those mice to sing: that's cute.
(4) Keep the story cards to break up the action: that's cute too, even
though "The Pig Gets Wise" made no sense, given the context of that
story partition.
(5) There must be action, however illogical, that will conjure up
pivotal scenes from the original: the trademark song that nobody
remembers the words to, the Baa-Ram-Ewe secret code, the "That'll do,
pig. That'll do."
Now throw in the limitations:
(A) James Cromwell, now a hot commodity, has limited time on the set (or
maybe he didn't approve of the script).
(B) Christine Cavanaugh, the voice of the original Babe, demands more
money ($200,000--paltry considering the $80 million budget).  Out.  E.G.
Daily comes in with noticable results.
(C) George Miller, the director, is more well-known for his dark
futuristic Mad Max films and his Twilight Zone segment, NOT for kiddie
fare (and no, he didn't direct that _Andre_ film in '94).
(D) The special effects are impressive, _but limited_.  Babe talks, but
most of the time from a single shot, repeated over and over again.
(Babe is center screen, looking straight into the camera, with a happy
smirk--regardless of whether he's happy, or scared, or tired).
Season now with the "original" elements, which, as we will find out, are
straight from the screenwriting-is-hell bin.
(i) Change the venue into "the big city".  This has been praised as
wildly original. Excuse me: didn't _Home Alone_ do this several years
ago?  How about the Muppets?  Even _The Bad News Bears_ travelled to
Tokyo.  Sorry.  No dice.
Side note: to give the city a fairy-tale look, George Miller crafted a
fantastical fantasyland that merges the landmarks of the world's great
cities, and yes, it _is_ impressive.  But this too is over-used,
repeating the same view over and again on multiple occasions.  And, for
the most part, Babe _remains in the hotel_.
(ii) Given the limitations of Cromwell, the human element is taken over
by "the boss' wife" played by Magda Szubanski.  S-t-r-e-t-c-h.  She's
not a lead actress-type, she's not funny enough in her physical comedy,
and she's simply embarrassing in some of her pratfalls. (Have her
arrested falsely on drug charges!  Have her accidentally incite a riot
with biker dudes and scantily clad babes!  Have her bounce around on a
bungee cord at a prestigious benefit dinner!)  I was hoping for a little
smirk during these scenes, but I felt sorry for the embarrassment that
she put herself in.
I am restraining myself from talking about the dark nature of the film,
the violence, the scene where a pit bull dangles from the bridge, head
submerged underwater.  Even the best fairy tales have a bit of the
macabre in it, as the Brothers Grimm have demonstrated.
No... my problem is with the story, or lack thereof.  _Babe_ is sent out
to save the Hoggett farm, but once in the city, that story is forgotten.
Being a good-natured pig in the midst of the cynicism of his environs is
nice, but, other than rescue that aforementioned pit bull, what did Babe
actually _do_?  Without giving the ending away, the farm is saved from a
left-field quirk that had nothing to do with the pig.
Speaking of "pig", or, "pig-pig-pig-pig-pig!". The word "pig" is so
overused, had they changed it to an expletive, and had the pig be Al
Pacino, I could have been watching _Scarface_.  This is screenwriting?
Further, I cannot explain the deep gnaw at my gut in the many scenes
where accidents happen to good people in fantastically elaborate setups.
Had it been a cartoon, and the victim be an equivalent of Elmer Fudd,
maybe my reaction would have been softened.  But to Farmer Hoggett?  His
wife?  An elderly Mickey Rooney?  Much too irreverent.  ("Quick!  Splice
those singing mice into those scenes!").
The film isn't a colossal failure.  I did like Glenne Headley's schmoozy
chimpanzee.  I liked the pink poodle.  The dog on the cart, who
momentarily thinks he's in dog heaven.  And a weird looking guy who may
have been doubly-cast as an airport employee and a judge.  But most of
the time, I was looking down, in boredom, or in embarrassment over the
hacked-up script.  Them singing mice, those chapter partitions, the
proficient acting of the animals-- none of these can compensate for a
story.
Let me spoil the final scene: Farmer Hoggett looks at pig, proud, says
"That'll do, pig.  That'll do." That's it.  Hope I didn't ruin it for
you.
But tell me this: what the heck did that pig _DO_?

Title
Review for Thin Red Line, The (1998)
_The Thin Red Line_ is a war film, based on the series of events that
led to the takeover of the island of Guadecanal.  It has an all-star
cast, an epic running time, many intermingling stories, and stunning
cinematography.  The film+s strengths are that it is stunningly
beautiful, and that it is deeply philosophical.  It+s weakness is an
incoherence that starts slow, and builds throughout the film.
If I have been slow in reviewing this film, here+s why:  For the longest
time I+ve waited for it to hit my area.  Now that I+ve seen it, my only
desire is to see it again.
Usually, that would be a blurb of great praise.  Not here.  I would want
to see it again so that maybe then, I would "get it."  It seems to be
very poetic, very visual, very philosophical, deeply complicated, and
too abstract.
But it+s not fair for me to criticize the film for going over my head at
points.  It+s not fair for me to complain that I could not keep up with
the rhythm of Terence Malick+s direction.  He may have made it a little
harder to follow, a little less dumbed down, but I wasn+t bored. (Okay,
I was bored a little towards the very end).
The film isn+t overtly graphic like _Saving Private Ryan_, but there are
some strong violent moments.  It+s more concerned with the deeper,
underlying issues of man versus nature.  Of man in a tribal state, being
more peaceful than the "civilized" counterpart.  There+s one phenomenal
image where a tribesman walks through the bushes, totally oblivious to
the infantry walking towards him.
There are many of these phenomenal images.  The only thing that is
lacking is the glue of a concrete story.  But it+s not that the story
doesn+t exist.  The story takes on many forms, affects many characters,
and doesn+t assume that we need to have it all explained for us.  It+s
not conventional, it+s not Hollywood, and it+s not dull.  I could only
hope that repeated viewings will improve my moviegoing experience.

Title
Review for Central do Brasil (1998)
Dora (Fernanda Montenegro) sits behind a make-shift desk at Rio+s major
train station.  She, in her colorful demeanor, offers a service that is
unheard of in the States.  She writes letters for the illiterate, who
pass through, to try to find lost relatives, find love, or search after
lost debts.
She+s quirky, she+s elderly, she+s caring.  Totally trustworthy, right?
Not a chance.  Once home, she never sends these letters, saving money on
postage, and relishing in the drama contained therein with her neighbor
Irene (Marlia Pra).
One of the letters is sent by a young mother with her nine-year old son,
looking for their father.  Shortly thereafter, she gets hit by a bus,
and the son is orphaned.  Days go by, and the boy, named Josu, roams
around the station, hungry, desperate, and somewhat clueless to his
predictament.
Through a series of circumstances too precious to elaborate upon, Dora
somehow takes a responsibility in trying to find Josu+s father.  This
means leaving the security of Rio, traveling to the outskirts of Brazil,
where unpaved roads, religious devotees and the poverty-stricken become
commonplace.
Films like this remind me as to what I enjoy about some foreign films.
It is an opportunity for me to get a fresh breath in another part of the
world, so distant from my own.  It does so entertainingly, and so
heart-wrenchingly.  And yet, it+s backdrop is merely that.  The focus is
on the minute transformation of Dora, of how she learns to love this
little kid, without being cloying or sentimental.
The most interesting backdrop is the amount of religious dedication is
in the film.  Dora being an amoral scam-artist, could care less about
the amount of bickering between the candle-lighting of the Catholics
versus the bumper-sticker mentality of the Evangelicals.  But neither
side is trivialized.  She even begins to develop an affection for a
non-drinking Evangelical, who sees the problems with Dora, if not
initially.
Fernanda Montenegro surprisingly got an Oscar nomination for this very
delicate performance, but the true marvel is that of Vinicius de
Oliveira, who plays Josu.  He, like the discoveries of Jrmie Renier
(_La Promesse_) and Giorgio Cantarini (_Life is Beautiful_), prove that
the true acting discoveries may be outside of the United States.  He is
a natural, and never once grating.  Send a memo to Jonathan Taylor
Thomas.

Title
Review for Armageddon (1998)
Hello kids.  Today the movie studios want to take over my critical
review, and somehow persuade you that _Armageddon_, the summer's biggest
blockbuster, is a film for everybody. And remember, if a film is for
_everybody_, and if it makes the most money for the summer, it _must_ be
good, right?
Armageddon is a COMEDY, with a capital "C".  It stars BRUCE WILLIS, who
has a hundred one-liners!  It has a tiny rock land directly in the
middle of a heated argument in New York City!!  And, chuckle, chuckle,
one of those New Yorkers, _survives_, with charcoal all over his face!!
Snorkle, *sniff*, hiccup.  And it has Steve Buscemi as a _genius_ who
wants to work for an oil rig?  Knee-SLAP!!  Isn't this just so, so,
funny!?
Armageddon also has ROMANCE, with a capital "R".  It has a tender moment
between *forbidden lovers* Ben Affleck and Liv Tyler, with, with, Animal
Crackers!  And it has Will Patton as a long lost husband trying to
reunite with his separated wife and child, who thinks he's a SALESMAN!
Gurgle, *sniff*, awwwww.  And it has Steve Buscemi spewing more
one-liners about minors and strippers.  Umm, moving right along...
Armageddon also has lots of ACTION, with a capital "A".  Not just any
action sequence would do.  It must have _original_ action sequences that
are designed to thrill.  Like, DRILL, darn it, DRILL!!!  And, let's have
inept people destroy the MIR space station!!  Can't you hear your heart
beating!?  And Steve Buscemi goes crazy and starts shooting at people!!
What drama!!
Lastly, Armageddon is out there to save the PLANET, with a capital "P".
This can't be any old thriller--we must have an asteroid, the size of
Texas head straight for earth!!  And, and, we must have beautiful scenic
worldwide shots, like Paris, BLOWN UP.  And, and, we must have peoples
of all colors, nations, and religions, join hand in hand for one final,
hopeful, HUG.  The final sequence, where Muslims in prostrate worship
stand up--in Domino fashion--to cheer the victory, filled me with such
emotional goo that I wanted to, to, to rip the screen into shreds!!  I
mean, I mean, cheer for ecstatic joy!  (It was over).
Comedy. "C".  Romance.  "R".  Action.  "A".  Planet.  "P".  Okay, kids,
what does that spell?
Seriously, folks.  Any film that could take the indie-films' most
valuable talents, and throw it all away with a Bruce Willis vehicle, a
hundred-million dollar budget, but have cheap-o sets and lousy special
effects, is, bottom line, living proof that hell exists, and has made a
multi-picture deal with Universal.
In the midst of all the action, the terseness, the one-liners, the fake
sets, the overall WASTE of  TIME, I recognized Matt Malloy playing an
underwritten NASA technician ("Malloy, give me a reading").  Remember
him?  He was a principal player in last year's _In the Company of Men_,
a film that was more powerful, shocking, terrifying, funny, and shocking
than _Armageddon_ could ever aspire to be.  _Armageddon_ cost over $100
million to make.  _ITCOM_ cost a paltry $30,000.   Need I say more?

Title
Review for Perfect Murder, A (1998)
It's not always a smart move to update a classic.  I tremble at the
thought that some very talented people are possibly throwing their
careers away in updating _Psycho_ for the 90's.  I get angry at those
individuals of the moviegoing public who refuse to see a film that is
older than they are;  I am further upset at those studios who cater to
such individuals, bastardizing a classic in the process.
That said, it has been years since I have seen _Dial M for Murder_,
which, I assume, is to my advantage here.  _A Perfect Murder_, a stylish
remake, works on the merits of its casting, its direction, and it's
post-_Pulp Fiction_ noir attitude.  If nothing else.
Michael Douglas is perfect as Steven Taylor, a courteous-on-the-outside,
devious-on-the-inside, commodities trader who faces possible bankruptcy.
He is married to Emily Brandford played by the attractive but glass-eyed
Gwyneth Paltrow.  While the age difference is great, that only serves to
undercut the tension in their marriage.  She opts to pursue an
extra-marital affair with David Shaw, played with special oiliness by
Viggo Mortensen.
Taylor catches wind of the affair, and approaches Shaw--not to kill him,
but to offer him a deal: kill his wife, and he will get substantial
money and be spared from having his skewered past revealed.  (Taylor
needs the money from his wife's estate to pay off serious debts).  It's
a good setup, and one of the better script twists not offered in the
original.
I will not reveal the rest of the plot, only to say that there are more
twists where that came from.  What I liked (and didn't like) about this
film is that nearly every character is shady and devious, including
Paltrow's.  I appreciated the noir-ish shadings of the characters, but I
also stayed emotionally distant.  The only character whom I rooted for
was that of the detective, played by David Suchet.  But his character
seemed more like window dressing than a hero.
Andrew Davis has rebounded, if only slightly, from the nadir of _Chain
Reaction_ and _Steal Big, Steal Little_.  But he is clearly not at the
level he once was, the heights of _The Fugitive_ and _Under Siege_.
Don't get me wrong.  I liked _A Perfect Murder_; I was entertained.  I
can only speculate whether I would like it so much had the original not
been as distant a memory.

Title
Review for Snake Eyes (1998)
Nicolas Cage stars as Rick Santoro, a corrupt cop lucky enough to get
front row seats to a pay-per-view boxing match in Atlantic City.  He is
also unlucky enough to be sitting in front of the Secretary of Defense,
who gets shot by some sniper.  But who did it?  Why?
So Santoro and his close friend Kevin Dunne (not to be confused with the
actor who plays a newscaster), played by Gary Sinise, work hard to
unravel the mystery, to find out who is behind it and why.  And yes, a
massive conspiracy unfolds; people aren+t what they seem to be; twists
and turns are promised.
Promised, but not delivered.  I knew going in who the Very Bad Guy was;
it+s that predictable.  Follow the hidden Hollywood rule: in a cast full
of mostly unknowns, the bad guy is most likely the biggest star who
seems to have a redundant role.  Even so, I will attempt to not give it
away here.
The cast and director are game. The directing is fantastic, and the two
leads do not disappoint.  Which is all the more counterproductive to the
film.
For example: Cage has a very good scene where he comes to grips with who
the Very Bad Guy is.  And he struggles.  He knows this person, and
cannot believe what he is hearing.  And this goes on for a minute.  All
and well, except this is twenty minutes after the script reveals who the
VBG is, which is about an hour after the audience knows.  Nice tears,
but you+re too slow, pal.
Another example:  Sinise in one scene is walking down a hallway with a
terrifying scowl on his face.  When Sinise gets angry, chills run down
my spine.  His eyes bulge out, his arteries appear on his neck.  Great.
But the logistics of the situation would compel him to cool it off a
little, to play it safe, to look cool but determined, somewhat like
Kevin Spacey.  He shouldn+t have to risk losing his composure to a
certain character in the film, which could ruin everything up to that
point.
And then the direction:  the opening sequence is a stunner: we follow
Cage around for about fifteen minutes non-stop, as he casually makes his
way to his seat, somehow runs into every major character in the film,
and then watches the fight.  The fight is an essential element to the
conspiracy plot; all and well, but we only see Cage+s reactions to
what+s going on.  Which is confusing, and which also cheats the
audience.
There+s another scene where the camera pans above, playing God+s eye
view through several hotel rooms.  A wonderful shot.  But so what?
There+s no tension in the scene, just a voyeuristic excursion outside of
the script.  Did we need to see what was going on in rooms of extras who
walked in off of _Casino_?
How about another scene, where Cage is walking towards where the Key
Witness is hiding; and the killer is right behind him?  Cage needs only
to turn around to prevent his mistake.  He doesn+t.  Even so, the killer
could only prevent such a blunder by hiding behind a corner, and then
jumping out when the Key Witness is found.  But that would make too much
sense.  Further, that would prevent the beautiful shot of having
lightning strike, and the shadow of the killer, gun in hand, appearing
before Cage.  (DePalma likes this shot so much, he uses it twice).
I heard DePalma on a radio interview say that he isn+t that interested
in plot as he is in camera technique and new ways of filming something.
It shows.  I+m happy to report that the plot moved along, and that the
conspiracy had a few gems in its formula.  But it+s the same old
formula, over-hyped and over-played, repackaged but not fresh.
_Snake Eyes_ has both good acting and great direction.  Yet this is the
first time in a review that I cannot recommend this film _because of_
these elements, not in spite of them.  It+s the screenplay, stupid.

Title
Review for You've Got Mail (1998)
_You've Got Mail_ is the latest of the Nora Ephron/Tom Hanks/Meg Ryan
movies in which, like _Sleepless in Seattle_, the two lovers, are
destined for each other, but are oblivious of this fact until the very
end.  It takes place in New York, where the two both work in the book
retail biz.
Side note: I love those huge bookstore chains with comfy chairs and
capucchino. It's a great place to relax, quick-skim potential purchases,
and try one of those forbidden pastries.  I frequent them at least once
a week.
Therefore, I'm not the most objective reviewer when it comes to this
film.  Its underlying subplot is of the huge corporate chains destroying
the Mom + Pop shop.  It's not unlike those annoying op-ed pieces I've
read about how those huge megalomaniacal theater chains running the
small theaters to the ground (lessee... better seating, greater
selection, better sound...).
It's been done before, but it doesn't seem to work in current films.
_What's Eating Gilbert Grape_ comes to mind.  In that, the small grocery
store is being put out of business by the huge grocery chain (with
double coupons, one-stop shopping, ATMs, etc. etc...).  _Big Night_
comes to mind.  I think only _It's a Wonderful Life_ was the most
successful.
Let the truth be proclaimed: the consumer is ALWAYS right.  If you like
the Mom and Pop shop, GO THERE.  If it doesn't stand up to the huge
chains for the many aforementioned reasons, then those stores may just
go out of business.  Sad, but think: the former employees may find a job
that better uses their skills for the general public.
So when _You've Got Mail_ rehashes this same plot-line, I get
distracted.  Frankly, as a former New Yorker, I've never encountered a
store equal to "The Shop Around the Corner" (only in Greenwich, CT).
The popular metropolitan bookstores are the Barnes & Nobles, the
specialty bookstores (i.e. technical books, religious books), and used
books (_The Strand_, promoted in _Six Degrees of Separation_).
Why couldn't have the store's owner, Birdie (Jean Stapleton) have
transformed the shop into one of these stores?  Or better marketed it's
children's book niche?  Instead, the screenplay sells out and
has it run into a bigger issue than it has any right to be.  The
campaign for market takeover turns into a battle that goes city-wide,
with local newscasters enterring the ring.  This goes on for twenty
minutes, is futile, and other than a few chuckles, just buys time.
So we are treated to the obligatory scene where Kathleen Kelly (Meg
Ryan) is sobbing, finally entering the chain store, and wells up in
tears when overhearing a conversation between a consumer and a
know-nothing employee.  A real cheap jab.  It is very likely the same
conversation could have occurred in _her_ store, with Steve Zahn's
character being the know-nothing employee.
Otherwise, _You've Got Mail_ is a funny, cute, romantic comedy.  Tom
Hanks and Meg Ryan play characters they know well. Nora Ephron displays
an uncanny West-Side New York tone: if you can stand the occasional
stench, you'll have a good time.

Title
Review for Gods and Monsters (1998)
Ah yes, the little movie that could.  No doubt that more than a few heads
were shaking the night of the Academy Awards when the Best Adapted
Screenplay trophy had "Gods and Monsters" written on it.  What the heck is
this film, and why is Brendan Fraser in hootin' and hollerin' with
artsy-types Ian McKellen and Lynn Redgrave?
Turns out that Bill Condon is fascinated with James Whale, a director I had
never heard of, but what a resume-- _Show Boat_, _The Invisible Man_, _The
Man in the Iron Mask_, and the first two Frankenstein movies.  Condon made a
love poem to one of Hollywood's great neglected directors, one whose
eccentric behavior had him all but blacklisted in Hollywood, at a time when
very few directors were acknowledged.
So far, so good.  James Whale is near the end of his life, and he's living
in a respectable little suburban house, far from the glitz that Hollywood is
accustomed to.  One day, he witnesses the young man mowing the lawn, and
pursues a friendship with him (Brendan Fraser)...
And much, much, more.  Gods and Monsters, from the very start, veers into
territory that is popular amongst art-houses--the homosexual angst film.
"Oh, woe is me.  If only I were understood.  If only I were acknowledged for
the real me."  These words were not spoken, but they might as well have
been.
I can appreciate films which explore hidden characters of great,
unacknowledged individuals.  But tell me, in Hollywood, is not the
definition of one's sexual preference quickly taking the defining role as to
who that person truly is?  How superficial.  
Ian McKellen does an extraordinary job as to hiding completely within some
of the eccentricities of James Whale.  But take away the homosexual fetishes
of this dirty old man (which he had truly become), and who do you have?
According to this movie, nothing at all.
The other performances are wonderful, including Brendan Fraser.  But
trumping the entire cast is none other than Lynn Redgrave, as Hanna, Whale's
overly ethnic housekeeper.  What a performance.  Redgrave is fully
convincing, very funny, and quite emotional.  I've seen this, and I've seen
Judi Dench, and to be quite frank, Redgrave was robbed.
And the screenplay has moments of genuine old-fashioned emotionalism, as it
looks at Hollywood at a simpler time, still learning how to deal with fame,
only as shallow as characters the actors played.  The scene I really liked
was a mini-reunion between Whale, Boris Karloff and Ella Fitzgerald, of the
Frankenstein movies.  What was a genuine reunion of old friends turns into a
mundane photo shoot.  Such is the price of fame.
The tragedy is that Condon falls into the same trap that the film's
fictitious reporters have fallen into.  The reporters could care less about
who Whale truly is: just talk about them Frankenstein movies.  Condon
couldn't care less either: he wants only to talk about Whale's homoerotic
impulses late in life.  I appreciate the sentiment, but I still don't know
who the heck he is.

Title
Review for October Sky (1999)
When _Star Wars_ came out some twenty years ago, the image of traveling
throughout the stars has become a commonplace image.  When the Millenium
Falcon moves throughout the stars, we see constellations, meteor
showers, and cool space-ships.  When Han Solo goes light speed, the
stars change to bright lines, going towards the viewer in lines that
converge at an invisible point.  Cool.
_October Sky_ offers a much simpler image--that of a single white dot,
traveling horizontally across the night sky.  Was it really only forty
years ago, when Sputnik was launched, and that before then, no
satellites ever existed?  Have we become so technologically advanced
that we have forgotten that it was nearly two generations ago where
people stood outside to breathlessly see a then-technological
achievement, even though it was from the Russians?
It sounds hokey, but when that scene occurs near the beginning of
_October Sky_, I found myself caught up with the enthusiasm of Homer
Hickam, played by Jake Gyllenhaal.  Determined to make a dent in the
space race, he becomes transfixed with his desire to make a rocket that
could fly like the best of them.
It is films like this that we know the ending as we buy the ticket.
When lovely teacher Miss Riley (played by Laura Dern), suggests that he
enters his findings into the National Science Fair, we know exactly who
is going to win.  But the joy in a film like this is in the little
details.
For example, Homer is clearly not the strongest student in his class.
If he has any strengths whatsoever, it is an undeterring vision, and a
good organizer.  It means that he may have to lose his reputation by
associating with the nerdiest kid in school, who knows more about rocket
science than he does.  It means that if his father forbids him to shoot
rockets on company property (that is, the entire coal-mining town), he
must walk eight miles one way, just to set up the rockets, which will
fail, fail, fail, and fail again.
Homer+s Dad is played by Chris Cooper, a favorite actor of mine since
_Lone Star_.  Here he plays the antithesis of the character he played in
_Matewan_: instead of organizing union rallies, he is the head of the
coal-miners, who is constantly wringing his hands against the unions.
This is will be one of the great unnoticed performances of the year:
note how multi-dimensional his character is.  He is his son+s last
nemesis, as one who most likely interferes with his son+s dreams.  But
he truly loves his son, and wants to see him succeed the only way he
knows how.  Through coal-mining.
Because of his character, we can see how far we+ve come.  The revolution
of modern technology has allowed for us to see society advanced at a
rate far faster than any generation before us.  We don+t understand that
there were the generations from the industrial revolution who knew of no
other way to raise a family.  The paradigm was shifting under the
father+s feet, and he knew of no other life.
So _October Sky_, far from being merely a feel-good inspirational film,
offers much food for thought.  And this is the best type of
inspirational film; the one that you take something with you.
BTW, the final image of the film is just as simple, is as strong a
contrast as the aforementioned horizontal-moving white dot against the
night-sky background.  Another commonplace image, to be sure, but it
must have been breathtaking forty years ago.

Title
Review for Analyze This (1999)
When cinema's history books are written, Robert De Niro would definitely go
down as one of this generation's greatest actors.  Great as he is, however,
he won't be noted for his versatility.  A cursory look at his filmography
shows him typecast as (A) a mafioso/hoodlum (_Taxi Driver_, _GoodFellas_),
(B) ordinary schmoe (_Deer Hunter_, _Falling in Love_), or (C) comic
personality (_Brazil_, _Midnight Run_).  Shakespeare, he isn't.  
_Analyze This_, to my memory, is the first film he's made where he tries to
reconcile all three personality types in one film.  He's a tough
gangster-type, who really is an ordinary schmoe, only to a comic extreme.  
De Niro plays Paul Vitti, a tough mob boss who is starting to get panic
attacks, days before a huge mafia "convention."  He secretly pulls himself
to a psychiatrist (Billy Crystal) who is terrified to get involved, and who
is planning to get married that week.  Complications ensue.  Hilarity is
blueprinted.  The comic apex is how De Niro totally breaks down and cries
like a baby in these sessions.
You'd think De Niro could pull it off.  Not quite.  The result is terribly
disorienting.  The opening scenes have him playing "Mr. Tough Guy," but
later, we see he's _really_ somebody who has panic attacks and low
self-image.  Sure, it's funny, but it leaves a sour aftertaste.  Are these
two caricatures from the same person?  I'm pretty good at suspending belief,
but this I just don't buy.  
Worse off, there's no real logical impetus as to why Vitti is getting
scared, around now.  He's had to deal with his adversaries his whole life,
and certainly the fear that he would be killed by an assassin's bullet at
any given moment carries far more tension than facing a competing
mafioso-boss (Chazz Palminteri).  And is there any guilt within him, for all
the crimes he's committed in the past?  No.
Because I can't accept this premise, the movie collapses.  Simple as that.
Billy Crystal tries hard, but face it.  This is a role _anybody_ could play.
He's just the straight-man here, being continually usurped by De Niro and
occasionally funny dialogue from his patients.  
Did you know Lisa Kudrow is in this film?  Wasted.  Bill Macy?  Wasted.
Molly Shannon?  I don't even remember who she played.  A cameo from Tony
Bennett?  Been there, done that, burned the t-shirt.
The film's saving grace is played by heavyweight (literally) Joe Viterelli.
In perhaps the most understated performance in the film, he singlehandedly
is both menacing and endearingly comic, moreso than De Niro.  He gets the
laughs, and doesn't have to change his character to do it.
In summary, AT has a few laughs going for it, but if you're lucky, you've
seen them in the previews.  Previews are good like that.  They rat-tat-tat
the jokes and the assumption is that the film would do the same for the
entire two hours.  They don't carry the burden of actually making sense.

Title
Review for Ever After (1998)
I love movies that can take me away.  Not like any other medium, cinema
has the power to take us jaded, p.c., smart-alecky and 90's chic
individuals to a distant land where there are princes, dragons, fairies,
magic, and honor.  I am not hindered by time, occupation, nor status; my
$7.50 will be my ticket for a brief interlude with somebody's
imagination made vivid.  Woodrow Wilson was correct when he saw that
films were writing history with lightening.
So, somewhere up the studio ladder came the idea to remake Cinderella.
Cinderella, as we all know, is a classic tale of a peasant girl with a
horrible stepmother who falls for Prince Charming, and wishes to go to
the costume ball, where she could get his attention.  She is forbidden
to go, but she does, and through magic, obtains a stunningly beautiful
gown and glass slippers.  She gets away before the prince could find
her, leaving behind a slipper; but it is through this that the prince
searches her out, and they fall in love.  It is a story bound to rouse
passions, as it did for generations before us; that is why it is a
classic.
For the studio to agree, there has got to be a hook.  What could make
the film fresh and powerful for today's audience, that _The Slipper and
the Rose_ didn't already do twenty years ago?
Why not remove the magic, and replace it with jaded, p.c., smart-alecky
and 90's chic sensibilities?
It must have looked good on paper; but _Ever After_ takes it's
Cinderella story too seriously, and its audience not seriously enough.
Cinderella, a.k.a. Danielle, is brought to life by Drew Barrymore, and
gives her character a gracious presence. But does she have to become a
champion human-rights expert and philosopher as well?  (She's shown
throughout reading a _paperback edition_ of Sir Thomas More's _Utopia_.
Funny, I don't remember paperbacks being invented yet).
Don't get me wrong: I don't have a problem with seeing films of strong
women role models in the Middle Ages; I do have a problem when the
filmmakers pander to the audience with historical women who are far too
modern for their own times.  I am still waiting for that big budget
biopic of St. Theresa of Avila.  I don't think Hollywood would
green-light the screenplay.
Nonetheless Ms. Barrymore is soft on the eyes, and a wonder to watch.
Is this the same person who grew up from kiddie roles to slutty
adolescent roles, to now, dignified adult roles?  Her transformation is
vivid.  Too bad it was with this film, where four of her co-stars
overshadow her.
Anjelica Houston is vicious as Rodmilla, her stepmother, and we know
she's wickedly good from scene one; but this is the kind of role that
she can do in her sleep.  Dougray Scott, as Prince Henry, is, well,
charming.  Patrick Godfrey, a well-renowned English thesp, brings great
pep in his role as Leonardo da Vinci (!).  But trumping the entire cast,
and walking away with the picture is Megan Dodds, as Marguerite,
stepsister number one.  She steals the film every time she's on it, and
so much so that I was convinced that I had seen her before, perhaps as
Molly Ringwald's older obnoxious sister in _Sixteen Candles_.  I was
wrong.
The cast alone is game, and the screenplay has its witty moments.  But
face it, a fairy tale without magic is like a cookie without sugar.  The
direction, cinematography, set design, costumes, all fall a little flat,
except for the scenes at the ball.  Did I really pay to see a soap
opera?
It's not impossible for there to be a modern, hip telling of a fairy
tale; _The Princess Bride_ is still current for having been made over
ten years ago.  That film had more wit, style, and magic than this film
will ever aspire to be.  As an aside, my girlfriend loved it; so I'll
show a little mercy.

Title
Review for Little Voice (1998)
Jane Horrocks, relatively unknown in the United States, has an
incredible talent.  She can mimic any number of famous vocalists-- Judy
Holiday, Ethel Murman, Marilyn Monroe--and she sounds exactly like them.
This one ups the talents of former HBO regular Rich Little; when she
sings, we have to pinch ourselves in recognizing that she doesn't just
mimic those famous voices, but sings with an extraordinary range,
remarkably on pitch.
It is a talent that prompted her friend to write a stage show, and now a
screenplay, just to show off her talents.  The story is how an extremely
timid person living under her mother's floozy shadow, is discovered.
It's rags to riches, a star is born, and then some.
I must emphasize, with a gloomy forboding,  "... and then some."  Start
trembling.
What's heartbreaking about a film like this is what the filmmakers, over
the guise of what can only be assumed as artistic "originality", did.
There are about ten minutes in this film where Horrocks takes the stage
with a confidence that matches the best performers.  To fully feel the
impact of this is to suffer, mildly, through the story, her overly shy
demeanor, her overly abrasive mother, the grating accents, and the
oddballs of a supporting cast that are given little to do except flaunt
their eccentricies, as if that would compensate for charm.  Only one
scene beforehand generated big laughs, but it's very clear that
particular scene was tagged on at the last minute, if anything as a
showcase for Brenda Blethyn.
But when that climactic scene arrives, its impact is so strong that it
qualifies as a genuine movie _moment_.  Had the film ended at that
moment, I would have liked it, and would have heartily recommended it.
It is that scene where Horrocks finally breaks through, and, with full
band, a full awe-struck screen-audience, delivers the goods.  It+s
magical.
Do yourself a favor.  If you see this film, once you come up to this
point, LEAVE.  Afterwards, a series of events occur of such a moronic
nature that it overshadows every bit of pleasure I had attained from
that one phenomenal, pivotal climactic scene.
I will not give away the truly awful ending, but I can+t help but
comment on the filmmakers+ apparently schitzophrenic intentions.  In one
minute, the filmmakers dictate: "isn't Jane Horrocks a wondrous talent!"
The next minute, the filmmakers slap our faces, as if we should be
guilt-ridden in enjoying her gift, as if we were the ones exploiting
her.   But then the credits come, finally, and then back to the
accolades; "Jane Horrocks used her own voice!"  Why bother trumpetting
the miracle, if we can+t fully enjoy it on its own merits?
Granted, this is different from a typical, feel-good "Star is Born"
vehicle.  It attempts to be original.  Believe me, I enjoyed it far
better the first time I saw it... the Warner Brothers+ cartoon starring
Michigan J. Frog.

Title
Review for Never Been Kissed (1999)
I'm currently accepting all future names for Drew Barrymore characters.  In
_The Wedding Singer_, she was Julia Gulia.  In _Never Been Kissed_, she's
Josie Grossie.  Future DB character names include: Janet Granite, Janey
Grainy, and for that NC-17 project in the works, Jo-Jo... aw forget it.
I'll stick to my day job.
This is a teen movie, all right, except the main characters aren't teens.
Drew Barrymore is a copy editor at the Chicago Sun Times who gets her big
break as a reporter, only it's very clear from the onset that she lacks the
toughness and the pushy extravertedness that marks the best of reporters.
The story she's covering is not really a story, but a story in the making.
She is to return to high school as a student and explain what's REALLY going
on.
The irony is that Drew's character, was such a dweeb first time around, that
she is terrified at going back.  When she does, she says the wrong things,
wears the wrong clothes, and projects the "I know the answer" in class that
popular kids (or at least popular kids in the movies) reject.  At least she
befriends nerdy Aldys (Joan of Arc's Leelee Sobieski--watch for her), who
turns out to be more beautiful than those who are "supposed" to be more
beautiful than her.
What works:  Drew's geeky old-self.  After a start in films that was
headline driven, and a nadir of roles that had her play the sluttish
character, it's a surprise to see her with bad hair, big glasses and braces.
It's very funny.  
What doesn't work:  Drew's geeky new-self.  Come on.  Nobody dresses as bad
as she does.  Couldn't she just go to _The Gap_ and take suggestions?  Had
she dressed like Princess Leia it would have been better.
The comedy is supposed to progress when Drew's younger brother (played with
zest by David Arquette) reenlists to jump-start his baseball career.  Now,
how in the world can somebody as nerdy (but in a funny way) as he can be the
most popular kid in the school... in a day?!
The dialogue in the film is, well, an embarrassment.  Her co-workers (Molly
Shannon, John C. Reilly and Gary Marshall) are in terminal hyper-drive.  Her
teenage peers (except Sobieski) are so inept and stupid that there's little
bite from them.  Couldn't the filmmakers watch _Heathers_ first?
Lastly, I am proud to say that I caught a significant gaffe in the film.  If
you see the film, you'd know what I'm talking about: 
Drew walks into a bar, has her hand stamped, and over the night associates
with some Rastafarians with some delicious, um, cake.  She goes wild, sleeps
in late.  When she wakes, she rushes off to school, without showering,
without noticing that her head, lying on her stamped hand all night, has
transferred part of the stamp's image to her forehead, spelling "LOSER".
Funny, eh?
...except that the hand would have transferred that image BACKWORDS.  

Title
Review for Out of Sight (1998)
Do you have memories of when a recognizable presence in the movies
suddenly finds the right script, and becomes a fully-developed star
right before your eyes?  Looking back, I will have pleasant memories of
"discovering" Bruce Willis in _Die Hard_, Julia Roberts in _Pretty
Woman_, and "rediscovering" John Travolta in _Pulp Fiction_.
Well, fasten your seatbelts, folks.  George Clooney and Jennifer Lopez
have done it.  After a couple of false starts, Clooney (who had a
smaller role as _Batman_ than Alfred the butler) and Lopez (a.k.a.
_Selena_), have broken out of their schlock and become cinema's latest
smart, hot, sassiest couple.  It also makes a strong comeback for
Stephen Soderbergh, who broke new ground with _sex, lies, and videotape_
nine years ago.
The film starts intriguingly as a disgruntled Jack Foley (Clooney) walks
out of an office building, furiously throwing his tie onto the ground.
The film pauses at that moment; this is Soderbergh saying, "Did you
catch that?"  Over the course of the two hours, you will know the reason
for his anger, and his impromptu decision afterwards:  to rob a bank.
Foley pulls off one of the most suave, gunless bank robberies in movie
memory.  But after he does so, the film double-crosses itself, and he is
easily caught after his car won't start.  Such great twists are
reminiscent of the film--smart people doing crazy things, and being done
in by life's unpredictabilities.  It's a great theme, and plays real
well here.
Foley lands in prison.  Only a matter of time will come where he will
escape, and inadvertantly run into Federal Marshall Karen Sisco (Lopez),
who wastes no time in using her birthday present-a flashy pistol.  The
two are subsequently locked in the trunk of the getaway car, where the
sparks of an unexpected romance begin to brew.  Days later, she's still
thinking about him.
This all serves as the opening premise of a wildly imaginative ride that
uses the talents of Ving Rhames, Don Cheadle, Steve Zahn, Dennis Farina,
and a couple of pleasant unbilled cameos.  Returning from the dead of
movieland hell is Nancy Allen, aging gracefully.  And stealing the show
is Albert Brooks, even if his bald-wig is a little too obvious in some
scenes.
_Out of Sight_ isn't perfect.  Some of the scenes are a little too talky
and Soderbergh's expiremental film style sometimes backlashes against
him.  I also found a few of the action scenes to be too easy;
screenwriter Scott Frank (who also wrote _Get Shorty_, both of which
originated from Elmore Leonard pulp) was not too concerned with great
action sequences as he is with great dialogue.  A good call, but it made
me wanting more.
As for Clooney and Lopez, genuine star-power has come with a mighty gust
of class and sass.  Take a breath of the new wind.  Get thee to a
multiplex now.

Title
Review for Happiness (1998)
Last week I was priveleged to catch the original _High Noon_ on the big
screen.  Gary Cooper plays the everyman, faced with a life/death
situation, and despite every opportunity to run, despite the objections
of a scared and lazy town, despite the logistics detailing a hopeless
situation, he stays and fights.  He miraculously triumphs.
_High Noon_, alongside the stellar _Casablanca_ and _It's A Wonderful
Life_, are similar in the base content, which is no doubt why they are
among the most powerful films ever made.  Each tells of a protagonist
who, despite all objections of society, sticks it out, and does the
hard, but honorable thing.  Sometimes he wins.  Sometimes not.
_Happiness_ is the polar opposite of the films I just described.  In
this film, we have a society that is peachy-keen, family-oriented, and
"perfect"; we have characters who "have it all."  But just below the
surface lies the makings of thieves, perverts, murderers, and
pedophiles.  Despite all inclinations to secure "happiness", every
character's moral failings catch up to them.
Todd Solondz, who wrote and directed _Happiness_, raises the debate with
this situation (one of many): A popular grade-school teacher turns out
to be a drug-addict.  Should she stay or go?  Initially, we side with
the mother: this is a potential harm for our children, the future of
society.  But the father raises an interesting point: should the woman
be ostracized for having a terrible addiction?  If she could do her job
without jeopardizing the kids or her health, while she fights to be
free, then shouldn't she get the support of the community?  Suddenly the
issue isn't so black-and-white.
This father, played by Dylan Baker, is the pedophile in the film.  He
acknowledges he to his wife that he is "sick", but she is oblivious to
his cries for help--she wouldn't want to upset her "perfect" family.
Baker has an impossible role, and succeeds.  He is indeed, a very sick
man, but despite all indications of the contrary, is a loving father and
responsible husband.  His final scene with his son, is as heartbreaking
as it is awkward as anything you'd find this year.
Another character reaching for perfection is that of Joy Jordan, played
excellently by Jane Adams.  (She's the sister of the wife, played by
Cynthia Stevensen).  She's still single, still living in her parents'
house, and unable to keep a steady job.  A former boyfriend kills
himself.  Another steals her guitar and CD player.  She's by far the
most sympathetic character in the film, and also the funniest.
The third sister, Helen Jordan is a sultry, successful single played by
Lara Flynn Boyle.  She's a critically acclaimed writer, but sees the
shallowness of success, and is angry that people do not see her
shortcomings.  When she receives an obscene phone call, who insults her
and threatens her with rape, she becomes immediately attracted to the
caller, (unknown to her, he lives down the hall).
He is Allen (Philip Seymour Hoffman, with memorable turns in _Boogie
Nights_ and _Next Stop Wonderland_).  We would initially want him locked
away for good, but the film sympathizes with him.  He is obese, shy, and
socially inept.  The best scene is when he finally confronts Helen, she
invites him in, and they sit at polar ends of the couch, blank gazes.
There are many more characters here, but suffice it to say that this
isn't kiddie fare.  What's hard about reviewing (and praising) a film
like this is that we don't want to admit that we can relate to these
deplorable characters.  We don't want to exonerate the sin that has
become more and more commonplace in society.
Gratefully, the film doesn't explicitly show us the worst of these
crimes.  It miraculously maintains a light-hearted, breezy tone, coupled
with Air Supply and Debby Boone songs.  It is in this context that the
film forces us to examine these lives.  The "Hate the sin, love the
sinner" concept hasn't been more in-your-face.
Needless to say, box office predictions are very low.  I nearly
abandoned seeing this film, before forcing myself to catch it at a
second run theater.  I couldn't have been more surprised.  Despite every
plot detail pointing to the contrary, that this is truly one of the
sharpest, funniest, and most observant of films out there today.  It
deservedly won Best Picture awards at Cannes and Toronto.  It is
brilliantly photographed, which makes the material all the more
heart-wrenching.
While funny, I cannot express how adult the material is.  It is limited
in nudity and violence, and yet it is clearly NC-17 material, due to its
story and to humor that one-up's the jokes in _There's Something About
Mary_ (both films cover nearly the same terrain).  I highly recommend
reading the Screen It! review (www.screenit.com) if you are cautious
about racy material.
If I have any reservations of the praise, it's that the film ultimately
sides against the caring wife, in the dilemna posited above.  Of all the
negative characters in the film, she is the one who is bad because she's
so "good." Therefore, the script _must_ make her snide, haughty, and
self-righteous.  I don't think that's fair--"don't drink/don't
smoke/must be something inside."  Great satire is usually not
sympathetic to the one who stays and fights for what's right.

Title
Review for Enemy of the State (1998)
_Enemy of the State_ has every reason to be a bad movie.  It was
produced by Jerry Bruckheimer, famous for the fiascos of _Armageddon_
and _Con Air_.  It was directed by Tony Scott, marred by his
stylish-but-hollow career (Beverly Hills Cop 2, Revenge, The Fan).  The
plot--innocent man caught in conspiracy--has been done countless times
before.  Even the dialog in the trailers is bad: "You got something they
want!"/"I don't know what you're talking about!"
EOTS is the techno-geek's dream film - a film that successfully
integrates modern technology into its labyrithrine plot.
This must be hard to do: it takes many years for a film of this caliber
to be conceived, written, then to be pitched, produced, directed, and
edited, all before said technology becomes obsolete.  _The Net_ is a
prime example of how a film rooted in technology would have been much
better had it only been released two years earlier.
I haven't been thrilled by Hollywood's treatment of advancing technology
since _Wargames_ and _Blue Thunder_ hit in '83.  And that may have been
because I was totally unaware of it.  The John Badham one-two punch were
seminal in my love both for modern technology and cinema.
_Enemy of the State_ integrates advanced surveillance techniques into
the standard Hitchcockian formula.  Satellites, normally used for
pointing outward, are pointing _downward_, to the point that chase
scenes are under surveillance, not unlike Christof's in _The Truman
Show_.  Computers are used in conjunction with security systems to
simulate, single out, and magnify the taped events.
Enemy of the State goes one better: it incorporates the talents of the
best "geeks" in Hollywood to sit behind the technology.  They have a
contagious enthusiasm that radiates a
yahoo-we're-gonna-destroy-an-innocent-man's-life mentality. They have
fun, and they've no idea how deadly their participation becomes.  Kudos,
especially, to character nerds Jack Black and Jamie Kennedy.  It's not
that you root for them, but you enjoy their presence.
The final trick up Bruckheimer's sleeve is Gene Hackman.  Not that
Hackman's in it, but that he is playing the same role that he did in
Francis Coppola's _The Conversation_ in 1974.  Brilliant.  In both
films, Hackman plays Harry Caul, a timid but expert surveillance expert.
In the first film he becomes increasingly weary over his profession,
especially as it turns on him.  In this film, he has become a recluse,
working for himself, paranoid and rightly so.
He comes to the aid of Robert Dean (Will Smith), a high-profile attorney
who unknowingly becomes a recipient of a disk containing evidence of a
high-profile murder.  Thomas Reynolds (Jon Voight), not taking any
chances, decides to destroy Smith's credibility, if he were to go public
with the evidence.  The rest of the film Dean is fighting to clean his
record, rid himself of bugs, and stay alive.
The film has several nifty touches, like a detailed (but improbable)
virtual surveillance scene in a lingerie shop.  It has a running gag
with a blender.  It has one of the best used cameos of Gabriel Byrne.
And it marks the return of Lisa Bonet--where has she been?
Alas, the film does fall apart in the end, with a final shootout that is
as cheap as it is predictable.  But for the majority of its playing
time, _State_ gives a good, thrilling ride.  Best to watch this on the
big screen with great sound.
