Authors
Jyothi Rengarajan
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for City of Joy (1992)
     I sat through Roland Joffe's CITY OF JOY at Pittsburgh and felt
anger and irritation among other things.  It is, not surprisingly, a
condescending, patronising and self-important depiction, loosely based
on Lapiere's novel of the same name.
     The film was made with a glaring lack of sensitivity and
understanding of India.  It is sad that even after 500 years of contact
with our civilization, the western psyche cannot come to terms with an
iota of what makes up our subcontinent.  Joffe has made the not uncommon
blunder of earnestly believing that he understands poverty and
suffering, that he can feel the pulse of the "real" India, that he can
discern the hope and love and the human bonding that triumphs through
the murkiness of the, I quote from the film, "cesspool of a country."
He proceeds to tell his tale of love and woe through terrible
stereotypes, cliches and nauseating moralizing.  He romanticises poverty
and gives us a glimpse of the "purity" and "uplifting" qualities it
fosters.  The fact the the film appeared to have been shot largely in
the studio did not help in establishing credibility.
     Swayze as the young, dis-spirited American doctor who finds a
reason to live from experiencing life on the edge at the city of joy is
hopelessly miscast.  Collins, as the wonder-woman, dedicated to
uplifting the destitute and downtrodden, determined to change centuries
of tradition and superstition with amazing zeal is simply not
believable.  Her dialogues are ridden with cliches and dripping
sentiments.  Together, they help save the "passive" inhabitants of the
slum from the clutches of the evil godfather, played by Art Malik, who
goes around cutting up women's faces with a blade for fun.  And of
course there were the usual sub-plots about dowry and saving up every
possible paisa for the sweet beti.   
     Personally, I was surprised that Swayze was passable.  However, he
cannot help that he looks ridiculous in a "serious" role.  From his
recent interviews it is obvious that he considers himself to be quite a
hero to have survived India and the much publicised bomb-attack during
the protests in Calcutta.  The only real acting was displayed by the
various Indians of the cast.  Om Puri and Shabana Azmi maintained their
good standards.
    The film has all the ingredients of a good masala movie except that
it tries to make a *point*, you see.  About India, about Poverty, about
Love, Salvation, Hope, Inner Strength, about Adversity; about Good and
Evil, the former of course triumphing over the latter.  Hurrah for the
poor rickshaw puller Hasari and his brave little family!  Hurrah for the
lepers!  Hurrah for dear Joan and a BIG Hurrah for our dashing,
hot-blooded doctor who finds the meaning of life through all of the
above.  How deep, how profound.  We, as Indians should all be grateful
to Joffe for teaching us these important lessons about our country.
