Authors
Gregory N. Bond
Number of Reviews
5

Title
Review for Sommersby (1993)
(This has just opened in Australia - it may be old news for the rest
of you.)
     This film is basically a reworking of the film THE RETURN OF
MARTIN GUERRE which in turn taken from the book THE WIFE OF MARTIN
GUERRE, which in turn is a dramatisation of real court records dating
from the French 100 years war around A. D. 1350.  Rather than set in
medieval France, the setting is the southern United States just after
the end of the United States Civil War.  John Sommersby (Gere), an
apparently cruel and cold man and the richest man in the local area,
has gone off to the war.  He has been missing six years, and, just as
his wife (Foster) is preparing to remarry, a man who may or may not be
her husband returns to claim his wife, his property and the loyalty of
the local town.  He has obviously been changed by four years in a
prison camp; his wife finds the new Mr. Sommersby a much more
attractive person and falls in love with him in a way she never had
before he went to war.  The film climaxes in a court case where
Sommersby is charged with a murder committed some time earlier.  Should
he be proved to *not* be Sommersby he would get off, otherwise he will
hang.  Is he really Sommersby? Would he pretend not to be in order to
get off?  Will he prove he is and die?
     This film is in large part a story of the (re-)discovered romance
between Foster and Gere.  The crux of the film is the uncertainty
around the identity of Gere's character.  Both leads handle the strong
ambiguity in the relationship well, and the developing affection is
well told.  The audience is not absolutely certain whether Gere is or
is not the actual Sommersby until the end (although the hints are
pretty obvious).  It is this ambiguity that gives the film its power
and appeal.  The final court case, where the questions of loyalty,
love, betrayal and identity are exposed, is powerfully moving.
     Acting from the supporting cast is excellent, including James Earl
Jones as the judge in the climactic court case.  Gere, despite his
reputation, succeeds in conveying the pain, the turmoil and the
ambiguity.  We the audience really feel for his character and
understand his motives in the final scenes (quite unexpected from
Hollywood, and potentially very unconvincing).  Foster is brilliant in
conveying the love, the doubt, the faith.  Also very impressive is the
photography - the landscapes, the scenery is spectacular.  Go and see
it on the wide screen; much of the impact will be lost on the video.
     One thing that was definitely surprising was the audience
reaction.  One of the witnesses in the court case is a true son of the
south and a "nigger-hater."  He insults the (black) judge and gets sixty
days in "our sadly uncomfortable correctional facility."  At that
point, the whole audience cheered and clapped.  Obviously, we're all
very Politically Correct.
     Unlike (I believe) the original story, where the real Guerre turns
up in the court case and it all ends in an anticlimax, the real
Sommersby is dead (buried during the opening credits), and the imposter
admits it to his wife.  This is after he has proved to the judge that
he is the real Sommersby, and been sentenced to hang.  And, bugger me
dead, he is actually hung.  This came as a bit of a shock, as I
expected the usual Hollywood happy-ever-after ending, and was (in the
back of my mind) considering how they might get out of the developing
situation.  To the credit of the director (British, not American!), he
stuck to the artistically correct ending and wasn't pressured into
diluting it, and the film is much more powerful because of it.  And
despite expectations, the end is actually quite uplifting, thanks in no
small part to the strength of Gere's acting in portraying the noble
nature of a liar and cheat grappling with honesty and love for the
first time.
--
Gregory Bond  Burdett Buckeridge & Young Ltd Melbourne Australia

Title
Review for Much Ado About Nothing (1993)
Starring: Kenneth Branagh, Emma Thompson, Denzel Washington, Keanu Reeves,
          Richard Briars, Brian Blessed, Michael Keaton, Ben Elton.
Director: Kenneth Branagh
Script:   Some bloke named Shakespeare.
[Probably old news to many, but it's just opened here]
     I went into MUCH ADO with very high expectations.  Branagh's
previous Shakespeare project (HENRY V) was a wonderful movie, and the
reviews I had seen about MUCH ADO were uniformly good (the best set of
reviews I'd ever seen for a film).
     I came out knowing that every one of those rave reviews was right
on the money.  This is the best film I have seen in years.
     MUCH ADO is the story of two pairs of lovers, the young and
innocent Claudio and Hero (two good-looking nobodies with very few
lines) and the older, sharp-tongued and cynical Baldick and Beatrice
(Branagh and Thompson).   There is celebration, betrayal, revenge, and
weddings.
     The dialog crackles and fizzes (as would be expected given the
author), with quips, puns, one-liners and razor-sharp wit flowing
faster than I could follow.  This is a *very* funny film despite being
in somewhat archaic language.
     The cast does a magnificent job.  Chief among them are of course
Branagh and Thompson.  Both have such fluency with the style and such
assured delivery that the antiquity of the language isn't even
noticed.  Branagh in particular shows an excellent sense of comedy in
both his acting and direction.  There is a long sequence when he is
hiding in the garden eavesdropping on a conversation, that is almost
Keystone Cops.
     The remainder of the cast does an excellent job, also handling the
language well.  Some interesting casting puts Denzel Washington and
Keanu Reeves as half-brothers, and all actors use their own (American
or English) accents, but the overall result is still consistent and
reputable.
     The cinematography is just fabulous.  The whole film was shot on
location at a Monastery in Tuscany, and it looks just superb.  The
soundtrack could be criticised for a lack of period relevance and being
at times quite overpowering, but it is none the less effective.  A
number of lute and voice songs are woven into the story in a very
effective manner.
     Overall, this film is simply a delight.  Run, don't walk, to your
nearest cinema and see it on the big screen.  It's worth every penny of
the AU$10 you will pay.

Title
Review for Hot Shots! Part Deux (1993)
[Again, just released locally but probably old news to many of you.
FLYING HIGH was released as AIRPLANE! in the U.S.]
     This is made by (one of) the same people who did FLYING HIGH, TOP
SECRET and the original HOT SHOTS.  Like all of the above, it is chock
full of sight gags, one liners, running jokes and not very subtle
parodies of other movies. I noticed among others: Just about every
RAMBO film, a huge swipe at BASIC INSTINCT, CASABLANCA, TERMINATOR 2,
ROBIN HOOD - PRINCE OF THIEVES (and most other sword-and-valour
flicks), APOCALYPSE NOW, SPACEBALLS, STAR WARS, and probably a dozen
more that I couldn't exactly place.
     The basic story is RAMBO 2 done over: got to get the hostages out,
this time from Iraq.  Plenty of gags about Hussein, none of which are
complimentary.  Lloyd Bridges is completely over the top as the
befuddled U.S. President, Charlie Sheen with a fair bit of added bulk
does a good line in brooding, and a bunch of look-alikes in various
supporting roles.  I found that as a whole it worked better than the
previous HOT SHOTS, with more laughs and a more even production.
However, the style is not universally favoured.  If you are the type
left cold by FLYING HIGH, this movie is not for you.
     All in all it works very well, and I laughed a lot.  Worth a look
at $7.50 prices, certainly worth it for a video night.  Rated M for
some fairly heavy sexual innuendo, but no skin shown.
The Second Test at Lords on the Sid and Nancy scale.
--
Gregory Bond  Burdett Buckeridge & Young Ltd Melbourne Australia

Title
Review for Forrest Gump (1994)
[Old news to 'merkins, but it's about to open locally]
Stars: Tom "Philadelphia" Hanks, Robyn "The Princess Bride" Wright
     This was previewed for local audiences on the weekend, prior to
official release this week.  The film is basically story of Forrest
Gump (Hanks), a borderline moron with a perfect soul, who rises from a
tough childhood to become football star, war hero, world pingpong
champion, shrimp fisherman and millionaire.  Through it all Gump is the
anchor for the soul of Jenny (Wright), an abused child and a deeply
troubled woman, and "Lieutenant Dan," the officer Gump rescues from his
fate to die in glory in Vietnam, leaving him a bitter cripple.  Gump is
also remarkably unaffected by all that life has brought him: "So I went
to the Whitehouse--AGAIN--and met the President--AGAIN" in a very
ho-hum voice.
     The story is told initially as a series of flashbacks, with Gump
sitting at a bus stop, relating his life story to a series of interested
or incredulous listeners.  The later part of the film takes a more
conventional narrative form.
     The whole saga of Forrest Gump the person is set against the saga
of America the nation, centered mainly in the 60s and 70s.  The most
fascinating thing about the film is the brilliant use of computer
graphics (attested to in the long list of technicians in the credits)
to completely seamlessly merge action from the film with the archival
footage of the events of the era.  Hence you have Gump meeting various
Presidents, shaking hands, etc; the Vietnam rallies with hundreds of
thousands of people in Washington imperceptibly merging with the
characters.  (In fact, it was not until the credits rolled that I
realised this was real footage, not just look-alikes.  I suspect some
of these film clips are much more famous in the US than they are out
here.)  Even the Vietnam scenes are some of the best (and most
frightening) war footage I have seen, and the serious digital sound in
the Russell Cinemas certainly aided the impact.  (The weakest part of
the computer graphics also occurs in Vietnam--a Napalm attack by F-4
Phantoms had a very matte'd look.)
     In all the incidents, the basic humanity and downright niceness of
Gump is used as a telling contrast to those around him, even the best
intentioned.  The man is *way* too perfect.  A Saint.  Mother Teresa is
nothing on him.  Despite a character that could be a major pain in the
arse, Gump is someone you feel for, sympathise with, and by golly you
wish you could meet him.  Hanks handles a very demanding role very
well, the script is excellent, and Wright (who obviously appreciates
the chance to show she is an actress, not just a princess) is also
excellent.
     The film is full of humor, the writing excellent, the acting
great, the effects stunningly seamless.  A lot of fun.

Title
Review for Crimson Tide (1995)
- A great techno-thriller with some huge plot holes.
     Russia has disintegrated into civil war, and the ultra-nationalist
rebel leader has captured a far-east submarine base and missile base.
U.S. nuclear missile submarines are sent off the Russian Pacific coast
as a deterrent.  Then the news comes through that the launch codes on
the Russian missiles have been compromised and the rebels are
threatening to level Japan and North America.  So the order is sent
out, a pre-emptive strike on the rebel-held missile bases.
     Gene Hackman is the Captain of a U.S. Boomer, a good ol' boy
redneck, the last of the learn-it-at-sea captains with combat
experience, and he eats XOs for breakfast.  Denzel Washington is his
new XO (Executive Officer, 2nd in command on the Sub), recruited just
in time for the emergency deployment, Hackman's previous XO having
suffered "appendicitis".  Washington is Academy-trained, a Harvard
graduate, modern, sensitive, has no combat experience and is as close
to a pacifist as you could get in a nuke. So the clash of personalities,
politics and morality is signalled well in advance.
     These tensions are increased a hundredfold when the order to
launch a pre-emptive strike is sent, and explode into boiling point
and armed rebellion when, just as the firing is about to start, another
order that may or may not be a retraction is garbled in reception.
There follows a knife-edge thriller that is basically a two-man play.
Here are two men, dedicated to their task, carrying a burden that might
just be the end of the world, each believing the other is selling their
country into nuclear holocaust.  Passions are high and tensions higher,
faces sweating and jaws clenched.  And we sweat and clench right along
with them.
     After a bit of scene setting, the remainder of the movie is set
inside the boomer.  And a perfect location it is.  Despite being larger
than a WWII-era aircraft carrier, these boats are *cramped*, and the
very tight, intimate locations are used to excellent effect to create
the high-strung tension.  This gives a feeling of tension and
claustrophobia that is unmatched since the seminal submarine movie, DAS
BOOT.  And unlike THE HUNT FOR RED OCTOBER, to which CRIMSON TIDE is
inevitably compared, we in the audience really feel like we're sharing
a very cramped steel coffin, bringer of Armageddon and target of
opportunity.
     The two leads do a very credible job.  I've liked Hackman since he
was Lex Luthor, and if you have fond memories of Superman then you will
have a good handle on his character here.  Washington seems to be
typecast as the sensitive, modern guy, and (to the great credit of the
script), the fact that he is black is just not an issue.  What is at
issue is the whole concept of Nuclear deterrence, and how the chain of
command ultimately depends on people.  The support cast have few lines
and are mainly required to stand around, sweat a lot, and look very,
very stressed.
     The worst part of the film is that it asks for a *huge* suspension
of disbelief, and (despite all they get right), they mess up a lot of
technical details they *really* ought to have got correct.  I suspect
that we are supposed to agree with Washington, consider Hackman to be
the villain, and decide that the whole concept of nuclear war is just
too horrible to contemplate.  But for my money, such moralizing is way
too late by the time the launch order comes, and I was on the Captain's
side right up until the end.  And the ending was a major wimp-out.
     In all, A roller-coaster ride and a great techno-thriller.
--
Gregory Bond  Burdett Buckeridge & Young Ltd Melbourne Australia
[more reviews: http://www.bby.com.au/~gnb/Reviews.html]
Some of the things they got wrong (AFAIK - no doubt the sci.military
pedants will jump all over me where I am wrong):
  >> The opening and closing broadcasts from the French carrier
  Foch - which they pronounced "foash" rather than "fock" - all the
  while showing shots of the USS Enterprise! (The Foch is a
  through-deck carrier with ski-jump; only the U.S. has angled-deck
  carriers.)  It was nice that they at least gave lip service to the
  rest of the world when they called it a French carrier.  And if he
  really was on the flight deck during launch operations, there is
  *no way* you would ever hear a word he said - those jets are
  LOUD!
  >> The ELF is just one of the many radios aboard a boomer - it has
  almost useless bandwith (measured in seconds per character) and is
  used only to transmit a short (3-character?) message telling the
  boomer to come up and talk to a satellite.  There is no way they get
  any sort of orders by ELF.
  >> And no way that they could decrypt half a message, or have the
  message blink in and out like a TV with a busted aerial.  You either
  get a message that decrypts or you don't.  This was just plain
  stupid.
  >> While I have no access to nuke secrets, I can't believe that
  the scenario of withdrawing a launch order within 15 minutes of
  giving it is ever likely, especially to a boomer.  The doctrine is
  basically, once you send a launch order, WW-III is started.  If
  you're not damned sure that you want a war, don't send it!  The
  basic crux on which the whole drama is based is flawed, because the
  system is set up to assume boomers don't get messages reliably.
  >> Given this, I could not believe that Washington's position ("What
  if they've changed their minds?") is reasonable.  They had orders to
  shoot, and they should have launched.  You don't question orders
  like that in *any* branch of the military.
  >> Nor can I believe that this sort of situation isn't covered,
  in very deep and gory detail, in the training the officers receive. 
     Not to mention that the conclusion was a terrible cop-out.  Being
Hollywood, there was little chance that the movie ends with the world
being destroyed (even though IMHO a much more powerful ending would be
that the missing message is a launch confirmation, and they wind up
launching then wondering what happens next).  But for the captain to be
made out as the villain and for the XO to be promoted for what is in
effect mutiny is unbelievable.  Being proved right after the fact is no
excuse!  At the very least he would have been decommissioned.
