Authors
James J. DiBenedetto
Number of Reviews
3

Title
Review for Wolf (1994)
Directed By: Mike Nichols
Starring: Jack Nicholson, Michelle Pfeiffer, James Spader
     It's not the best werewolf movie ever made.  It's not the best
movie of the year.  It's not even the best movie I've seen this week.
But WOLF is an intelligent and entertaining film, well worth seeing.
     The plot is a relatively straightforward one: Will Randall is
driving home from Vermont when he hits an animal.  He gets out to
investigate, examining his victim by the light of the (naturally) full
moon.  And guess what?  It's not, as Will (Jack Nicholson) probably
suspected, a dog, but a wolf.  And, as Will probably didn't suspect,
it's still alive, which it demonstrates by biting Will on the hand.
The next morning, Will goes into work, and into a situation to which
being bitten by a wolf might be preferable.  He's being squeezed out in
a corporate takeover, with his job being handed to his "protege,"
Stuart (James Spader).  This unhappy transition is confirmed that
evening, at a party given by the unpalatable billionaire Mr. Alden.
After receiving his news, Will gets another shock - something's
happening to him, and in the midst of his surprise and pain, he meets
the lovely Laura Alden (Michelle Pfeiffer).
     From there, things are somewhat predictable, and I don't want to
spoil the movie for anyone, so I'll leave the synopsis at that.  As for
commentary, it's an intelligent film.  The dialogue is very smart and
witty, and, if one can accept the premise of werewolves, the plot holds
together pretty well.  It's also a beautiful film--Manhattan has
rarely looked better on film--the overhead shots of the city at night
are simply breathtaking.  And as for the acting, Jack's in top form, as
is Michelle Pfeiffer.
     All in all, I'd recommend this film pretty highly....
--
Dr. James J. DiBenedetto - SUNY Buffalo School of Law Class of 1994
jjd@ubunix.buffalo.edu or jjd3@po.cwru.edu

Title
Review for True Lies (1994)
     First thing--it's a comic book put to live-action film.  A $100
million (or more, depending on the source) live-action comic book.
It's not realistic in the least, and it's not ashamed.  If you're the
type of person who says "But there were 10 bad guys shooting at the
hero!  How could they all miss him?", you're probably not going to
enjoy "True Lies".  But if you can suspend your disbelief for 2 hours
and 20 minutes, you're in for one hell of a ride.
     The plot is pretty simple: Arnold Schwarzenegger is a spy (working
for some really-ultra-secret outfit called "Omega Sector", powerful
enough that field agent Arnold can get directly connected to the White
House in a crisis), whose job is to hunt down terrorists.  Trouble is,
he's never told his wife (Jamie Lee Curtis), instead telling her that
he's a computer salesman.  The story gets moving as two apparently
unrelated plots develop.  In one, Arn, along with partner Tom Arnold,
are on the trail of a radical terrorist group that might have nuclear
weapons.  This involves infiltrating a high-class party in Switzerland,
and a horse-and- motorcycle chase through Washington, D.C., among other
stunts.  The second plot is more mundane:  Arn thinks his wife is
cheating on him.  Arn decides to find out for sure, using all the
resources at his disposal (wiretaps, bugs in his wife's purse, etc.) to
do so.  And then ... well, things get complicated, finally resulting in a
truly stunning sequence involving helicopters, Harrier jets and people
dangling from a crane hundreds of feet in the air.
     All in all, it's great fun.  The stunts are truly amazing--the
Harrier sequence in particular.  You can see every penny of the $100
million budget on the screen.  And the acting?  Big Arnie is good--he's
mastered these kind of roles--taking himself and the film just
seriously enough not to make it a farce, but no more.  And Tom Arnold,
as the wisecracking sidekick, is surprisingly good.  Jamie Lee Curtis
turns in a fine performance, especially when her character gets
something to do.
     To sum it up, I highly recommend this film.  Just don't think
about it too deeply.
-- 
Dr. James J. DiBenedetto - SUNY Buffalo School of Law Class of 1994
jjd@ubunix.buffalo.edu or jjd3@po.cwru.edu

Title
Review for Jungle Fever (1991)
     If you don't want to know anything at all about Spike Lee's new
film, you can bail out now....
     First off, I don't know what to think about JUNGLE FEVER.  It was
well done in all aspects of filming, something we've come to expect from
Spike Lee.  The acting was uniformly good, or better in some cases.  The
story was pretty tight, and there really weren't *any* wasted scenes (in
almost every  movie, there are what I call "wasted scenes," scenes that
do nothing for the plot or the characters...).
     But it seemed too, I don't know, derivative of Lee's earlier films.
This film looked a *lot* like MO' BETTER BLUES, at least to me.  The
music was in a lot of places very much like that earlier film.  And the
racist morons that inhabit both Bensonhurst and Harlem, well, we've seen
them before, too, in DO THE RIGHT THING.  
     It seems that in both JUNGLE FEVER and MO' BETTER BLUES, one of the
major themes is a male "hero" who can't make the big choices in his
life.  Flipper (the male lead in JUNGLE FEVER, played by Wesley Snipes)
doesn't decide to start a relationship with his white secretary, Angie
Tucci.  It just happens, and as he says later, he was just curious about
what it would be like with a white girl.  He doesn't decide to quit his
job; it's forced on him when he is denied a deserved promotion.  Nothing
he does is his choice, and when the film ends, he really doesn't have
anything.  Angie gained independence from her family and at least a
glimpse of life  outside Bensonhurst.  Her ex-boyfriend also got
independence.  But Flipper got nothing.
     So, I don't know what Spike Lee was trying to say with this movie.
I enjoyed it, but there were some problems.  Ther whole subplot with
Flipper's brother, a crack addict, was unrelated to the main plot, and
seemed to take over the movie at the end.  And Lee was especially
unsubtle in places.  Mainly, this was in the scenes where Flipper and
Angie are eating together after work, and then when they have sex for
the first time.  The "romantic,with a dark undertone" music comes
blaring on, which was unnecessary, because the pictures told us all we
needed to know....
