Authors
Terri Buchman
Number of Reviews
5

Title
Review for Men in Black (1997)
Some actors just belong on the silver screen, big as life and twice as
beautiful.  You can't really say why they belong there, but they sure as
shooting do.  It isn't just talent which is, after all, a fairly common
commodity.  It isn't technical skill or mastery of craft, although,
knowledge and pursuit of those things can keep a career going.  It is a
certain indefinable other, a combination of some acting ability, gobs of
charisma and the plain good luck of having the camera adore you.  This
ineffable quality is what makes an audience remember your name and forgive
the fact that the films that you appear in are a little shallow and corny.
It surely is what makes Will Smith a movie superstar.
Hey, life is unfair.  There are certainly actors (in the generic non-sex
specific sense) who have much more technical skill than Will Smith. There
are those who have spent years at Julliard and Yale Drama School, and other
august institutions of artistic learning, feverishly pondering the secrets
of drama and film acting.  I've seen and admired such actors and noted how
hard they have worked to achieve their cinematic wonders.  Hey, and then
there are folks like Mr. Smith, who appear to just walk under a kleig light
and just bedazzle an audience.  Just by showing up.  This guy has got *it*
and it's that indefinable quality that is making him a superstar.  (I can't
define what that *it* is, but i know it when I see it, and damned if I
wouldn't show up to watch this guy read from the phone book or recite his
laundry list.  I think he'd make it interesting.  I really do.)
Mr. Smith's latest movie, the hilarious MEN IN BLACK, is a case in point.
MIB features a dazzling array of special effects, a fanciful and witty
script by Ed Solomon and some wonderful direction from Barry Sonnenfeld.
But it's Will Smith who makes this picture rock and roll.  His onscreen
partnership with Tommy Lee Jones (who is at his FUGITIVE best here) is
wonderful.  Mr. Jones is a hilariously droll and deadpan counterpoint to
Mr. Smith's young, hip and definitely cool junior partner.  The
relationship works and is a lesson in how to make a special effects movie
in which the f/x don't overwhelm the story.  (Would that the recent BATMAN
picture had this quality.  Unfortunately, it was nearly the opposite of MIB
in nearly every respect from the way the f/x overshadowed everything else
on screen to the way that character development was given an early and
miscalculated death.  Hey Warner Bros, take a lesson.  It is possible to do
a comic book movie without reducing it to mindless drivel.)
MEN IN BLACK is a tongue-in-cheek story that takes all the paranoid
conspiracy theories about aliens-on-earth at face value.  It supposes a
super-secret neo-governmental agency that is in charge of controlling all
extra-terrestrial activity on earth.  Tongue planted firmly in cheek, the
movie 'explains' a lot of strange things that are going on on Planet Earth
as the result of alien visitors who just might be living among us.  Tommy
Lee Jones functions as the world-weary, seen-it-all senior agent, whose
deadpan line delivery is a funny marvel.  Mr. Smith and Mr. Jones are
perfectly cast and the interplay between the two (and the interplay with
Rip Torn from HBO's 'Larry Sanders Show') is an underplayed hoot.  (Yes,
I'm talking about enjoying the dialogue.  In a summer movie.  Boy does it
feel good to write that down.)
This is a lively picture that has a lot on it's plate.  Not only is it a
dead-on satire of "X-Files"style paranoia, but it features some beautiful
set design and bug-eyed alien creatures that are hilarious.  As with most
satires, the more you learn about this picture before you go in, the less
the satire works, so I'm not going to mention any specific scenes.  But I
wholeheartedly recommend this movie.  Go, sit back and let the whole silly
wonder of it rev up your summer.  And let Mr. Smith and Mr. Jones drive.
Trust me, you'll have a great time.
A word of caution:  allthough this is not by any means a horror movie,
there are some scenes and special effects that might scare some kids.  As
always, parents should not take highly sensitive or easily spooked kids.
The special effects are top notch and could give some (not all, just some)
kids nightmares.  For me, that means that my 12 year old daughter can see
it, but my ten year old son cannot.  (He is easily bothered by these
things.)  As ever, you know your kid best and your mileage may vary.

Title
Review for Batman & Robin (1997)
BATMAN AND ROBIN: ahm, well, that was something.  I'm not quite sure what,
but that was something.  I'm not sorry that I went, but I'm not sure I'd go
again.  It had terrible, horrible, teeth-grindingly bad dialogue that made
me want to slap not only the credited screenwriter, Akiva Goldsman, but
every Elementary school teacher who ever told him he could write.  (What
could they have been thinking?)  On the other hand, there were some solidly
gorgeous visuals in the flick, the costuming was a hoot and Uma Thurman
ain't half bad as Poison Ivy. So, I'd say flip a coin.  Heads, the visuals
win and you get to spend two+ hours in air conditioning.  Tails, the dopey
plot is just too difficult to take.
This is one loud damn picture.  (Which is actually sort of a mixed
blessing, since some of the idiotic dialogue is acutally drowned out.  Just
thank the Divine for small miracles and pass the popcorn.)  I'm not exactly
sure of the specific plot sequence, but it doesn't really matter.  Batman
and Robin get another couple of psychotic bad guys to fight, one armor-clad
uber-male and one barely clad uber-female.  The Caped Crusader has also
been very busy in the old Bat-metalshop and has come up with a host of new
bat toys that I almost actually saw.  (It was a somewhat dimly lit picture.
Why Warner Bros would spend mega-bucks developing all these cool toys and
then forget to light the set so that the audiience can acutally see them is
beyond me, but there it is.)
Let's see, what else do I remember.?  (It was that kind of a picture.  You
have trouble recalling what the heck was in it ten minutes after you leave
the theater.)   Well, Chris O'Donnell was in it.  This was actually a
highlight of the movie for me, since my 12 year old daughter has a huge
crush on Mr. O'Donnell and sighed heavily every time he came on screen.
(You haven't lived until you've been to an action picture with a love-sick
preteen.  I knew parenthood would be tough, but I never thought I would
have to warn my daughter about getting involved with guys who have obvious
rubber fetishes.  On the other hand, it made the picture more interesting.)
I really, really like George Clooney.  He has a nice screen presence.
Unfortunately (And it kills me to say this, because I really like Mr.
Clooney) his Batman is not really very good.  (No wonder my daughter has a
crush on Mr. O'Donnell instead of Mr. Clooney.  Mr. O'Donnell has a pulse
and his Robin is a bit of a rebel.  He's very cute.  Mr. Clooney's Batman
acts like the dorm mother in a large frat house.  "No, you can't get your
own car until you've proved you can handle it.  No I will not loan you
money.  You have lousy taste in women.  Would you stop whining all the time
and act your age."  Geez, if I were Robin I'd leave Wayne Manor and set up
shop somewhere else.  Batman is getting a little stodgy and difficult to be
around.
Alicia Silverstone plays Batgirl.  Yawn.
Okay, everybody loves the Bat-Villains.  (Well, sorta.  I loved Catwoman in
the second Bat movie, but I hated the Penguin.  I loved Nicholson's Joker
and Carrey's Riddler.  I tolerated Tommy Lee Jones' Two-Face.  That's not a
bad villain track-record.)  Ahnold is ahm, well Ahnold.  This poor, poor
man is saddled with some of the worst puns and lamest, dumbest dialogue
I've ever heard.  (See .sig below.  I've seen a lot of dumb dialogue and I
am, generally speaking, a forgiving woman, but even I have a limit.)  It's
as though someone took all the dalogue from past Ahnold movies and put them
in a Cuisinart and then gave him the finished product.  The character's
costume is fun (RoboCop Lite) and Ahnold certainly seems to be having fun
with the part.  But the character doesn't really take off and start doing
this joyful dance of psychotic rebellion that the best Bat-Villains do.
The character is weighted down by an indecisive plot that can't decide
whether Mr. Freez is a deluded and sad character or a silly upbeat
homicidal freak.  I still can't figure it out.  (Geez, they stole the
characterization from one of the best episodes of 'Batman: The Animated
Series.'  The least they could have done was run with it.  Victor Freez,
sad and pathetic character who was, in a way, a victim of love.)  Ahnold
ain't a victim of anything and his Mr. Freez is an anti-climax.
Uma Thurman is wonderful as Poison Ivy.  Batman has a long tradition of
infatuation with the wrong woman and Ivy is a truly messed-up Bat-Babe.
Thurman is lively and beautiful and graceful and underclad as the luscious
and vengeful Poison Ivy.  She is the highlight of the movie.  (Well, I also
have a soft spot for Michael Gough who has been Alfred the Butler through
all 4 installments of this series.  He has surely endured a lot.)  Ms.
Thurman's performance isn't as rich as Michele Pfeiffer's was in BATMAN
RETURNS, but she is a strong and funny character and is almost worth the
price of admission.
Gotham City is wonderfully, breathtakingly brought to life.  (Damn.
Writing this makes me think of that line of dialogue from BULL DURHAM.  To
paraphrase:  This picture has a multi-million dollar art design, but a ten
cent brain.  Too bad.)  Particular highlights include shots of all those
wacky giant sculptures and a gorgeous and fully imagined shot of Arkham
Asylum.  (Could someone please tell MR. Schumacher that in the next picture
we would like to see some of the stunning visuals put to good use.  Hey,
maybe we could break a few wackos out of Arkham, let them use their brains
and give Bats a real challenge.  That might be fun.)
Anyway, I can neither recommend nor discourage anyone from going to see
BATMAN & ROBIN.  It depends on how you like your action flicks.  If you
like bright, loud, splashy popcorn movies and don't mind bad dialgoue and
extremely fuzzy plotting, then go, have fun.  (Hey, if you happen to like
lots of shots of black-rubber clad toushies, then this is the picture for
you.)  If you want movies to make sense and you want a picture that slows
down for five minutes so that you can actually find out what the heck is
going on, then pick something else.
I really liked some of it.  Honest-to-gawd.  But then again, I really,
really hated parts of it.  Go figure.

Title
Review for Dracula (1992)
     I couldn't decide whether Francis Ford Coppola's DRACULA was a
poorly done love story or an inept horror film.  I finally found it to
be neither, but rather a dull mismash of unconnected visual "moments"
that lacked both convincing acting and involving storylines.  My overall
score was a D+.
     I think the thing that really threw me out of this movie was the
excessive romanticism imposed on it.  I never felt that Gary Oldman and
Winona Ryder connected.  Coppola needed to have real sparks flying
between these characters for his romantic conceit to work and I found
their alleged passion dull and unfocused.  Mina Harker is supposed to be
the Drac's reincarnated love, a love so strongly felt that he would
endure centuries of living death rather than except god's judgement that
parted him from his love.  Yet Ryder's Mina is hardly a woman that is to
die for.  She is dull and self involved and the character never changes
from this sort of "lifeless" state.  The movie would have us believe
that something in her soul recognizes Drac as her ancient love, yet no
tone of voice, look of the eyes or impression of body language conveys
this critical recognition.  We are told to believe that meeting Drac
transforms this woman, freeing her repressed sexual desires.
Unfortunately none of this passion shows up on the screen.
     I also disliked the character of Dracula.  As written, it is a
confusing portrayal that never quite gels for me.  I believe that
Coppola's aim was to have the audience identify with the circumstances
that had made the man into the monster.  Unfortunately, it didn't work
for me.  I found Dracula silly and melodramatic, much more bathos than
pathos.  Oldman never convinced me that his character was a lover jilted
by god.  The only emotion that seemed to come across was a sort of bored
wistfulness.  The strong performance that the title character needed was
missing.
     I found most of rest of the cast extremely forgettable.  Keanu
Reeves sleepwalks through his part.  He is especially bad in the scenes
set in Castle Dracula with the three weird sisters.  Reeves seems to be
nearly comatose with excitement at the prospect of forbidden sexual
pleasures.  Anthony Hopkins' Van Helsing seems like he wandered in from
another movie, possibly a comedy.  The woman playing Lucy (Name escapes
me) is put in the odd position of portraying a vampire that was more
sexually alluring in life than in undeath (possibly a first in vampire
film history!).
     Many reviews have marveled over the effects in this movie.  I
found most of the effects pointless and unnecessary.  They distracted me
from the story and destroyed what little chance there was of connecting
with the characters.  This movie contains endless tracking shots that go
nowhere and special effects that are hardly even memorable, let alone
special.  I found Coppola's shadowplay mundane instead of menacing.
There is almost nothing frightening in this film.  
     In short I found this film dull and uninvolving.  It was poorly
written, acted and directed.  I'm afraid that I wouldn't even recommend
renting the video.  

Title
Review for Lost World: Jurassic Park, The (1997)
Geez, ya ever go to the movies with your kids and you just know that you
ain't seeing the same flick they are?  That was the case with THE LOST
WORLD.  I saw a fairly slow and poorly written film that had few thrills
and uneven pacing.  I thought it was a C+, at best.  My kids saw a great
movie with huge dinosaurs and great special effects and enough spills and
chills to give them nightmares for a couple of days.  They gave it an A and
are telling all their friends about it.  So, with respect to both
viewpoints, a split review.
Parents: Geez Louise why do I always get stuck next to the guy who has to
explain every damn scene to his apparently brain-dead girlfriend? How the
hell hard can it be?  Scientist escaped from Dinosaur Island the last time
and doesn't want to go back and play 'hide the salami' with the T-Rexes any
more.  Wise old former Capitalist waives money, scientific curiosity and
the threat of having the guy's girlfriend eaten by giant dinos and --
poof-- scientist goes back to the island.  Nasty bad old capitalist idiots
decide to also go to the island and "meddle where man was not meant to go."
(This is bad.  They are going to get eaten. We know this 'cuz we saw the
last movie and nasty people like lawyers and greedy capitalists and
gun-totting morons with slack-jaws always become lunch.  Law of the jungle
baby.  I mean geez, what are they going to do, let the dinos eat the kids
or the heroes?  No way.  That doesn't leave anyone for the next sequel.)
Everybody screws around with scientific stuff that isn't very sturdy, wind
up pissing off the dinosaurs and then just barely escape with their lives.
Extremely stupid capitalists decide to bring dinos back to 'civilization'
(well, California, but it counts in the movie.) Nobody in this movie ever
saw KING KONG and doesn't know what any pre-schoolers knows; never bring
giant killer animals into the city.  The animals don't like the city, they
can't get good take-out in the suburbs and they get pissed off and start
stomping on cars.  Everything turns out allright though because the dinos
get back to nature, the bad and greedy capitalists are wiped out by
liability suits and the scientists get to go home and watch TV.  That's
about it.
Ah, I've seen better.  The movie is really, really slow.  I liked the
beginning, wherein a little kid is almost eaten by tiny dinosaurs. Hey, I'm
a parent and there are times when you take your children to the movies with
the expectation that something in the damn movie will scare them.  If dinos
only eat adults then how the hell are the kids supposed to get scared.
"Hey, sit up and be good or I'll send you to Jurassic Park where you'll get
eaten by giant T-Rexes with bad breath and humungo teeth."  "Yeah right Ma,
dinos only eat grown-ups.  You're the only one who'd be in trouble." At
least now we know that tiny dinosaurs do have a taste for small children.
It's a start.
I was bored with the first hour of LOST WORLD.  It was slow, filled with
dull people with dull jobs and unintelligible dialogue.  I liked Jeff
Goldblum, but mostly because he's Jeff Goldblum and he has an interesting
and unique way of delivering a line.  (He has a sort of hushed and
breathless delivery filled with accents on off words that I find slightly
disorienting and enjoyable.) The woman who played his girlfriend wasn't
interesting enough to remember though she did scream well.  The hunky guy
who was a photographer for at least part of the movie before he
metaphorphisized into a Rambo clone was nice to look at.  (What was that
all about?  Was he really a photographer or just one of your standard
movie-issue hunky Rambo guys who only pretend to be a photographer?  I have
no idea.)
The guy who was in FARGO was good, although he was actually playing the
same character.  (Though he had more dialogue in this movie than in FARGO.)
There was also an English guy playing  a hunter in the picture who was evil
because he wanted to hunt down a male T-Rex. (I am not sure why this guy
was evil.  The T-Rex wanted to hunt the English guy down and eat him, but
the T-Rex wasn't considered evil, he was just doing his job as a devoted
husband and father.  But the hunter guy was evil.  Really really evil.  I
mean, they even cast an English guy as the hunter, that's how evil he was.)
And there was the cute kid who played Jeff Goldblum's daughter.  She was,
ahm, cute and read her lines well and screamed well.  Unfortunately she
also had to act in a scene that called for her to do a really ludicrous bit
of gymnastic daring-do that
was a truly dumb moment of film-making.  Poor kid.
The best part of the picture was when a T-Rex got loose in San Diego.  I
felt bad for the dino because I've been in San Diego and it's really hard
to get around that city as a tourist.  The dino was angry and tired and
scared that his kid was hanging out with a bad element.  When he wound up
in the suburbs, stuck without a map and unable to see the street signs
because of the poor lighting and all, well, my heart bled for him.
Fortunately the T-Rex was able to rescue his kid and beat a path back home
before his old lady found out and kicked him out of the nest.  Phewh!  I'm
really glad he made it.
Kids:  Wow!  What a great movie!  The dinosaurs were like ten, no twenty,
no fifty feet tall.  They were so cool.  And they, like, ate people and
like dripped blood all over everything and it was so coo-ooo-l.   I loved
that movie.  And, like, they only ate grown-ups which was really good
because the kids didn't really want to hurt them but some of the adults did
so that was good.
The guy who was in ID4 was in this only he was like he was when he was in
the first JURASSIC PARK and not like he was when he was like saving the
world and stuff.  (He was cool when he was saving the world and got to fly
in a spaceship and hang out with Will Smith and stuff only he wasn't doing
that in this movie cuz he was different.)  This movie was just like
JURASSIC PARK only it was different. In JURASSIC PARK the dinosaurs were
pretty good but in this movie they are even better.  And they, like, drip
blood when they eat people, you know.  I don't think they dripped blood
before, but my friend has the tape so I could check and find out.  The
T-Rex didn't eat anybody like a lawyer in this movie, but he was still
like, eating people and stuff, so it was the same thing, only different.
Anyway, see this movie.  It was GREAT! It was really scary and funny and
good and it had giant dinosaurs kicking cars around and stuff and I really
liked it.  My Mom didn't like it, but she's old and so it wasn't really even
a movie for her, so what difference does she make anyway.  See it!

Title
Review for To Die for (1995)
     In Brief:  Best bleak comedy film since HEATHERS.  Full of
wonderful swipes at the fifteen minutes of fame mentality that feeds so
much of modern American pop culture.  Go see it!
     So, I prepared for this film by watching a moving interview on
"Hard Copy" with Pam Smart, the New Hampshire Media teacher who was
convicted of engineering the death of her husband back in the 1980's.
"Hard Copy"'s Diane Diamond asked Smart what she thought about Nicole
Kidman's fictionalized portrayal of her in the new film TO DIE FOR.
Smart replied that she thought Kidman's character came off as a dumb,
vicious tramp and she thought that the publicity the new movie
generates might just hurt her chances in her latest court appeal.
(Smart was convicted and given a life sentence for her part in the
murder of her husband.)  Smart's got a point.  It wouldn't be the first
time that the public took the better scripted and well-acted movie
version of an event as the absolute truth over the duller and far less
artistic real life version.   However, given a choice between the mass
media 'happening' of the real event and the fictionalized movie, I
would definitely opt for the later.  Real murderers rarely have
dialogue as witty as what Buck Henry has written for this movie and
Smart, while pretty and alluring, is no match for the cinematic charms
of Nicole Kidman.
     TO DIE FOR begins in a town called Little Hope, New Hampshire, the
archetypal dry and intellectually barren American suburb.  The story
concerns the ambitious Suzanne Stone and how she tackles the obstacles
between her and her life long ambition of being 'on TV.'  Of course,
one of those little obstacles turns out to be her dull and unambitious
husband Larry, played by Matt Dillon.  But, with a little imagination,
some charm and raw sex appeal and a rather novel approach to Junior
Achievement, Our Heroine manages to overcome the nay-sayers in her life,
at least temporarily.
     Kidman triumphs in the trashy role of Suzanne.  I have never
really been all that fond of this actress but she shows a wonderful
flair for comedy in this picture.  Her portrayal of the incredibly
shallow and dumb femme fatale resonates.  Kidman knows a star-making
role when she sees it and she plays the conscience-deprived Suzanne as
the ultimate career driven, post-feminist uber-temptress from hell.  She
is ably abetted by wonderfully demented comic dialogue, which Kidman
delivers in a unselfconsciously funny way.  At one point Suzanne is
expounding on her knowledge of world events to her future husband and
sister-in-law.  "You know," she knowingly exclaims, "Gorbachev would
still be the leader of Russia or whatever, if he had just had that ugly
purplish thing removed from his head."  Her husband beams at Suzanne's
profound knowledge of world politics and then proudly proclaims that
this qualifies her to be the next Barbara Walters.  This is very close
to pop culture bashing heaven, folks.
     The other standout performance in the film is delivered by Joaquin
Phoenix.  He plays Jimmy, a burned out teenager who becomes addicted to
Suzanne's sexual favors.  Kidman's character, vapid though she is, is a
sort of suave beacon of success to Jimmy and his lost friends Russell
and Lydia, winningly portrayed by Casey Affleck and Alison Folland.
Phoenix looks like the very embodiment of Gen-X slackerhood (as
envisioned by tabloid TV, of course).  His Jimmy has the dead eyes and
demeanor of a kid who knows that he ain't going anywhere, ever.
Phoenix reacts to the sexy Suzanne with a sort of obsessed amazement
and he makes us believe that a loser character like Jimmy really would
be willing to kill for someone like Suzanne, someone who actually
noticed him.
     Gus Van Sant (DRUGSTORE COWBOY, MY OWN PRIVATE IDAHO) direction is
first-rate.  He keeps the pacing in this not-quite-thriller snapping
along.  Van Sant rightly keeps the focus of this movie on the amoral
Suzanne and doesn't stop to proselytize the audience about the
rightness or wrongness of her actions.  Van Sant trusts his material
and trusts his audience to 'get it' without stopping to explain what is
funny about this All-American story.  The screenplay, by Buck Henry, is
absolutely great and includes some of the best bleakly comic lines I've
heard since HEATHERS.  Henry's story is a blast against the shallowness
of the American media and the mindlessness of fame, yet the screenplay
delivers this sharp message by focusing on just a few characters.
Henry ably manages to avoid diluting his story by aiming at too many
targets and the result is a crisp and funny mini-classic.  Danny Elfman
did the original music for this movie and he delivers another
eccentric, loopy score that strongly echoes his themes for EDWARD
SCISSORHANDS.  Either film score would make wonderful background music
for Halloween Trick-or-Treat parties.  All-in-all, a wonderful
production, well worth your seven bucks!
TO DIE FOR: A Columbia Pictures Release
Directed by Gus Van Sant.  Written by Buck Henry  Score by Danny Elfman
Starring Nicole Kidman, Matt Dillon, Joachin Phoenix
Based on the book by Joyce Maynard.
Rated R - for language and mature themes.  (Respect the R, not for under 14's)
Rating -----  9 out of 10 stars.  Go see it.
