Authors
Christophe Boone
Number of Reviews
3

Title
Review for City Hall (1996)
Opens nationally Friday, February 16, 1996
        No mayor can ever be liked by everybody, especially the mayor of 
New York City.  No matter what services he claims to have brought to the 
city, there is always something behind him to make him corrupt.  CITY 
HALL tries to paint a portrait of the perfect mayor, but winds up falling 
short.
        One rainy afternoon in Brooklyn, on the corner of Broadway and 
Marcy, a detective meets up with a mob screw up that he tried to put away 
two years ago.  Something goes wrong, bullets fly, the cop and the 
mobster lie dead, and a six year old is caught in the crossfire.  Whose 
bullet hits him is a little ambiguous, but watch closely and you'll know.
        News in the city travels fast.  Deputy Mayor Kevin Calhoun (John 
Cusack) learns from an aid of the incident and cuts the Mayor's (Al 
Pacino) speech short.  Calhoun is down home boy from Louisiana spouting 
quotes from Huey Long and Harry S Truman, only trying to do what is right 
and find the truth.  He idolizes the Mayor, John Pappas, Time cover man, 
and one of the finest mayors ever to grace this office with his 
presence.  Together, they start a crusade to find out why these killings 
took place.
        Along the way, Calhoun runs into Marybeth Cogan, a lawyer 
assigned to protect the widow and her chances of receiving her husband's 
pension.  She believes that Calhoun is out to tarnish his name and expose 
him as corrupt.  They make an unlikely pair that should have no romantic 
spark.  Well, the writers couldn't resist at the end in one of the lamest 
conclusions I have seen in a while.  Can you say reshoots after poor test 
showings?  Together, these two become detectives doing police work that 
should be left to IA, but they seem to only have one moment of 
brilliance.  The rest is left up to Calhoun and Cogan, which in and of 
itself is hard to swallow.
        CITY HALL remains almost too ambiguous at times.  For the normal 
American audience, many people are going to be confused as to why there 
are so many twists and turns, and where are they all leads.  A central 
theme to this film is that when one doors closes, another one opens, or 
rather, the other way around.  Unfortunately, from the beginning, the 
audience knows something is wrong, but each twist could result in a dead 
end at the answer.  The film continues to plow through its own dead ends.
        The biggest problem with this film is the screenplay.  Cusack 
turns in a strong performance, much improved since his days as a high 
school slack in BETTER OFF DEAD and ONE CRAZY SUMMER.  His potential from 
SAY ANYTHING is coming into fruition.  Al Pacino plays Al Pacino, and one 
wonders if the audiences will ever tire of him.  Bridget Fonda smiles 
nicely, and bobs her hair, that's about it.  Upon closer examination, 
however, there is a reason why the credits do not precede this film.  
Four separate writers are credited with penning this script:  newcomer 
Ken Lipper, Bo Goldman (SCENT OF A WOMAN), Nicholas Pileggi (GOODFELLAS, 
CASINO), and Paul Schrader (TAXI DRIVER, RAGING BULL).  Three well known 
writers on a not-so-worthy script.  If I had to guess, I'd say that 
Lipper wrote it, and the studio saw potential, so they passed it from 
one hand to the next.  Their strategy did not pay off.  This film was 
supposed to arrive in theatres in December, but the studio pulled out, 
exposing their lack of confidence in this film among the holiday 
competition.  The plot lines do not weave a complete story, but run 
parallel instead.  One character says it best, "The sweater unravels."
        For Cusack's performance alone, it might be worth a look, but I 
have reservations.  This is not Pacino's best, and Bridget Fonda has 
still not found her breakout role, if it ever comes.  But, CITY HALL is a 
worthy rental, so save the $7, and spend the $3 in a few months.

Title
Review for Postino, Il (1994)
Directed by Michael Radford
Produced by Mario Cecchi Gori, Vittorio Cecchi Gori,
and Gaetano Daniele
Written by Anna Pavignano, Michael Radford, Furio Scarpelli,
Giacomo Scarpetti, and Massimo Troisi.
Based on the book by Antonio Skarmeta
Music by Luis Enriquez Bacalov
Cinematography by Franco DiGiacomo
Now showing in major cities, and re-released for a second time in select 
theatres on Friday, February 16, 1996 for a limited run.
        12 hours after filming the final scene of IL POSTINO, Massimo 
Troisi passed away due to a fatal disease that he was well aware was 
eating away at him.  It has been said that he bought the rights to this 
book because he knew he was going to die, and he wanted to act in a 
serious role after becoming well known as a comedic actor in Italy.  The 
biggest tragedy of this film is that Troisi never saw what he had 
accomplished.
        Nominated for Best Actor (Massimo Troisi), Best Adapted 
Screenplay, Best Music, Best Director, and Best Picture for this year's 
Academy Awards, IL POSTINO has won the battle that few films ever must 
attempt--to be a foreign film nominated for the Best Picture Oscar along 
side other American film (or English speaking film) nominees.  Due to a 
technicality that IL POSTINO was released in Italy in 1994, and therefore 
not eligible to be nominated by Italy for the Best Foreign Film Oscar, 
Miramax spent $1.5 million and sent tons of videos to members of the 
Academy to get this film seen and nominated.  This is why.
        Mario Ruoppolo (Massimo Troisi) is a fisherman's son who becomes 
a postman due to his father nagging him about not having a job.  He has 
one customer, Nobel Prize for Literature nominee and exiled Communist 
Chilean poet Pablo Neruda (Philippe Noiret).  Neruda is living in Italy on 
Ruoppolo's island while in exile, so Ruoppolo rides his bicycle to his 
house every day to deliver the mail.  Soon thereafter, Ruoppolo befriends 
Neruda, and with his simple way of thinking, learns to appreciate 
Neruda's poetry and share his thoughts with the poet.  He employs 
Neruda's help to win over a woman he has fallen for, Beatrice Russo.  
Through Neruda's help and poetry, Ruoppolo attempts to win her heart.  
Enough with the spoilers.
        This film is crafted with a tender spirit.  Throughout, if you 
know Troisi's story, you realize how gaunt he looks.  His stubble does 
not mask his dying.  This is his final performance, and both he and the 
audience know it.  His character comes alive as if it wasn't a character 
at all, but rather simply Troisi expressing his feelings for a woman in 
his own shy, confused way.  Opposite Noiret, known to this critic best 
for his portrayal of Alfredo in CINEMA PARADISO (this critic's favorite 
film of all time) an accomplished actor, Troisi shines, and steals the 
screen from him.  It is hard not to think about his impending death as 
the film comes to an ironic close, and Neruda's poetry rolls up the screen.
        Many reviews have been written about this film, so I will not 
write a lengthy one.  I will leave it at that.  If you have not yet seen 
IL POSTINO, search your newspaper for the nearest art house cinema, and 
go see it in its second re-release in less than a year.  Take some 
friends, and tell the rest.  You'll quickly realize why the Academy went 
out of its way for this film.

Title
Review for Black Sheep (1996)
Opens nationally Friday, February 2nd.
        I can't decide which was more annoying--the fact that this movie 
was so horrible or that the two middle-aged women behind me laughed 
incessantly throughout the movie?  Why should people laughing the whole 
time bother me?  Well, for one reason, and for one reason only...
        Chris Farley and David Spade team up again for TOMMY BOY REDUX, I 
mean, BLACK SHEEP.  Penelope Spheeris (WAYNE'S WORLD) directs this latest 
in a series of bad Lorne Michaels, "Saturday Night Live" extensions.  Farley 
plays an earnest brother of a gubernatorial hopeful who just wants to do 
what he can to get his brother elected.  Unfortunately, bad luck seems to 
follow Farley around.  Enter David Spade as one of the candidate's advisors 
who volunteers to try to keep a lid on Farley until after the election.  
Of course, Spade has no control over Farley's luck.  In fact, some rubs 
off on him, with one of the few inspired moments in the score when the 
electric guitars start to play "Dueling Banjos" from DELIVERANCE.  The 
guitars are inspired.  The scene isn't.
        So, every strange mishap that could happen does happen, including 
bumping into Gary Busey as a psycho ex-Marine still fighting Vietnam in his 
mind and living in an abandoned school bus with a 27 inch TV.  Okay, this is 
where I lose it.  This movie is horrible.  Gary Busey's enormous, buck teeth 
usually are the most annoying thing on the screen, but they take a back seat 
this time to the drivel that passes as a screenplay.  Throughout the entire 
film, I laughed once, when Farley does his own thing on stage at a 
Rock the Vote concert.  This is the Chris Farley that made me laugh on 
Saturday Night Live.  His entire performance of 60 seconds in WAYNE'S WORLD 
as the overinformed security guard was better than his turn in BLACK SHEEP.  
Occasionally, the script tries to become dramatic, making Farley's character 
pathetic, so we should care for him.  Whatever.
        Then, there is David Spade.  I almost forgot he was even in this 
movie.  Spade has absolutely no shining moments in this film.  I used to 
think his "Hollywood Minute" on SNL was funny.  Then, his new "Spade in 
America," (or "I only have time to do 2 minutes in between my busy film 
schedules") started to get on my nerves.  Then, in BLACK SHEEP, his 
"I've got a little present for you, it's in my pocket," routine was funny 
when my friend did it to me...in seventh grade (said with Chandler-like 
inflection).  When schticks like that are all they have to put in a 
screenplay, it's not worth writing.  Unfortunately, that didn't stop 
the studios from producing this first draft of a not-so-funny comedy.  
Spade's character could disappear from this movie, and you'd never know it.  
That's a problem if he is one of the headliners.
        Unfortunately, Lorne Michaels has a hold of the executives' attention 
at Paramount for some reason, and they let him produce this redundant 
material that isn't even suitable for an SNL sketch.  Granted, WAYNE'S WORLD 
was funny, but the slew of extended skits recently (TOMMY BOY, BILLY 
MADISON, STUART SMALLEY SAVES THE WORLD, IT'S PAT, how many of you caught 
those last two?) have proven, maybe with the exception of TOMMY BOY, that 
this stuff just isn't successful.  But just slap "From the Director of 
WAYNE'S WORLD," on the poster, and it's in the bag...or maybe not.  
Remember THE BEVERLY HILLBILLIES?  They tried the same thing.  It didn't 
work.
        Despite my lack of amusement throughout all 87 minutes of this flick, 
on the whole, the crowd liked it.  Maybe they enjoy predictable humor, or 
maybe they were just smoking crack.  Either way, don't waste your money.  
Maybe check it out when it hits video, but I'd wait until HBO decides to 
show it every night for a month, kind of like WEEKEND AT BERNIE'S.  Oh wait, 
I hope they don't do that.  I couldn't handle the thought of another 
TOMMY BOY, I mean, BLACK SHEEP.  I keep doing that.  I wonder why.
        A footnote from the author:  The best part about this entire film 
was grabbing a free t-shirt that was tossed into the crowd and stealing 
it from the two women behind me who thought they had it.  Sorry, ladies.  
Justice is served.  The second best thing was shredding this movie in this 
review.
