Authors
sunil ramchandani
Number of Reviews
2

Title
Review for Mississippi Masala (1991)
Starring Denzel Washington, Sarita Choudhury, Roshan Seth,
         Sharmila Tagore, and Charles Dutton
Directed by: Mira Nair
Music: L. Subramanium
     To call Mira Nair's latest film a heavy handed social commentary, 
would, in my opinion, be doing great injustice to this lady and her
film.  A message it does carry, but that is definitely not the intent of
the film.  For if it were, then the whole premise is wrong, the
situations are uncalled for, and the characters are too cliched.  This
is a very unpretentious, earthy, and simplistic collage of varied
characters.
     The main protagonist of the film Jai (Roshan Seth) is an Indian (as
in from India) African, very idealistic by nature, who forever harbors
dreams of his native homeland--Uganda, after being expelled (along with
all the Indian expatriates) from there in 1972.  Normally, it would be
easy to dismiss Jai off as a hypocrite.  But hypocrite he is not, rather
a man with good intentions, albeit his hard experiences have embittered
him to the point of being detestful of the black-skinned.  Still, is he
really that resentful of the black race?  No, rather it is just an
outlet to vent his frustrations, for he was after all a victim of
circumstances beyond his control.
     It is really this feeling which comes into play after he hears
about the relationship of his only daughter and child Mina (Sarita
Choudhury) with the local carpet cleaner Dimitrius (Denzel Washington),
even though he rationalizes to Washington otherwise.  Drawing upon his
own experiences he tries to explain to Washington, why he is not willing
to let his daughter go through similar situations he experienced as one
of the minority when in Uganda.  
     His realization is late in coming, though nonetheless is very
welcome, and in a scene remarkably done as he embraces a black African
baby while watching a dance in a street square in Kampala, Uganda.  The
whole scene is so much significant of the world as it is today, a world
in transition, a much closer and smaller world.
     The movie on the whole is very appealing and entertaining.  The
smalltown ambience of Greenwood definitely adds to the unique flavor.
Also the characters of the Indian motel owners albeit cliched, add good
humor to a movie which in any case has a strong undercurrent of being
funny.  
     Of the cast, both Choudhury and Washington are a match made for
each other.  The chemistry between them is terrific, the scenes
involving them have a spontaneity and freshness erstwhile seldom
witnessed.  As proof, you have a scene where they are taking a walk in
the scenic environs of Greenwood, when he very hesitantly asks if he
could kiss her.  The whole shot is so well handled, it is very difficult
not to break out into a smile.  Kinu (played by Sharmila Tagore) as the
mother is very adequate,she appears emotionally distraught and very
vulnerable for most part, a typical Indian wife would best characterize
her role.  Charles Dutton (from the Fox TV show ROC) is delightful in
a cameo as Tyronne--business partner of Washington.  Of the Indian
cast, Anil (Ranjit Chowdhury) as the motel owner, and his friend Pontiac
(Mohan Gokhale) are brilliant.  And finally Roshan Seth who seems very
effective as the morose and yet hopeful Jai still pining for his
homeland.  If you've seen GANDHI, you'd recognize Roshan Seth (plays the
role of Nehru) as a terrific actor.
     The film does include some breathtaking shots of the countryside in
Kampala, the green rolling hills, and Lake Victoria (?) as seen from
Jai's house.  In her second major attempt after SALAAM BOMBAY Mira
Nair maintains her effort, not superlative, but good nonetheless.  In
any case this Harvard film school product seems destined to go places.
Her next motion picture which she is doing for Warner Bros. is about
the life of Buddha.  
     I recommend this film unequivocally; you'll leave the movie theater
with a smile.  As Sarita tells Denzel in one of the scenes from the
film, that she is essentially a 'Masala' (mixture of spices) having
lived in different countries and having experienced different cultures,
this film is also loaded with all the Masala for an evening of
entertainment.

Title
Review for Final Analysis (1992)
Starring Richard Gere, Kim Basinger, Uma Thurman, Eric Roberts,
         and Keith David
     Take two of the hottest stars in Hollywood today, throw in some
steamy moments between them, add a dash of deception, some wry humor,
some violence, all to a base which is distinctly Hitchcockian in flavor,
and you have Final Analysis.  No, no it isn't all that simple as it
sounds.  What starts of as a very pretentious and seemingly over
sophisticated film shifts into just the right gear midway and doesn't
stop till the finish.
     Richard Gere plays a Bay Area psychiatrist who while treating one
of his patients (played by Uma Thurman) falls in love with her sister
(played by Kim Basinger).  As Gere plays hooky for the first time in a
couple years,  and courts Basinger around the scenic Bay and in a
deserted, crumbling  lighthouse, things seem picture perfect, save for
the fact that Basinger  is married to an insanely jealous Eric Roberts,
a role played very adroitly.  In this cameo as Jim Evans, Roberts
displays a great flair for panache, and comes across as a very ruthless
and chilling character -- just right.
     Some scenic shots of the Bay were craftfully done, good
cinematography.  The background score was excellent, especially towards
the end.  Of the performances, Richard Gere sleepwalks through most of
his role (I still feel that his *best* performances to date were in the
films BREATHLESS, INTERNAL AFFAIRS, and AN OFFICER AND A GENTLEMAN -- in
that order).  Uma Thurman as the mentally disturbed patient is
appealing, very vulnerable at most times, quite impulsive and morose
during others, and extremely pretty.  Basinger is a brilliant surprise,
and Keith David as the detective is excellent.  Unfortunately though,
the screenplay has some holes and lacks spirit and creativity, very
uninspiring.
     Overall, the movie makes for an entertaining evening.  See it, if a
suspense thriller is your cup of tea.  
