Authors
Clarence Worley
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Crow, The (1994)
     I've been reading many reviews recently on THE CROW and I have to
say I'm a little disappointed.  I think everyone is being a little too
hard on this movie.  The fact is that this movie was put out by Miramax
Pictures.  A not so upper class company.  It is a fact that THE CROW
had the most profitable opening weekend of any Miramax film ever.  So
the budget of THE CROW is not that high.  I think it was like $23
million, which was reportedly $8 million over because of Brandon's
death.  The point I am trying to make is that this movie should not and
cannot be compared to BATMAN or BLADE RUNNER.  And also is too good to
be compared to CAPTAIN AMERICA or THE PUNISHER.
     I think that the action scenes were filmed very well.  I found the
rooftop scenes to be very entertaining.  Brandon Lee definitely had a
future in action movies.  For those who don't agree with me I have two
words, LASER MISSION.  If you have not yet seen this movie, see it.  It
stars Brandon Lee as a government agent trying to regain a stolen
diamond that is going to be used by some bad guys to make a laser.  It
is one of the worst movies I have ever seen.  When I look at THE CROW
it amazes me that Brandon Lee was ever in a movie like LASER MISSION.
What I am trying to say is that Brandon Lee has come along a great deal
from movie to movie.  LASER MISSION came out in 1990.  Within only four
years Brandon Lee made a major motion picture.  I think that Brandon
Lee could easily take an action movie with a $50 million budget and
turn it into a huge success.
     Back to THE CROW: I do admit Brandon did have a few corny lines.
But beyond that I thought the screenplay was well written.  Michael
Wincott's character had a witty remark to everything as did everyone
else.
     I also loved the music.  I think that it added a dimension to the
film that most action films do not have.  Most action movies have third
rate bands stealing third rate songs from shitty top forty groups like
Def Leppard.  The soundtrack to THE CROW contained songs by such acts
as: The Cure, Stone Temple Pilots, Nine Inch Nails, Helmet, Jesus and
Mary Chain, Violent Femmes, and Pantera to name a few.
     I feel I must make a comment on a review I read on the net.
Someone said that Eric Draven looked stupid as a wise cracking
vigilante.  Well what did you expect.  Remember that this is the same
guy who was in a rock band, he's young and full of life.  Just because
he was dead for a year doesn't mean that he has lost his sense of
humor.
     All in all I think that THE CROW was a very good movie.  I was
kept entertained throughout.  There was good action, snappy dialogue,
and who can deny the eerie irony that surrounds the picture.  The tragic
death of Brandon Lee may have altered my mind a little but that's ok.
I loved Bruce Lee and Brandon Lee and I feel that the world, especially
the movie industry, will not be the same without their martial arts and
charisma.  Remember when you watch THE CROW that you get out of
something what you put into it.  In the case of THE CROW you get more
than a $24 million picture.
