Authors
anonymous@X.X.X (X)
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Trois couleurs: Rouge (1994)
     Like all things eternal RED begins and ends in the sea.  It is
well the film has the complexion of water, the water motif transports
the fairy tale, points the way.  Benign, sympathetic images answer each
other like waves, carrying within them their own inexorable unity and
completeness even as they draw upon humanistic traditions from way back
when.  So it is that Valentine gulps down the life-giving substance
before going on the fashion show; exhausted, the bolero trails off, a
wedge of light settling on her windshield like a dove.  Other lights,
other signals follow, and then the inevitable bloodshed that brings her
before the judge.  He is a dark, pathetic figure who fiddles his straps
and spills water all over -- a walking profanity against the human race
Beckett would have approved.  The all-knowing judge pontifies on the
maiden's past while they stalk each other across partitions and wheel
in circles, two Peking opera divas at war over justice and truth.  The
winner renounces his spells and charms, the loser descends into the
perfect amber sunset through the tears in her eyes.  Biblical allusions
abound: Valentine plays "winners-lose" at jackpots and crashes into
churches, and indeed she is a most saintly figure, almost made of water
herself.  Irene Jacob has such a difficult face, now overflowing with
radiance, now soulful and thin.  It takes a Kieslowski to challenge its
many facets, bring out the beauty; that must be why she is his Muse
Extraordinaire.  It is a special honor to witness that staggering
beauty as she takes the runway again, lights in her hair, flanked by a
commoner to each side, her bejeweled necklace Kieslowski's thorn crown
that absolves us of our failings.  Also present is Joseph Kern, thirty
years younger by the earnestness in his eyes, and in the stillness
before the storm they tell the future, read the signs.  (Water has its
violent ways too.)  With a ballet dancer's grace and fluid steps
stilled against time by flowing curtains and the look in those eyes,
Valentine throws herself at the theater gate, trying to beat back the
wind and the rain.  Under whose watchful gaze is she in turn spared by
the tempest in the sea?  Set in pacific, urban Geneva, RED is strangely
elemental, shot almost entirely in the magic hour in the shadow of
distant hilltops, from whence lightning issues like judgement on Mount
Sinai and the evening sun vanishes like a lost hope.  The many interior
sunsets in Kern's mansion are memorable indeed.  And yet it is morning,
ten minutes to eight, when our protagonists are plucked wet and
shivering from the English Channel.  As the judge looks on, time stops
and telescopes on to that exact moment Valentine turns back towards the
scene of the carnage.  The circle closes on the very imperfect replica
of Valentine's canvas-sized profile, accompanied by the tell-tale
foghorn which was already there when the picture was first taken.  A
peaceful note rings out, blossoms into a reprisal of the runway choral,
fades away, and finally rises to a crescendo even more glorious than the
first.  There is always hope then, just as there will be dreams of
eternal redemption.  And because of RED, there will always be memories
of a most profound and absolute beauty.
    -- To Stanley, who knew about the lightning, the wind, and the rain
