Authors
Nizam Ahmed
Number of Reviews
7

Title
Review for Pulp Fiction (1994)
     Don't believe the hype.  Quentin Tarantino's loud, brash and
supercool crime pic is certainly entertaining and a real crowd-pleaser,
but no way is the cult reputatation that has built up around it
deserved.
     Tarantino is now being hailed as the catalyst of a new wave of
motion picture director: cine-literate, streetwise and able to meld the
best elements of popular culture with the film-making craft of the
auteurs.  Erm, excuse me, but hasn't his been said about every new
"shining star" whenever a debut feature is critically acclaimed? Making
entertaining, violent films is certainly not a monopoly for Tarantino:
the Joel Silver bandwagon has been doing exactly that throughout the
eighties.  Having a grip on popular culture is also hardly a great
achievement.  Is there some reason why mentioning McDonalds and Pop
Tarts in a script makes it suddenly profound? Worst of all, a band of
pseudo-intellectuals obviously weened on the MODERN REVIEW, Julie
Burchill and Tony Parsons, have acclaimed it as a masterpiece.
Hypocritically, they heap abuse on FORREST GUMP for being too populist,
yet PULP FICTION only exists to please a slightly-more-cynical market
segment.
     Right from the start, Tarantino throws every movie trick in the
book at you.  Hey, let's start with a scene from the end of the film,
and muddle up the time sequence of the stories--the senile film
reviewers love all that stuff!  Let's have nice, slow camera movements
and an anally retentive ultra-detailed look at everything our two
hitmen protagonists get up to.  They spend seemingly hours in the car
on the way to their first job, spouting their supposedly brilliantly
witty dialogue.  It seems to have been overlooked that half this
dialogue is muffled and is barely audible, and the other half is not
particularly amusing or interesting anyway.  One particularly dull
sequence involves boxer Butch (Bruce Willis) dressing, talking to his
partner.  So what?  Why should the audience be in the slightest bit
interested in the boring chatter of Butch and Fabienne, or in Butch's
dress sense? The film is peppered with these long, drawn-out showcases
for Mr Tarantino's god-like gift for dialogue....
     There *is* fun to be had however.  Tarantino's overblown
pretentious directing style is extremely annoying, he seems to believe
the press he has been receiving, which as we all know signals the death
of talent.  The essential storylines are good, simple tales with plenty
of black humour for those with sick minds.  The entire cast performs
well, signifying one of Tarantino's rare strengths, coaxing good
performances from everyone on set.  Samuel L. Jackson and John
Travolta shine as Jules and Vince.  There are enough gunshots, fights
and blood to please all action-lovers, and a supreme scene of
humiliation and then revenge involving Butch and Mr. Big Marsellus in
a hee-haw gunshop.  The final sequence is not as powerful as Tarantino
would want, but there is certainly plenty of fun on the way.
     So no way is this An Artistic Triumph, or indeed, one of the best
films of the 90's.  It is simply an entertainment that provides its
fair share of laughs, groans and cheers, but has ideas above it's
station: a "pulp" film as the title suggests that thinks it can become
a "classic."  Sadly, it can't, and Quentin Tarantino's attempts to hide
its flaws through quirkiness and a 90's feel, while fooling many
people, left me unsatisfied.

Title
Review for South Park: Bigger, Longer and Uncut (1999)
South Park: Bigger, Longer and Uncut (1999)
I recently had the chance to view a post-production VHS copy of the eagerly
awaited South Park movie. The film is in the final stages of
post-production: some frames of animation are not yet completed (they are
replaced by a series of stills) and some of the dialogue track is to be
redubbed. Otherwise, the film is pretty much ready for release - the story
is clear and all the dialogue is present, voiced by all the correct actors.
So, how does it fare? It kicks off in style as Cartman and the gang sneak in
to the brand new Terrence & Philip movie. This film-within-a-film ("Asses of
Fire") is a hilarious excuse for offensive bad-language (not bleeped!) and
vulgar toilet humour. It contains a brilliant musical number containing
nothing but four-letter words, clearly a celebration of the new-found
freedom SOUTH PARK's creators have found with an 18 certificate ('R' in the
US). Naturally, the South Park kids are impressed, and are soon repeating
the swearing at school. Soon, the news of the kids' foul mouths filters
through to the teachers and the parents, who are up in arms. The film then
turns into an unsubtle attack on a society of censorship, as the parents
point the blame at Terrence & Philip themselves, putting them on trial,
sentencing them to death, and declaring war on their homeland (Canada).
So far, so good. There are some brilliant gags and one-liners (as you'd
expect) and the relationship between Satan and Saddam Hussein is possibly
the sickest thing I've ever seen - so the film must be doing something
right.
Unfortunately, it seems that the natural length for SOUTH PARK is half an
hour. The film simply can't sustain the cartoons simple one-note inanity for
the full running time of the feature. All the best ideas are in the first
half-hour, after which SOUTH PARK begins to slide into repetition and
tedium. There is no denying the thrill of hearing the South Parkers swear
for real, but basing an entire film on this premise suggests laziness.
Certainly, its watchable and enjoyable enough (as any average episode of the
TV show is), but you get the feeling that SOUTH PARK has possibly exhausted
its format with this movie. There is very little left to explore, meaning
the film has to resort to cliched fantasy and war sequences.
The most irritating aspect of SOUTH PARK THE MOVIE is undoubtedly the boring
musical numbers. There are far too many of them, of which only one-or-two
are remotely amusing. They exist only as filler, padding the story out to
reach feature film length. Equally tedious is the sub-plot involving Kenny's
death (yes, he dies - no spoilers there).
SOUTH PARK: BIGGER, LONGER AND UNCUT is a fan's film. It is good to see that
the creators are not compromising their vision in an attempt to draw in a
more mainstream audience: this is as acerbic and cruel as any TV episode.
Unfortunately, as a fan's film, it follows the strict formula of 'more of
the same'. There is nothing particularly special here to distinguish it from
the TV show other than the swearing, some poor songs, and some snazzy
animation sequences.  Building it up as an 'event movie' is possibly a
mistake: it would be more at home as a sell-through video release.
This film's potential under-achievement, combined with the TV show's
dwindling audience figures in the States, could well spell the end of the
SOUTH PARK franchise. This may be a blessing in disguise. Parker & Stone are
undoubtedly talented people, and it may be time for them to move on to
projects new: the clear parallel is with a similarly controverial cartoon,
BEAVIS & BUTTHEAD, which ended with a major motion picture, to be replaced
by the more emotionally rich and mature KING OF THE HILL.
So, in conclusion, SOUTH PARK THE MOVIE just about stands on its own merits,
and all fans should certainly see it, not least because it may be the last
you will ever see. It was fun while it lasted, but no more SOUTH PARK
please.

Title
Review for Natural Born Killers (1994)
     NATURAL BORN KILLERS was released in Britain in January and is
shortly to get its video release.  However, considering the hooplah of
publicity it received concerning the subject matter, and the new tough
stance on violence by the British Board of Film Classification, it may
not be released at all.  RESERVOIR DOGS took two years to appear on the
small screen, so things don't bode well for Oliver Stone's relentless
depiction of two serial killers on the rampage.
     The film purports to be a bizarre, twisted look at the life and
killings of Mickey & Mallory Knox, and in particular attempts to
concentrate on the media feeding frenzy that turns them into prime-time
TV celebrities.  We see how they got together in a brilliant parody of
US TV sitcoms, seen through the broken memory of Mallory (Juliette
Lewis).  Their killing spree down the highways of the midwest is
documented from th point of view of top-rated docudrama American
Psychos, fronted by a manic Robert Downy Jr.  We see their downfall and
imprisonment at the hands of an obsessed cop who's just as twisted as
the prey he hunts, and an amazing climax that stokes up the excitement
to boiling point.
     Oliver Stone uses the screenplay (originally by Quentin Tarantino)
to throw every cinematic technique in the book at the viewer.
Flashbacks, video montages, back-projection, fast-cutting, black and
white, monotone, and the weirdest camera angles you're ever likely to
see combine to give you a visual bombardment that leaves you feeling
exhausted at all the images you have had to take in.  I get the
impression this was a deliberate ploy by Stone - you're supposed to be
looking inside the head of a serial killer here, it's bound to be
exhausting.  The only problem is, he uses it to overkill.  It's not
just the nutters in the film who get this technique to serve as
"thought bubbles," the entire film is enveloped in it.  If Stone is
trying to suggest that everyone's a potential murderer, fine, but give
the viewer the chance to work it out for themselves.
     Woody Harrelson as Mickey Knox is brilliant, absolutely faultless,
and Juliette Lewis is disturbingly convincing as Mallory.  She seems to
be making a habit of playing disturbed females. "Cheers" will never be
the same again.  Robert Downey Jr hams it up well as the supposed
villain of the piece, although a film where two convicted serial
killers are the heroes is a strange inversion.  I suppose it mirrors
the idea that the "media made them superstars".  Another reason for
seeing this powerful but flawed film is a thundering soundtrack, that
echoes the imagery of the film in its loud, in-your-face style.  Rap,
country, heavy metal, it all just seems so right.
     In the end though, it all depends on whether you will succumb to
Stone's unique brand of moralizing.  PLATOON was hardly subtle, but it
won Oscars.  This is even less subtle and very heavy-handed in its
criticism of the media.  There are scenes which reach farcical
proportions in their attempts to "visualize" the media celebrity idea.
But their is a certain pulp poetry in here somewhere, and it certainly
stands out, if not head and shoulders, at least shoulders above the
other films of the year.

Title
Review for Monty Python and the Holy Grail (1975)
A castle atop a windy hill. Silence. Then we hear the sound of horse hooves
approaching. Over the crest of the hill the figure of King Arthur appears.
But he is on foot, hopping along on an imaginary steed, with Patsy following 
behind banging two coconut shells together. This opening scene encapsulates
the whole tone of the Monty Python team's first venture into feature film
territory. Sheer nonsensical silliness, delighting in subverting our
preconceptions from the word go. Yet throughout all the idiocy, there is
a constant sense of skewed logic at work, giving the feeling that maybe
there is more to this than you think. In short, typical Monty Python.
Having read the first and final drafts of the script and seen the movie,
it is clear why this film was such a success. Originally conceived as 
basically a sketch show set half in medieval times and half in the present
day (notably in Harrods), the film would merely have been seen as a
footnote to MONTY PYTHON'S FLYING CIRCUS. But the decision to have (almost)
the entire movie as a full-blown 90-minute narrative was inspired. It
proved that the Pythons were credible writers, directors and performers
and paved the way for TIME BANDITS, BRAZIL, even A FISH CALLED WANDA.
Each scene is beautifully and carefully crafted: the tiny budget meant there
was no room for excess lines and flat jokes which plagued their TV series.
Yet the film still looks fantastic even today, peasants rolling in mud,
the harsh and desolate landscape, the fog, all contribute to give the
best impression of medieval times ever seen in film. Throughout it all, 
the Pythons perform exquisitly. The deadpan delivery and the improvised
pauses, "um"s and "ah"s, are spot on.
Monty Python are probably the only comedy team since the Marx Brothers
who are able to perform such clever material and yet remain so riotously
funny. The silliness will grab you, but it is the sense of logic behind
it that makes you come back for repeat viewings. For instance in the 
opening scene the castle guard is only interested in where Arthur and Patsy
got the coconuts ("In Mercia? But the coconut's tropical!"). In any other
comedy film, the coconuts would be a throwaway joke, yet here it is
pursued to its limit. Both self-referential and deconstructionist, it
succeeds on all levels.
There are minor flaws. The film suffers from an episodic quality, which
is unsurprising considering the sketch show background. It is easy to 
recite scenes by heart because they stand up so well outside of the film's
context, but as a result the narrative structure is weakened: scenes
could easily be interchanged at will without much disruption, and probably
were. Also, the Pythons could not totally compensate for the miniscule
budget, some of the pyrotechnics and special effects are less than 
successful. And finally, the deliberately anti-climactic ending as the
police round up the cast and crew is bound to annoy first-time viewers,
although it is a clear indication of how far the Pythons were prepared
to go to do things their way.
Nevertheless, MONTY PYTHON AND THE HOLY GRAIL is a classic. Argument may
rage over how it compares with MONTY PYTHON'S LIFE OF BRIAN, but both
films are landmarks in comedy cinema, unique events that have rarely, if
ever, been equalled since.

Title
Review for Batman Forever (1995)

Title
Review for Interview with the Vampire: The Vampire Chronicles (1994)
     INTERVIEW WITH THE VAMPIRE: THE VAMPIRE CHRONICLES.  It doesn't
exactly trip off the tongue, does it?  Why the extraneous subtitle was
added I guess we will never know.  What we do know is that this film is
shortly to get its video release here in the UK.
     We all know about Anne Rice's horror as she realized her dark,
sexually ambiguous hero Lestat from her novels was to be played by Tom
Cruise, but it's hard to see what all the fuss is about.  Despite
having his name in lights above the movie poster, Cruise is nothing
more than a supporting role.  Brad Pitt plays Louis, the focus of the
film. as he recalls his centuries-old, unaging life to an interviewer
(Christian Slater).  He tells of his creation by another vampire,
Lestat, their life as they set up home together, his own creation of a
vampire "daughter" Claudia and his search in Paris for Lestat's
creator.  The story encompasses hundreds of years, and ends in the
present day.
     The whole structure of this film is S-L-O-W.  You really do get
the feeling that 300 years have passed when you leave the cinema!
Every camera shot, every scene is done majestically, taking in the
sumptuous sets, the fabulous scenery.  You can sense the sadness and
despair that immortal creatures would face, unable to die as everything
around them changes.  But this is also the main flaw of INTERVIEW WITH
THE VAMPIRE--if good production values are not what makes a film for
you, it's boring.
     Brad Pitt is apparently a "sex symbol."  Throughout this film, he
looks and acts more like Neil from THE YOUNG ONES.  He can't carry the
weight of the film alone, so it is up to the others to support him.
Cruise is good.  His strange manic energy fits his role, but a
ludicrous sequence which reminded me of a bad monster movie, with
Cruise coming back to life after multiple killings, ruined a good
character role.  Walking and talking with a body looking like charcoal
is a real credibility-loser.  Of the others, Kirsten Dunst who plays
Claudia is annoying, although that's probably how she was scripted, and
Antonio Banderas (Armand) is just another good-looking young actor
recruited to grab the punters.
     In fact, the whole thing reeks of marketing:
     "Hey, let's get three hunks together and cast them as vampires!"
"We could get Neil Jordan to direct and maybe pick up an Oscar or two!"
"Yeah, that would boost attendances, wouldn't it?"  "Quick! Let's get a
best selling novel and adapt it."  Any artistry that may have existed in
this production is muted by the sheer commercialism of it.  In the end,
you fail to see what it's trying to be.  A horror?  Not really.  A
drama?  Nah.  A romance maybe?  Hard to say.  Looks great, shame about
the story.

Title
Review for Die Hard: With a Vengeance (1995)
     When Renny Harlin's DIE HARD 2 hit the big screen several years
ago, it was to universal criticism.  Christmas Eve again?
Single-handedly saving an entire airport again?  Most negative views
centred around the film's huge body count and it's lack of screen
sophistication and subtlety.  But never believe the hype: DIE HARD 2 was
as exciting, action-packed, adrenaline-pumping and fun as the first, if
not more so.  DIE HARD WITH A VENGEANCE has attracted similar criticism
to it's predecessors.  But history has repeated itself: the film is
Hollywood entertainment at it's best, a roller-coaster ride that is the
most satisfying movie of the summer.
     There are big changes this time round: no Bonnie Bedelia (as
McClane's estranged wife), no enclosed setting, no ventilation shafts.
But there is Samuel Jackson as a Harlem businessman with an acid
tongue, accidentally finding himself running around New York with
McClane at the beck and call of a German mad bomber with explosives
planted in one of NY's 500 schools.
     The whole thing is ridiculous fun, stretching credibility to the
limit with a taxi drive straight through Central Park, surviving a 100
foot drop onto concrete, outrunning a million-gallon torrent of water
in a truck (in reverse).  This is where it suffers in comparison to DIE
HARD and DIE HARD 2.  Even amongst all the mayhem, there was still some
contact with reality there.  Some of the events depicted here are so
over-the-top they're laughable.  The dialogue between Zeus and McClane
is funny at times, though never quite as snappy as it could have been,
and the bad guys are not as mean as in the first two.
     But forget that: this is still suspense, excitement, adventure on
every level.  Lightning has struck yet again.  Watch this and the last
thing you will have is a bad day.
