Authors
Steven Hildebrand
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Forrest Gump (1994)
     "Life is like a box of choc-o-lates ... you never know what you'll
get" says Forrest Gump (played by Tom Hanks) in the movie by the same
name, and that simple philosophy is just one of many messages of this
film.  Gump is a simpleton with an IQ of 75--not quite retarded, but
definitely not a rocket scientist either--and an unforgettable
character in an unforgettable story about life, love, friendship,
destiny--and dogged persistence.
     As a child with a dull mind, crooked back and braces on his legs,
Gump suffers indignities at the hands of other children, and his mother
(Sally Field) also suffers a few indignities of her own in the process
of looking after him.  Gump is befriended by a girl named Jenny (Robin
Wright) who becomes his best friend and lifelong love.  He spends much
of the movie protecting Jenny in one misguided way or another, and
trying to get her to marry him; she spends most of the movie running
from Gump and looking for something outside herself to make her
happy--men, drugs, political causes.  A victim of incest, her head is
like a bowl of spaghetti and she has obviously never heard the saying,
"Happiness is an inside job."
     In a key scene early on, Gump is attacked by a gang of boys
pelting him with rocks.  As he tries to run away from them, hobbling
with great effort, his leg braces literally fly apart and he discovers
that after years of wearing those braces, he can run like a gazelle.
This scene sets the stage for the rest of the movie, as Gump's life
becomes a miraculous comedy of errors in which running is a recurring
theme.
     In the process of running away from another gang of punks when he
is older, he runs across a football field during a game, attracting the
attention of several scouts with his blinding speed ... and Gump goes
off to college on a football scholarship, becoming a football hero for
Alabama's "Crimson Tide," despite having great difficulty understanding
that he's supposed to stop running after the end zone.
     Following graduation, he enlists in the Army where he fits in
perfectly, following orders without question.  He becomes a war hero in
Vietnam, winning the Congressional Medal of Honor for saving his
platoon during an ambush, including his platoon leader, Lt. Dan Taylor
(Gary Sinese in an excellent supporting role).  Lt. Dan survives the
war as a legless, embittered veteran who is angry at God and Gump for
saving his life, believing it was his "destiny" to die on the
battlefield like many of his ancestors had. Forrest, through his natural
optimism and persistence, helps Lt. Dan to make peace with God, with
Gump, and himself.
     Gump shakes hands with several Presidents, inspires Elvis and John
Lennon (watch the movie), becomes a world ping-pong champion, foils the
Watergate break-in, and eventually winds up a millionaire, a husband
and a father.  It is a wonderful movie full of strange miracles and
poignant kindnesses.  Though some call him "retard," his so-called
handicap actually works in his favor and allows him to walk through
life comforting the afflicted and afflicting the comfortable without a
trace of guile or meanness. They say that God works thru people, and we
can see this clearly as Gump touches many lives and heals a few broken
people with his selflessness and unconditional love.
     I just can't say enough about this film ... the acting, the
directing, the script--it is all so very good.  It had me alternately
laughing and crying, and in one scene, doing both simultaneously.  This
is Hanks' finest performance ever, one to rival his role in the
award-winning "Philadelphia," and look for this movie to be a major
contender for multiple Oscars.  Tall kudos also to the supporting cast,
and especially to director Robert Zemeckis.  On the 10 scale, I'll give
this one an 11 and urge everyone to see it on the big
screen--definitely the movie of the Summer.

