Authors
John W. Collins
Number of Reviews
4

Title
Review for Blair Witch Project, The (1999)
Over the past one hundred years, many movies have been given
the moniker, "horror film," but few have deserved it. They were given
that title mainly due to their subject matter, but a vampire,
werewolf, zombie, ghost, maniac with an ax, demon, or even the Devil
himself does not a horror movie make. There have been many a valiant
effort. Some even managed to truly scare their audience, but they have
sadly fallen short of what a true horror movie is suppose to do. A
true horror movie's objective is not to just frighten you, but to
upset you; to make you feel uneasy as you are watching, and to make
that feeling follow you, even after you have left the theater. It is
not supposed to gross you out with gory make-up effects. It is not
supposed to  amaze you with what can now be put on the screen with
state-of-the-art computer effects. It is not supposed to make you feel
like you have been on a roller coaster after it is all over. A horror
movie is supposed to make you feel like you have been hit in the face
with that roller coaster. 
The "politically correct" 90s, where everyone is supposed to
feel happy, and you are not supposed to upset anyone, have not been a
very good time for "Hollywood" horror movies. Not to mention the ones
that are suppose to "rock the boat" and come right out and slap the
audience in the face. So, I was beginning to believe that the 90s were
going to be the first decade since the modern horror movie began (the
1920s)that we were not going to have a true horror movie; a classic in
the genre. But thankfully, I was wrong.
The Blair Witch Project just did make it with less than six
months left in the decade, but there it is, standing as an example of
what a horror movie should be. Made on a budget of  sixty thousand
dollars, and by a group of unknowns, TBWP, is well on its way to
earning more than one million dollars in only its first month of
release. It is setting box office records and has people standing in
LONG lines; lines that have not been seen since another horror classic
was in theaters, The Exorcist. 
The back story is simple enough. In 1994, three student film
makers went into a wooded area of Maryland to make a documentary about
the local legend, the Blair Witch. They never returned. The movie
consists of the footage that they shot and that was supposedly found
one year after their disappearance. What follows is a movie that
succeeds where all other so-called horror movies have failed. It is
nearly a textbook on how to make an effective horror film; on how to
manipulate your audience; on how to take ordinary places and
circumstances and make them terrifying by turning the familiar into
something unfamiliar. In a true horor film, it is not the film maker
that frightens the audience. They can put in "surprises" that make
people jump in their seats, but that is not horror. In a horror film
that is doing its job, it is the audience that is frightening the
audience.          
 Since the entire movie was shot with a video camera and a
regular film camera, TBWP. has a "reality based" feel to it. People
are used to seeing that only on television, not at a movie theater.
Then there are only three characters throughout the majority of the
film, so you have a very intimate setting and at times you feel like a
voyeur. Then since this is all "amateur" film making, there is no
blaring soundtrack of intrusive, popular songs. There is also no Dolby
surround sound, so you are forced to pay attention to dialogue. There
are bits of dialogue that you cannot make out, so like the characters
you are watching, you are not quite sure just what is going on in some
spots. All of this works to pull the audience into the movie and
forces them to be a part of it; something modern audiences are not
used to and that adds to the feelings of unease that are already
brewing because this movie is breaking so many rules. Then, this is
not a movie where action scenes are pilled on top of action scenes.
When something exciting is going on, the camera movement is jerky and
disorienting, and you can't always hear what is being said.
Then as if to add a final insult, there are no breathtaking,
wowie- zowie special effects. Just trees and raw human emotion. You
watch as the three film makers become more lost and frightened and you
are forced to observe their slow decent into near madness. A situation
that no one is comfortable with. And because you already know that
these people never make it out of those woods, you begin to wonder
just what IS going to happen to them? What horrible fate awaits them?
You find yourself rooting for them, even though you know that they are
doomed. Now the movie-going experience is completely out of whack.
Characters in a horror movie that you really like and care about? What
it all adds up to is that without even noticing it, you have become
involved. You are now a participant, be it willing or unwilling. There
is now a sort of audience participation going on and that is the key
element in any successful horror movie; or any other movie for that
matter. By this time, the audience is not really sure what is going to
happen next. Some are truly scared because of that very fact; they
don't know. To its credit, TBWP is not predictable. Some are mad
because they ARE scared and not used to that feeling in a 1990s horror
movie; others are mad because this movie is breaking all the rules.
Where is all the blood? Where is all the slam-bam action? Where are
all the bodies? How dare they. Others are just praying that this whole
damn thing will be explained to them at the end. But ALL are riveted
to their seats because no one knows where all this is leading.
We are all exactly where the movie wants us to be; off
balance, tense, and uneasy. We have been manipulated and placed in a
situation that many don't want to be in. Some are not even sure how
they got there. Then the final trap is sprung and we watch as the
final fate of the three characters that we have lived with for the
past hour and a half unfolds. Not wishing to give anything away, let's
just say that it is an ending that will be written about and discussed
in film classes for years to come. But the end credits roll, the house
lights come up, and the ordeal is over.
The effects of a true horror film last long after the credits
have faded from the screen. The images stay with you, they make you
take those quick glances over your shoulder as you make your way to
your car. Then if you go get something to eat afterwards, what you
have just seen is all that you can talk about. On the drive home, it
is all you can think about. Then when you are "safe" at home and in
your bed and the lights go out, you try not to think about what you
have just witnessed anymore. But it is no use. All the uneasy feelings
refuse to go away. And now that you are in darkness, they are
magnified. You are no longer in the relative safety of a crowed movie
theater. You are alone, in a state of undress, and laying there
wondering if there is something lurking out there in the dark that is
surrounding you. Just like the three film makers you had just seen had
wondered when they put their lanterns out. You try to tell yourself
that conventional wisdom is right, and that there is nothing in the
dark but the darkness. But you can't shake the feeling that
conventional wisdom just might be wrong. After all, it was wrong in
the case of the three young people in The Blair Witch Project. But
that was only a movie. Or was it?
The Blair Witch Project gets a very much deserved **** and
will join films like Psycho, Night of the Living Dead, The Exorcist,
and The Texas Chainsaw Massacre as a true horror film.

Title
Review for Godzilla (1998)
              It seems that the trend in Hollywood nowadays is to remake (or
as they call it "update") old films and television shows. Just last
month we had the movie version of LOST IN SPACE. Later this summer we
will see ZORRO, don his mask once again, and the British secret
agents, John Steed and Emma Peel, try to save the world in the big
screen treatment of the AVENGERS. Then for some ridiculous reason,
there are plans to "update" PSYCHO. Last reports were that Hitch was
still spinning in his grave.
        Now after months of hype that only a 50 million-dollar
advertising budget can buy, and a "let's not dare show the monster
until the movie opens" campaign, the men behind STARGATE and
INDEPENDENCE DAY, bring us the latest in this trend.
        GODZILLA, stomps its way into more than 7000 theaters starting
this week with a new look and a new attitude. The giant, radioactive,
reptile with atomic bad breath, was first brought to the screen in
1954, in Toho Studios' GOJIRA. Then scenes with Raymond Burr playing a
reporter  were inserted, the film was re-cut and released in the U.S.
as, GODZILLA, KING OF THE MONSTERS, in 1956. A legend was born. What
followed was a series of fun, campy, and sometimes out right silly, B
movies featuring the creature battling everything from Smog Monsters
to Godzilla robots controlled by aliens. 
        Director Roland Emmerich, producer Dean Devlin, and the man
responsible for Zilla's new look, Patrick Tatopoulos, have brought
Godzilla into the 90s with a complete make-over. He is now
streamlined, buff, and looks entirely different. The 1990's version of
Godzilla has him, as suggested in the movie, a mutated, lizard-like
creature, not a resurrected dinosaur. Gone is the stiff, plodding
monster with the "I'll take on anybody or anything" attitude. Now we
have a Zilla that is fast, agile, smart, and knows when to fight and
when to haul tail. Upon viewing, it is clear that the film's budget,
of 100 million dollars plus, was spent on its special effects, and
they are nothing less than spectacular. No man in a rubber suit,
cardboard buildings or toy tanks, here. This Godzilla doesn't just
march along stepping on buildings. He RUNS through the streets,
crashing into them, or just goes straight through them! Then his
longer, slimmed down tail does the rest of the damage.
        One of the problems with this kind of expensive, special
effects generated, title character, is that cost prevents you from
having him on the screen for the whole movie (in this case, 140
minutes).You need interesting characters, and a halfway good script to
fill up the rest of the time and hopefully add something to the story.
Unfortunately, this is where GODZILLA loses some of its firepower. The
story is not very plausible in places, the majority of the characters
are less than compelling, the film lacks any real emotion, and it even
stoops so low as to present two characters that are caricatures of
movie critics Roger Ebert and Gene Siskel (who panned INDEPENDENCE
DAY). Come on Roland and Dean (who wrote the screenplay), isn't that
just a little bit petty?
        Matthew Broerick does a competent job as Nick Tatopoulos (the
last name of Godzilla's designer, see above), a mild-mannered, nuclear
biologist that is called upon  to help figure out what has destroyed
and left claw-marks in several ships in the waters near Polynesia, and
has left a trail of HUGE footprints across Panama. After analyzing
blood samples, Broerick immediately suspects that a new species of
giant lizard may have been created as a result of  atomic testing. But
it is never really made clear why it is on its way to the Big Apple.
Broderick is proven right when the new and improved Godzilla comes
ashore in New York City at the Fulton Fish Market, in one of the most
dramatic "giant monster rises from the depths" sequences since the
giant squid attack on San Francisco in Ray Harryhausen's IT CAME FROM
BENEATH THE SEA. Fittingly, a clip from this film is playing on a
television in one of the latter scenes.
        The movie then goes back to its "giant monster running amok"
roots, with the military trying to figure out how to destroy it, the
political powers in charge worrying how a monster tearing up the city
is going to affect their chances for re-election, and the scientist
(Broderick) telling them they are all missing the big picture. Then
Broderick's long, lost, college sweetheart, who left him to try and
make it big as a reporter, is introduced as an "undiscovered" talent
working at a local television station as a lowly researcher. Played by
Maria Pitillo, Audrey Timmonds, is one of the most unappealing female
leads to come along in a while. Throughout the film, you find yourself
wishing Godzilla would stomp her or use her as an appetizer. But in
Pitillo's defense, she wasn't given very much to work with. She
unwittingly uses her connection with Broderick's character to gain
access to inside information for the story that will hopefully make
her a star. Hank Azaria (mainly used for comic relief and a plot
device) plays the husband of one of Pitillo's friends. A television
cameraman, nicknamed "Animal", Azaria also hopes that the lizard's
arrival will make his career. The film's only good character is
Philippe Roache. Posing as an insurance adjuster, Roache is a member
of the French Secret Service. It is suggested that France's atomic
testing created Godzilla, and he is there to "clean up the mess".
Played brilliantly by Jean Reno, he is searching New York for
Godzilla, and a good cup of coffee. Reno is one of the film's saving
graces; the other being the special effects.
        It is discovered that Godzilla can reproduce asexually and has
plans to use New York City as a nursery. Broderick then loses his
credibility and his spot on the team when the information that Patillo
has stolen from him is broadcast. His "nesting" theory is thrown out
the window and all efforts are concentrated on killing Godzilla.
Meanwhile, Reno "kidnaps" Broderick, and tells him that he believes
there is a nest and convinces Broderick to help him and his men hunt
it down. Foolishly, Patillo and Azaria follow them in an attempt to
make amends.
        After the nest is found, the film mutates into an almost
blatant rip-off of JURASSIC PARK's raptor sequences, with a little bit
of GREMLINS 2 thrown in for good measure. Then it is as if saner heads
prevailed and the movie gets back on track. Zilla appears and is
PISSED OFF at the way our heroes have treated his offspring. They
steal a cab and Godzilla gives chase in a final sequence that is
exciting, yet somewhat unbelievable at times. The ending is clever in
places, and cliched in others.
        After all the dust from all the destroyed buildings has
settled, GODZILLA is a disappointment. You have no empathy for the
characters, and there is nothing story- wise to chew on when the BIG
GUY is not on the screen. Nearly all the jokes misfire and some
characters are there for no apparent reason. Sadly, all the attention
was paid to the FX. It is almost like the old B-grade, gore movies of
the eighties, where poorly drawn characters were placed within a very
weak story, all created just to highlight a new special effect. It is
a shame that the Godzilla story was not "updated".
        But despite these flaws, the movie is fun and that is what a
summer movie is suppose to be. The younger generation will revel in
its roller coaster, high tech presentation of the monster and its
rampages, while older fans, who look for just a little bit more, will
shake their heads in slight disappointment. But they will enjoy seeing
that even after 44 years, one of its icons is still alive and kicking.
Cast: Matthew Broderick, Jean Reno, Maria Pitillo, Hank Azaria, Kevin
Dunn, Doug Savant, and Godzilla.
Rated PG13: some intense scenes, but could have been rated PG.
I give it *** , but the final star is given just on the strength of
the special effects.

Title
Review for Armageddon (1998)
        There is a widely held theory that a giant meteor slammed into
the Earth, 65 million years ago and knocked the dinosaurs off their
high perch as the dominant species of this planet. There is also a
widely held belief that one day another meteor will strike and knock
Man from that same lofty position. The first is just a theory that has
never really been proven as fact, and the latter is just idle
speculation. But while we are on the subjects of theories and
speculations, I would like to discuss another theory that is gaining
popularity and acceptance. This new train of thought is not coming out
of such distinguished places as MIT, or Stanford, but out of
Hollywood. That is the theory that if you can dazzle your audience
with enough special effects, fast-paced editing, loud enough
soundtracks, and constant camera movements, you can convince them that
instead of seeing something that is substandard, they are really
seeing something great; something that they can sit and stare in awe
at; something that they can recommend to their friends to do too.
Unfortunately, for us, the movie-going-public, many studios,
producers, directors, and to some extent, writers, are moving forward
with this theory and trying to prove it as fact. Touchtone pictures
just spent 140 million dollars and exposed two-and-a-half hours of
film stock to try and prove this Hollywood hypothesis by bringing us,
ARMAGEDDON.
        Directed by Michael Bay(BAD BOYS, THE ROCK)and staring action
hero icon, Bruce Willis, ARMAGEDDON is a special effects filled, high
octane thrill ride where images are thrown at you almost at the speed
at which the meteor in the film is approaching Earth at, 27,000 miles
per hour. Then thanks to the fast-paced editing and a camera that
hardly ever stays in one place for more than a few seconds, these
visuals are gone in the blink of an eye, thus giving the illusion that
something spectacular and exciting is happening up on the screen when
it is all just smoke and mirrors. Sadly, this is what is happening in
ARMAGEDDON.Unlike its predecessor, DEEP IMPACT, this "mankind is
doomed" tale relied on its special effects and directorial style to
tell its story, rather than its characters.
        After an orbiting space shuttle and parts of New York City are
destroyed by a hail of meteors the size of basketballs and small cars,
NASA realizes that that was just a precursor and that another meteor
the size of Texas will arrive in just 15 days and end Man's reign on
Earth. Our only hope is to land a team of deep-core drillers on the
space rock, drill an 800-foot deep hole, drop a nuke in it, then leave
and detonate from a safe distance. Simple. Right? 
        Of course, Willis is the best driller on the planet and is
tapped to do the job. After insisting  that he take his own team, we
are introduced to a group of cliched, social misfits that are far from
having the "Right Stuff." The group consists of: the young hot
shot(played by Ben Affleck)that is also involved in a weak subplot
romance with Willis' daughter(played by Liv Tyler), the loyal best
friend, the comedy relief character, the token black, the loveable fat
guy, and a couple of throw away characters that you know won't last
long after the mission begins. We also pick up a kooky Russian
cosmonaut along the way. 
        But the cliches don't end there. Once the mission is underway,
everything that can go wrong, does go wrong. More than once we hear
that the mission has failed and that Earth is doomed. At one point,
CNN goes off the air so they can be with their families. We get
everything: they landed at the wrong site and the rock there will be
tougher to drill through, the surface of the meteor is breaking up
around them, they are running out of drill heads and transmissions,
the time to safely explode the bomb so the meteor will be split in
half and miss the Earth is running out, and the shuttle will not start
when it is time to haul ass.And that is just a few. There is even a
series of events on the ground where the old "scientists vs. the
mility" senario is played out. Then  there is an ending that anyone
with half a brain can see coming a mile away.
        What all this boils down to is poor script writing. Not only
is the script full of cliches, but they are plot holes big enough for
this Texas-sized meteor to pass through. It has been reported that at
least nine writers contributed to the script. Never a good sign. But
as we discussed earlier, the thinking is you can cover all this up
with dazzling special effects, fast editing, and dizzying camera
movements. But while that is fun and exciting to look at, it is lazy
film making. The story should be first and foremost and the rest
should be used to enhance that story. It is on this point that
ARMAGEDDON failed and DEEP IMPACT succeeded. The latter was character
driven. While ARMAGEDDON was character driven to a small
degree(especially at the end), it was a road we had all been down many
times before. There is a line in the movie where after seeing the
motley crew that has been assembled to save the world, someone says,
"Is that the best you could do?" After seeing ARMAGEDDON, we should be
asking the same of the director and screen writers.
Staring: Bruce Willis, Ben Affleck, Liv Tyler, Billy Bob Thornton,
Will Patton, and Steve Buscemi.
Rated PG-13 for intense situations
I Give it ** out of a possible four.

Title
Review for X Files, The (1998)
         F.B.I. special agents, Fox Mulder (David Duchovny) and Dana
Scully (Gillian Anderson), search for that elusive "truth" each week
on the hit television show, "The X-Files."  Week after week, millions
tune- in to see the two delve into the strange and bizarre cases that
the rest of the bureau won't touch. While most of the cases they
investigate deal with unusual, and even sometimes supernatural,
phenomenon, the "guts" of the series deals with Fox Mulder's search
for proof of the existence of aliens, and the mysterious group of men
that will stop at nothing to prevent him, or the rest of the world,
from finding out "the truth." And now, Mulder and Scully's quest for
that "truth" moves to the next level, because...
        Series creator, Chris Carter, director Rob Bowman, and
Twentieth Century Fox, have brought the hugely popular television show
to the big screen with the release of THE X-FILES: FIGHT THE FUTURE.
It must have been a fairly easy task (although I'm sure they would
disagree with me). They already had developed characters, a
relationship and history between those characters, a recognizable
framework for a story to be woven around, and millions of fans as a
built-in audience base. The only real question was whether or not non
fans could follow the film and enjoy it. The answer to that question
is, "yes" and "no."
         The film can be followed and enjoyed as a work standing on
its own, but, speaking as a fan, it must be like eating a bowl of
banana pudding after all the bananas are gone. You can enjoy the
pudding part, but you are kind of missing the whole point. Carter, who
wrote the screenplay, tries to let the uninitiated in on the fun with
bits of "background information" sprinkled throughout the dialogue,
but that really isn't enough. There are several situations throughout
the film that cannot be fully understood unless you are a fan. The
same is true with a handful of characters that pop up. Unless you have
watched the show, you will not know who they are, or what they are
doing there. 
 It may have been better to have had a script that dealt with a basic
"X-Files" story, instead of the series mythos. That would have pleased
the fans, and allowed X-Files "newbies" to get to know the characters,
and get a "feel" for the show. 
        Instead, the film opens where the season finale left off, to a
certain degree. None of the characters or the situations set up in
that episode remains except for the fact that the Cigarette-Smoking
Man has returned, and that the X-files have been shut down. The movie
starts with Mulder and Scully having been assigned  "normal" duties.
But as it often happens when this pair is involved, the "normal" has a
way of turning into something "paranormal," and soon the two find
themselves pulled into a conspiracy that threatens to wipe out life on
Earth as we know it. What follows is a two-hour television episode
with higher production values, bigger and more expensive special
effects, familiar supporting characters (to the fans anyway), and some
four-letter words that are not allowed on network television. 
        This film has the distinction of being the only movie based on
a prime-time television show  that will still be in production when
the networks start the new television season. But that is also its
greatest flaw. Since we already know that Mulder and Scully will have
new adventures this fall, we are not concerned with their well-being
throughout the movie, thus killing any suspense. In addition, we also
know that circumstances will only allow for just a small bit of that
"truth" that our heroes have been searching for to be revealed, and
that something will happen that will cause the X-files to be reopened.
Paramount may have had the right idea with its "Star Trek" features;
wait until the series finishes its t.v. run so you can have more
freedom with your characters and story lines.
        Another flaw is that the film doesn't play on its strongest
elements. One of the things that draws viewers to the show is its
creepiness. Some of the episodes are very scary. That comes from the
writing and the different, bizarre things that Scully and Mulder look
into. With a "mythos" script, you don't get to go explore those dark,
scary places. All you mainly have to deal with is intrigue. 
        But what really brings viewers back each week are the
characters of Mulder and Scully. Viewers want to see these two
characters react to situations and play off each other; they want to
see them interact, both professionally and personally. Sadly, there is
very little of that in this film. Make no mistake.  This is David
Duchovny's film. He is in nearly every scene, and by the middle of the
movie, Gillian Anderson's part has been reduced to that of
"damsel-in-distress." 
        Basically, THE X-FILES: FIGHT THE FUTURE is just a reward for
all its loyal fans; a chance to see Mulder and Scully do their stuff
on the big screen. Also, it is a chance to pull in some new fans, and
establish some new characters and situations for the up coming season.
New fans mean a bigger audience base for the next feature. Oh,
yes......
Cast: David Duchovny, Gillian Anderson, Martin Landau, William B.
Davis, John Neville, Mitch Pillegi, Blythe Danner, and Armin
Mueller-Stahl.
Rated: PG-13 for violence and some intense situations
I give it ** out of a possible four.
