Authors
Dean Kish
Number of Reviews
2

Title
Review for Final Destination (2000)
    Another teen horror flick in the wake of "Scream 3" written by the guys
who put the creepy in the X-Files. Sounds like a wild ride or is it? The
story centers around a group of teens who survive an airliner explosion
through a bizarre incident. After the crash, one teen (Devon Sawa) becomes
completely convinced that the Grim Reaper is after him and he is hunting the
group in the way they should have died in the explosion.
Producer, co-screenwriter, and director James Wong re-teams with his
partner Glen Morgan for a stab at the silver screen. Morgan and Wong's
greatest exploit has to have been the couple seasons of the X-Files where it
became the staple for TV suspense and to this day the series is still trying
to recapture. They have continue to dabble in TV with such series as the
little seen but at times brilliant "Space: Above and Beyond" and NBC's
recent hit "The Others". But with the debut of "Final Destination it's the
team's first real venture onto the silver screen.
Destination starts off with a great opening 20 minutes where we are
shocked and dumbfounded by the opening plot. I haven't seen that thrilling
of a plane disaster scene since 1993's "Alive". Wow, what a scene. And as
the film moves along a lot of the scenes are shocking and keep you on your
toes. But it's the latter half of the film that bugged me. The time I am
talking about is just when ex-Hollywood sex symbol Ali Larter's hair starts
to get blonder. Ever notice that in Hollywood films they always dumb down
the leading lady until she is supposed to catch the hero's eye? It's at that
point that Sawa's avoidance of the Grim Reaper get really hokey. That cabin
scene is a perfect example. Every movie like this needs a supernatural
ending and the finale here is gimmickry and unrealistic. If you love the
humor-horror trilogy of "Scream" like so many million people then
Destination has all that to offer but watch out for a couple goofy things
along the way.  I guess other "Scream" clone "I Know What You Did this
Summer" and especially its sequel got this back lash too.
The young people out there will love this, I am sure. (3 of 5) So Says
the Soothsayer.

Title
Review for Holy Smoke (1999)
     Harvey Keitel re-teams with feminist director Jane Campion for another
journey back to the land down under. This time Keitel is the world's best
"cult deprogrammer" and his subject is a religiously confused Kate Winslet.
Holy Smoke is one of those art films that probably won't appeal to the
biggest of audiences because of its tone and harsh storyline. Kate Winslet
continues to grow as an actress with this risky and risqué venture. But it's
her spirit and screen presence which brought me in. As her emotions and
beliefs crossed with her parents, we began to actually see the two worlds at
war for this young girl. These were magical scenes which Campion did a
wonderful job with. But as Campion delivers a generous telling of the story
and makes it very compassionate and direct for us, we are shocked when
Keitel's man's man drop his pants in a comfort scene. And you begin to
wonder if this guy is a professional and if he should be looking after a
vulnerable young woman. Both in 1996's Portrait of a Lady and in 1993's
Piano, we saw this destruction of a man. And Campion continues her escapade
here as Keitel delivers quotes of morals but never really believes a word.
He self-destructs and delivers his own fiery flight into the flesh of an
innocent woman. What made me really cringe was the running time on Keitel's
destruction. Campion would never let up and this reminded me a lot of the
Piano as well. Is Campion saying that women destroy men or that men destroy
themselves with sex? Another begging question is why did a fully nude
Winslet have to deliver a "golden shower" before they could embrace and seal
his eminent fate? Is this a symbolism of a lost vulnerability and innocence?
A cross-dressing Keitel screams after a shoeless Winslet as they stumble
through the Australian outback this results in his final undoing and her
final deliverance from him. A lot of clouded symbolism and half truths had
me scratching my head. Or maybe "Holy Smoke" just isn't for everyone. (2.5
of 5) So Says the Soothsayer.
