Authors
Vince Yim
Number of Reviews
18

Title
Review for Batman & Robin (1997)
Director: Some guy who should be taken out and shot (Joel Schumacher)
Starring: A bunch of people who were handed a really horrible script and
were paid waaaay too much (Arnold Schwarzenegger, George Clooney, Chris
O'Donnel, Uma Thurman, Alicia Silverstone, Jeep Swanson, Elle McPherson)
Written By: The hack who wrote the horrible script (Avika Goldsmith).
Based on the critically acclaimed "Batman: The Killing Joke" by Alan
Moore, the ultimate villain in the Batman gallery of rogues, The Joker
(played by Jack Nicholson), is on a crime rampage in an attempt to drive
Commissioner Gordon (played by Sam Elliot) to the brink of insanity.
Constantly terrorizing him, his acts culminate to invading the Gordon
household and brutally shooting Batgirl's alter ego, Barbara Gordon
(played by Alicia Silverstone), severing her spinal column and
effectively ending her career as a costumed crime fighter.  Batman
(played by Alec Baldwin) is on the case in an attempt to bring the
madman down by any means possible.
Oh...sorry, I must have lost my train of thought there.
In one of the worst comic book adaptations to date, director Joel
Schu-hack-her effectively destroyed the Batman film franchise, caused a
slump in sales of Batman comic books, and cost me $5 CDN.  The film is
so horrible, it made the direct-to-video Marvel films (The Punisher,
Captain America) look like genius by comparison.  The film is so
cheesily contrived, it made Howard the Duck look like Star Wars.  The
film's dialogue is so bad that it makes Jean Claude Van Damme's dialogue
look like it was written by Quentin Tarantino.
But enough venting.  Here is exactly what is wrong with this film.
1: The characters.  Tim Burton's Batman (1989) and Batman Returns (1991)
each featured a manageable three core characters (Batman, Joker, Vicky
Vale, and  Batman, Catwoman, Penguin, respectively).  Batman Forever
(1994) featured five (Batman, Robin, TwoFace, Riddler, Chase Meridian).
Batman and Robin featured the most (Batman, Robin, Batgirl, Mr. Freeze,
Poison Ivy, Bane, Generic Love Interest).  While some film franchises do
succesfully add characters (Lethal Weapon, for one), it is due to the
fact that the characters are familiar.  With all these characters
venting their excess baggage, it is impossible to get any feel for the
characters.  Which brings me to...
2: Faithfulness to the source medium.  Bane was supposed to be the most
deadly Batman villain of all, paralyzing Batman from the waist down and
temporarily ending his crime fighting career.  Instead of being Batman's
intellectual and physical superior, he is reduced to a monosyllabic
buffoon in the film, who's dialogue consists of "Bomb...bomb...bomb..."
(or, perhaps he was referring to the box office reciepts).  Batgirl was
supposed to be the daughter of Commissioner Gordon who originally wore
the costume for a Hallowe'en party.  Instead, she becomes Batgirl after
finding a CD-Rom with the Batman's secrets on it.  Don't even mention
the fact that Bane uses the "Super Soldier Serum" (does the name
"Captain America" ring a bell?).
3: Overall tone.  Apart from the characters, the film has absolutely
nothing to do with the current issues of Batman being put out.  Gone is
the dark, gothic tone of the comics, replaced by the gaudy colours of
the 1960's television show with Adam West.  Joel Shu-hack-her seems to
have failed to realize that comic books have since grown up, and so has
the audience.
4: Dialogue.  I had to bite my tongue to prevent myself from heckling
the dialogue (ie: Bruce Wayne says, "There are things about me you don't
know...", to which I respond, "HE'S GOT A THING FOR GERBILS!").  Instead
of intelligent speech, we are subjected to stupid one-liners.  "Let's
kick some ice!"  "Chill..."  "Kill the heroes!"  "It's the hockey team
from hell!"  A comic book written by Rob Liefeld (the much maligned
artist and writer, formerly of Image comics) has smarter dialogue than
that.
5: Action sequences.  Schwarzenegger and Clooney were given thirty pound
costumes that severely restricted their movement and made fight scenes
virtually impossible.  So, in lieu of real fight choreography, the
audience is given quick editing to give the illusion of a fast and
furious fist fight.  NOT.  Choppy editing is no substitute for real
fight choreography.
6: "Humor".  Batman flashes a credit card and says, "Gotham Express,
don't leave home without it."  Robin repeats a line from the previous
film, "Chicks dig the car, right?"  Mr. Freeze gives Batman a cure for a
disease and says, "Take two and call me in the morning."  Batgirl finds
out all of Batman's secrets, to which Robin comments, "I guess we're
going to have to kill her."  This was intended as humorous, I merely
groaned.  Loudly.  The only time I really laughed was when Dr. Fries (by
Arnold Schwarzenegger) falls off a ledge into a vat of chemicals and
screams on the way down.  Unfortunately, I don't think that was intended
7: Marketability over substance.  Sure enough, the film cost over $100M
to make, much of which was used to pay the big named actors'
astronomical salaries.  It's got a hot new soundtrack with tunes by
Smashing Pumpkins.  It's got a bunch of t-shirts to be made from it.
But with that much money, they could have made a much better film.
8: The gratuitous crotch, ass, and breast shots.  There are two
completely unnecessary sequences where Batman and Robin (at the
beginning) and Batgirl (near the end) are getting into costume.  The
camera focuses on butts, crotches, and breasts, successfully causing me
to STOP enjoying the film.  As soon as I saw Chris O'Donnel and George
Clooney's vinyl covered asses on sceen, I felt the sudden impulse to run
screaming from the theatre.  Unfortunately, I would have had no way of
getting home if I did (I was with friends at the time).
Surely enough, I'm not the only one who felt this way, as poor reviews
and word of mouth promptly sunk this film's grosses, causing it to
barely recoup its budget and marketing costs, and causing Warner
Brothers to consider dumping the franchise, as well as the Superman
franchise.
Later on, Joel Schumacher would go on to blame the film's lackluster
success on the "unpoliced internet" and on the die hard comic book fans
who didn't embrace the lack of faithfulness to the original source
medium.  George Clooney would later blame himself for the film's demise
at the box office and the destruction of the Bat-Franchise.  Judging on
who the two lead players of the film choose to lay blame, the one who
the audience can lay blame on is obvious.
--

Title
Review for Yeshou xingjing (1998)
Review: Ye Shou Xing Jing (a.k.a. Beast Cops)
Dir: Gordon Chan with Dante Lam
Starring Michael Wong, Anthony Wong, Kathy Chow, and Sam Lee Chan.
   Proving that North American filmmakers can easily learn much from
overseas film markets, director Gordon Chan (best known for a few Jackie
Chan films including Thunderbolt) and first timer Dante Lam put together
an entertaining package about the meeting of two cops running amok in
Triad infested Hong Kong.  Combining laughs, action, and a touch of
obligatory romance, the film almost tries to hard, yet is still a fun
film.
   One of the main characters, Cheung, is played by Michael Wong, best
known for his role in the John Woo's Once a Thief telefilm (and more
recently, Knock Off…ugh). Cheung is a straight-laced cop who is imported
to the police force in an anti-triad squad.  Playing off of him is Tung,
played by Anthony Wong, known for the villain role in John Woo's
Hard-Boiled.  Tung is the opposite of Cheung, the rogue cop that keeps a
liaison with the Triads, leaving the open question of who's really in
charge.
   The odd man out is Sam (played by Sam Lee Chan).  Best described as
the Hong Kong equivalent of Spud from Trainspotting, he is a young cop
with weird hair, funny looking glasses, and odd attitudes towards sex
(ie: appropriate condom substitutes). While a fun character that
guarantees a few laughs during his screen time, he is ultimately a
throwaway character.
   Unfortunately, this plays with the entire nature of the entire film.
The film is trying to be too much in too short of a span of time (either
that, or too much time is wasted to properly define the film). The film
takes on a documentary style (reminiscent of Cops), interviewing each
character. Then, the two main characters go off to the underground scene
of nightclubs and take drugs and stuff (Cheung mistakes them for Chinese
herbs).  After some comic scenes where Cheung stumbles around in a
drug-induced stupor, he falls in love with the Triad leader's girlfriend
(played by Kathy Chow). Much later in the film we have Tung taking a
handful of uppers and going on a suicide run to kill the new Triad
leader.
   Sequences are set up in an almost haphazard fashion, with some
elements left completely in the dust. Before the formal introduction of
Cheung, we are shown a brilliantly shot black and white flashback
sequence where he is forced to kill a fellow police officer. While the
filmmakers could have easily used this as a character development
device, it is instantly forgotten as Cheung graces the screen.
   Quickly jumping in transition from documentary to comedy to romance
to Romero-esque horror, these sequences are well constructed by
themselves. But as a whole, they ultimately fail to achieve balance.
Documentary style interviews were an interesting insight into the
character's lives, but ultimately feel out of place in the film.  The
scene where Tung takes on a demonic appearance after a machete fight
with Triads is darkly comic and fun to watch, but out of context with
the rest of the film (although it does justify the English title, Beast
Cops).
   Stylistically, this film is incredible. Slow motion tracking
reminiscent of John Woo's Hard-Boiled, strobe and handheld camera
effects reminiscent of Wong Kar-Wai's Chungking Express, brilliant
colours, and nice art direction make for a nice scenes. Unfortunately,
they do not always make for a great film.
   While a fun film, it is not a great film. Still, it is worthy of a
look if you can get a hold of it.
--

Title
Review for Mummy, The (1999)
Based on the Boris Karloff's classic by the same name, The Mummy starts
off with the high-priest of Osiris, Imhotep, who murders the pharoah for
his mistress and is punished by being mummified in the most horrifying
way possible -- bandaged up, having his tongue removed, and being
covered in flesh-eating scarab beetles, then entombed...all while still
alive.
Recap a few thousand years later, where a soldier named Rick (played by
Brandan Fraser) aids a young historian named Evelyn (played by Rachel
Wiesz) and her brother, Jonathan (played by John Hannah) in finding the
book of Amon Ra, in the process inadvertently freeing the Mummy. 
Problem is that the Mummy wants to revive his mistress, using Evelyn as
a sacrifice...
Walking in with relatively low expectations, I thought this movie was
actually pretty good.  The visuals and CGI are astounding, and obviously
not cheaply done at all.  They pack a ton of detail into the images,
especially during scenes involving mummies rendered completely by CGI. 
The computer special effects makes for some brilliant scenes, such as
unnerving moments involving flesh-eating scarab beetles and moments
where the Mummy goes after the people who freed him (after all, those
who took his artifacts are cursed).  
Unfortunately, the film attempts to be way too much in such a short span
of time, becoming a tug of war for control between genres.  On one hand,
it is a fast paced action film.  On the other, it's a frightening horror
film.  And on the side, it's a hilarious comedy.
Ideally, for it to be successful, the film would have to focus on one
the more action oriented aspect, with one character serving as the comic
relief (that would be Johnson).  The problem with this film is that it
has at least three characters serving as comic relief, with Rick
occasionally delivering his witty one-liner.  If they were trying to
make a horror-action-comedy, it would have helped if it were established
early on in the film, but unfortunately, with the backstory of Imhotep's
entombment, that would be impossible.
And then there's the slapstick fight scene between a sword-wielding Rick
and an army of mummies.  While really well done, it had the feel of
slapstick comedy.  Replace the sword with a chainsaw and you'd
effectively have Ash fighting zombies in Army of Darkness.  While
entertaining and funny, it feels really out of place.  But at least it's
a break from the naive heroes that Brendan Fraser has been playing a lot
of.  
On the whole, the movie is pure popcorn fare from beginning to end,
entertaining the audience.  But I must end my review with a plea to
movie theatre owners...TURN THE SOUND DOWN!  While a lot of theatres
have good sound systems, my ears were almost ringing as I walked out of
the theatre (the sound is particularly irritating and will make you crap
your pants if you're not careful).  When they were showing the trailer
for the upcoming Schwarzenegger film, "End of Days", it was so loud I
couldn't make anything out.

Title
Review for Star Wars: Episode I - The Phantom Menace (1999)
WARNING: If you actually wish to see the film, stop reading this and see
it.  While I don't blow any plot details, the more you know about a
movie, the more disappointing and built up it becomes (waiting a month
to see Titanic did the same thing).  But, in a nutshell, it's a good
film. 
Never having been the biggest Star Wars fanatic in the world (I was more
into Star Trek: The Next Generation), it is difficult to relate to the
mass fandom surrounding the latest installment, The Phantom Menace. 
However, it can't be ignored. Endless toys lining the shelves, endless
news reports, and a multi-billion dollar advertising campaign makes it
all the more difficult.  With the level of this hype, one would recall
an overhyped disaster from 1998, Godzilla, which definitely failed to
live up to expectations.
Thankfully, The Phantom Menace does much, much better.  
While the "first" Star Wars trilogy told the story of Jedi Knight Luke
Skywalker, the prequels backpedal to tell the back-story of Obi Wan
Kenobi and a young Jedi named Anakin Skywalker (who would become the
father of Luke and eventually become Darth Vader).  Without blowing too
much of the story, The Phantom Menace evolves around a peaceful planet
Naboo, which is being held hostage by a greedy Trade Federation, and
it's up to two Jedi Knights (Qui-Gon Ji, played by Liam Neeson and
Obi-Wan Kenobi, played by Ewan McGreggor) to free it.  
The Phantom Menace has taken a literal beating from various film
critics, leaving me to lower my expectations somewhat.  Common
complaints range from lack of characterization, weak narrative, poor
direction of actors, the dated style, and too much focus over special
effects.  Still, film critics often apply much historical theory in
regards to film criticism, much of which the average film buff does not
care for.
Hence, this film is a lot of fun and definitely an improvement over the
previous films (even with the "improvements" in the Special Editions). 
There are many memorable sequences throughout the film, ranging from the
fast and furious "pod race" sequence (which is a take on the chariot
races in "Ben Hur") and the many fight scenes involving legions of
battle droids.  Utilizing technology that is light years beyond anything
made before, special effects and computers are used to create everything
from monsters to robots to amazing cityscapes with incredible detail. 
No matter how many times you watch this film, you will catch something
new.  
The level of humour is a bit higher than the previous films as well,
mostly conveyed through the reluctant hero Jar Jar Binks, who belongs to
a race known as the Gungans.  Best described as an Mr. Bean from the
planet Naboo, he steals the show.  Unfortunately, being that he is a
computer-generated character, tells a bit about the direction of the
actors (although Natalie Portman as the Queen is pretty effective, as is
Jake Lloyd as the young Anakin Skywalker).  
With Star Wars mania at an all time high, there is the risk that the
film will disappoint (I myself had my doubts), which this film does have
a tendency to do at times.  There are a few logic problems with the
plot, several things are left unchecked, and at times seems to be made
only for diehard Star Wars fans (although the appearance of the Tusken
Raiders makes for more than a few laughs).  That, and young Anakin
Skywalker is a really annoying character, coming off as a smarmy,
arrogant brat (with such an attitude, it's no wonder why he turns to the
Dark Side).
Still, it seems that many people, especially critics, are missing the
point.  The film is some of the most fun 2 and a half hours that you'll
blow in your life, which is something I wouldn't mind doing again. 
While it may not have the psychological impact of an Academy Award
contender, who really cares?  The film is pure fun from beginning to
end.  And isn't that what really matters?

Title
Review for Mod Squad, The (1999)
   It is movies like these that make a jaded movie viewer thankful for
the invention of the Timex IndiGlo watch.
   Based on the late 1960's television show by the same name, The Mod
Squad tells the tale of three reformed criminals under the employ of the
police to go undercover. However, things go wrong as evidence gets
stolen and they are immediately under suspicion.  
   Of course, the ads make it seem like so much more. Quick cuts, cool
music, Claire Dane's nice hair and cute outfits, car chases, stuff
blowing up, and the like. Sounds like a cool movie, does it not? After
the first fifteen minutes, it quickly becomes apparent that it is not.
   The Mod Squad is certainly a slick looking production, complete with
nice hair and costumes, but that simply isn't enough. The film is best
described as a cross between an hour-long cop show and a music video,
both stretched out into the span of an hour and a half. And with it
comes every single cliché. It doesn't really matter that the film is
based on a television show, as most of the plot elements have been
recycled from everything we've already seen.
   The characters and acting is nothing spectacular, sometimes even
bordering on wooden. Claire Danes and Omar Epps deliver their lines as
if they are bored, which really transfers onto the audience. The only
one to escape relatively unscathed is Giovanni Ribisi, who plays the
resident crazy man, ultimately being the only thing worth watching.
Unfortunately, even he's not enough to save this convoluted mess, as all
the characters don't do much apart from occupying screen time. 
   With the young cast, cool clothes, nice hair, and hip soundtrack, it
appears that the film is geared towards the teenage mindset. Despite an
American 'R' rating (which the content does not justify), the film is
way too juvenile for the older mindset. Information on the characters is
literally spoon-fed to the audience (would it be that hard to show us
instead of telling us?), dialogue is poorly written, and the plot is
extremely predictable. The way the film progresses, you likely won't
even care if the heroes are in any jeopardy, because you'll know they
aren't.
   Basing the show on a 1960's television show that nobody remembers is
of questionable wisdom, especially when one considers the target
audience and the fact that the number of memorable films based on
television shows can be counted on one hand (even one that's missing a
finger or two). The number of times that I checked my watch (six) is a
clear indication that this film is not one of them. 
   It is clear that the film is nothing more than an attempt to cash in
on the teenage spending dollar, judging from the rash of really awful
teen-flicks that we've been seeing as of late. Avoid this film at all
costs.
-- 

Title
Review for American Psycho (2000)
Disclamer: This review may divulge a few more plot details than you'd
like to hear.  If you wish to view the film, you may wish to skip this
review.  Besides, you can't really be prepared for your experience when
watching this film anyway.
Starring Christian Bale, Willam Dafoe, Chloe Sevigny, and Reese
Witherspoon.
American Psycho (2000) tells the tale of Patrick Bateman, a 27-year old
yuppy with an upscale apartment, rows of suits, a really nice watch, abs
of steel, and a bunch of dead body parts decorating his apartment.  
The film has been a subject of controversy over the past little while. 
First of all, it is an adaptation of a book of the same name, which has
been reportedly banned, and was also the book read by notorious Canadian
serial killer Paul Bernardo (proving that yes, movies, books, and video
games will turn an average joe into a cold blooded killer).  And then
there's the little matter of a sex scene that has to be trimmed in order
to avoid the dreaded NC17 rating.  
After watching it, I'm still left with the nagging question of whether I
liked the film or not.
American Psycho works on multiple levels.  On one level, it is a bloody
slasher pic on par with Texas Chainsaw Massacre (which, if I'm not
mistaken, is actually featured on a television in the background as the
protagonist does situps).  On another level, it is a witty satire along
the lines of RoboCop and Fight Club.  On another level, it is a
hilarious comedy that makes you feel really bad for laughing.  But does
it work as a combination on those levels?
The film takes place in the late 1980s and deals with the greed and
materialism often associated with the "Me" generation, where everybody
is so absorbed by their new CDs, their fancy business cards, their brand
name stereo equipment, their cellphones, and their ability to get
reservations at the fanciest restaurants.  The film attempts to make a
social commentary about that, telling about how one man who has it all
-- beautiful women, money, all the coke he can snort -- is dissatisfied
by everything material and must kill people in order to be content.
Hence, we are treated to really graphic showings of him killing people
with reckless abandon.  This is done in such an over-the-top manner
that, a lot of the time, it just leaves you in stitches.  One scene
involves Patrick inviting a co-worker rival to his apartment, which he
has decorated with newspaper plastic sheets to cover the furniture and
carpet.  He then pulls out a shiny axe, which he uses to hack his
co-worker into itty bitty bits to the tune of Huey Lewis and the News'
"Hip to be Square".  Another scene involves him wielding a chainsaw
while chasing a prostitute, while completely naked.  These scenes are
really sick and difficult to watch, yet you can't stop laughing no
matter how hard you try.
As well, there is the scene that had to be trimmed for American
audiences (I love being Canadian!).  In one scene, Patrick has picked up
two prostitutes and is having a menage-a-trois.  But, all throughout the
experience, he his actually staring at himself in the mirror, flexing
his muscles and posing.
Towards the conclusion, the audience is given a Fight Club-esque plot
twist, leaving the audience members confused as to the homicidal nature
of the character.  This does make for an interesting message -- does
having far too many material things ultimately lead to a hollow life,
which in the end leads to something close to psychosis?
The unfortunate thing about the film is the way it handles the social
message.  The film practically jams it down your throat, with constant
mentions of material things and people's attachment to them (ie: Patrick
goes through his daily routine and lists off the products he uses in
minute detail).  
>From a technical standpoint, the film is really well done.  With a $7M
budget (half of which was recouped in the first weekend of release), the
film has beautifully designed sets, good attention to detail,
interesting camera angles, and is a good film to look at and listen to. 
But the ambiguous ending leaves you a bit cold.
I do recommend this film, but mostly on the basis of Christian Bale's
acting and the fact that this is not a film where one can just be told
to like it or not.  This is the type of film where one has to see it for
themselves to make their own judgement.  
-- 

Title
Review for Matrix, The (1999)
(originally for The Ubyssey, the student paper of the University of
British Columbia, April 7, 1999)
   What do you do when you wake up one day and realize that your entire
life is a lie?
   After countless movie trailers that blow too many secrets and
ultimately fail to deliver, we finally have a product that far outweighs
the hype. The Matrix tells the tale of a computer hacker named Neo
(played by Keanu Reeves) who unknowingly holds the key to an effort to
bring down a mysterious organization that is manipulating reality and
the collective minds of humanity. Using high-tech implants and weapons,
Neo and an underground movement jump between reality and the manipulated
world. However, the question still remains. What is the real world,
anyway?
   Due to the film's dark atmosphere and the premise, The Matrix will
inevitably garner comparisons to 1998's underrated Dark City. While Dark
City is a well constructed sci-fi thriller, one glimpse of The Matrix
and it is clear which one will win out more fans.
   While the special effects and art direction in Dark City are nothing
to sneeze at, the visuals of The Matrix must be seen to be believed.
Despite a small budget (in this post-Titanic world, anything costing
$70M or less is considered small budget), the filmmakers truly push the
envelope, using technology that was beyond reach not too long ago.  Not
relying solely on CGI, directors Larry and Andy Wachowski call for some
very complex camera work, leading to bizarre visuals once seen only in
comic books and Japanese animated films such as > Ghost in the
Shell.  
   As the story involves characters that have found out how to
manipulate "reality", this leads to agonizing slow-motion sequences and
bizarre freeze frames in which a character jumps into the air and seems
to freeze in place as the camera flows towards another angle. In terms
of visuals, > The Matrix breaks a lot of ground with the camera
effects and computer renderings. This is largely due to the background
of the directors, who wrote comic books along side Vancouver based comic
book artist Steve Skroce (who also provided storyboards for the film).
   Apart from comic books and Japanese animation, the film also has
inspiration from Hong Kong filmmakers, thanks to HK martial arts
director Yuen Wo-Ping and three months of hard work and training by the
actors. When combined with the computer aided effects and gratuitous
slow-motion effects, it leads to many incredible action sequences,
especially a wild shootout that comes close to putting action maestro
John Woo to shame.  
   While the film is a dazzling spectacle that leaves the audience
gaping in disbelief, The Matrix could have benefited from at least one
more re-write of the script. While the storyline explores many
interesting ideas and bizarre concepts, there are a few noticeable holes
and inconsistencies, and some of the dialogue is unintentionally
laughable. Regardless, these flaws are immediately smoothed over as soon
as we see something really cool on screen. And there are a lot of really
cool things on screen.
   And of course, the film would not be much without the actors.
Surprisingly, Keanu Reeves comes off pretty well, although he does have
a tendency to degrade into a Bill & Ted type character at some moments.
Canadian newcomer Carrie-Anne Moss plays a rather unemotional role,
although that is pretty much all that the script calls for. Still, one
has to keep in mind the dedication that the characters put into the
roles, especially since within the three months of martial arts
training, they could have easily made another film.
   In a movie industry where just about every surprise is already blown
and nothing is new, The Matrix easily blows them all away. This film
will easily keep the most jaded sci-fi fans and movie buffs happily
satiated until the release of Star Wars: The Phantom Menace in May.

Title
Review for Romeo Must Die (2000)
As the Hong Kong film industry disipated due to piracy, Triad
interference, one of the end results is the influx of very talented
individuals coming over to the North American film market.  This is a
godsend for many film buffs, wishing to see the high-octane fueled
gunplay of John Woo, lightning fast fists of Jackie Chan, and
charismatic screen presence of Chow Yun-Fat.
The unfortunate byproduct of mixing East and West cultures is that West
tends to dominate, leaving mere reflections of what once was.  Albeit,
the forementioned people have proven themselves, but only after a
lackluster turn.
John Woo made the brilliant actioner, Face/Off...but he also did start
out with the heavily edited Hard Target.  Jackie Chan has most of his
Hong Kong films released here, as well as the successful Rush Hour...but
then, he also starred in "Battle Creek Brawl" and "The Cannon Ball
Run".  And then there's Chow Yun-Fat, who received acclaim in Anna and
the King...but then, started out with "Replacement Killers".
Romeo Must Die, starring Jet Li, is one of these films.
Hot off the success of the super badass heavy in Lethal Weapon 4, Jet Li
comes back to his hero roots playing the role of Han, who escapes from
prison to find his brother's killers.  Along the way, he meets Tricia
(R&B singer Aaliyah), the daughter of a crime boss who helps him along
the way.  With the two warring families going at it...ah, never mind. 
The story has a mere passing resemblance to the Bard's play about doomed
love.  
For the most part, this is a very entertaining film.  Once you get past
the fact that 40% of the story and characters can be jettisoned, the
fact that it takes place in LA but it looks a hell of a lot like
Vancouver, a small handful of continuity errors, and the annoying
hip-hop soundtrack, the film is actually quite entertaining.
The Matrix blew the door open for martial arts flicks, and the ones they
do here work.  Of course, after Jackie Chan pioneered Wing-Chun in the
films and the use of every day objects as weaponry, it's hard to top. 
Of course, it's not like these guys don't try.  
For starters, there is the much talked about bone crunching which you
finally get to *see*, not just hear, thanks to the magic of CGI (one
character has his arm broken and you see the x-ray of his bones getting
broken).  Then, Jet Li also shows off some of his comic flare during a
slapstick sequence in which he is forced into a pickup football game. 
Upon learning the rules ("Why are they hitting me?"  "'Cuz you got the
ball."), he comes out on top and announces, "I love American football!" 
Then, there were some of the coolest fight sequences that Lethal 4 only
gave hints at.
If you had to actually think of the storyline, you'd put yourself in an
asylum.  Or, you'd want to take up a screenwriting class and come up
with a better script.  Included in the 40% jettisonnable script is an
annoying subplot about the NFL (which doesn't make that much sense) and
a lot of nonsense that could've easily been replaced with more images of
Jet Li beating the snot out of someone bigger than he is.  But on the
plus side, they didn't give too much of a romance between Jet Li and
Aaliyah.
For the most part, I was entertained.  But then, I'm also from Vancouver
and I'm attending film school in the area.  A very, very deadly
combination for a film viewer/critic/cynic.  Much of the 2 hours in the
dark theatre were spent counting the cigarette burns (which tell the
projectionist when to change reels...but then, I had to watch Fight Club
first), noticing the glaring continuity errors during the chase scene
(bullet holes appear and disappear), and noticing that the place where
Han drops off Tricia in the cab happens to be the the same place that I
get off of the Skytrain.  And what's up with those "BC" Transit busses?
That, and the fact that movie soundtrack producers seem to think that
all Chinese people listen to nothing but hip-hop.  I'm Chinese and I
hate hip-hop.  There are fewer things worse than that Hack Daddy taking
old songs from the 80s and turning them into his (c)rap music
travesties.  The only song I like from Puff Daddy is "All About the
Benjamins", and that's only for Foo Fighters frontman David Grohl's
contribution.  "Come with Me"?  Puh-lease.  If I have to hear him say
"Uh huh...yeah" one more time...!  When Jet Li's Black Mask (aka Hap
Hak) was released to North American audiences, I went to a Chinese video
store and rented the version with Chinese dialogue, English subs, and NO
ANNOYING HIP-HOP SOUNDTRACK.
But for what it is, it's not bad, and a worthy first time effort for
it's director, Andrzej Bartkowiak, once responsible for cinemetography
of the Lethal Weapon flicks and a bunch of others.  It's certainly a
slick looking picture, and has almost enough martial arts to satisfy the
action starved audience.  While it doesn't quite match up to the
standards already set by Jet Li and his contemporaries, it's okay.
In terms of a film with a Hong Kong star in it, it's not bad.  Jet Li
could have done a lot worse (and judging from some of the North American
debuts had by his fellow countrymen, that's saying quite a bit).  But
here's to hoping that he'll finally get much, much better.
Rating: B-
-- 

Title
Review for Batman & Robin (1997)
Review: Batman & Robin (1997)
Director: Some guy who should be taken out and shot (Joel Schumacher)
Starring: A bunch of people who were handed a really horrible script and
were paid waaaay too much (Arnold Schwarzenegger, George Clooney, Chris
O'Donnel, Uma Thurman, Alicia Silverstone, Jeep Swanson, Elle McPherson)
Written By: The hack who wrote the horrible script (Avika Goldsmith).
Based on the critically acclaimed "Batman: The Killing Joke" by Alan
Moore, the ultimate villain in the Batman gallery of rogues, The Joker
(played by Jack Nicholson), is on a crime rampage in an attempt to drive
Commissioner Gordon (played by Sam Elliot) to the brink of insanity.
Constantly terrorizing him, his acts culminate to invading the Gordon
household and brutally shooting Batgirl's alter ego, Barbara Gordon
(played by Alicia Silverstone), severing her spinal column and
effectively ending her career as a costumed crime fighter.  Batman
(played by Alec Baldwin) is on the case in an attempt to bring the
madman down by any means possible.
Oh...sorry, I must have lost my train of thought there.
In one of the worst comic book adaptations to date, director Joel
Schu-hack-her effectively destroyed the Batman film franchise, caused a
slump in sales of Batman comic books, and cost me $5 CDN.  The film is
so horrible, it made the direct-to-video Marvel films (The Punisher,
Captain America) look like genius by comparison.  The film is so
cheesily contrived, it made Howard the Duck look like Star Wars.  The
film's dialogue is so bad that it makes Jean Claude Van Damme's dialogue
look like it was written by Quentin Tarantino.
But enough venting.  Here is exactly what is wrong with this film.
1: The characters.  Tim Burton's Batman (1989) and Batman Returns (1991)
each featured a manageable three core characters (Batman, Joker, Vicky
Vale, and  Batman, Catwoman, Penguin, respectively).  Batman Forever
(1994) featured five (Batman, Robin, TwoFace, Riddler, Chase Meridian).
Batman and Robin featured the most (Batman, Robin, Batgirl, Mr. Freeze,
Poison Ivy, Bane, Generic Love Interest).  While some film franchises do
succesfully add characters (Lethal Weapon, for one), it is due to the
fact that the characters are familiar.  With all these characters
venting their excess baggage, it is impossible to get any feel for the
characters.  Which brings me to...
2: Faithfulness to the source medium.  Bane was supposed to be the most
deadly Batman villain of all, paralyzing Batman from the waist down and
temporarily ending his crime fighting career.  Instead of being Batman's
intellectual and physical superior, he is reduced to a monosyllabic
buffoon in the film, who's dialogue consists of "Bomb...bomb...bomb..."
(or, perhaps he was referring to the box office reciepts).  Batgirl was
supposed to be the daughter of Commissioner Gordon who originally wore
the costume for a Hallowe'en party.  Instead, she becomes Batgirl after
finding a CD-Rom with the Batman's secrets on it.  Don't even mention
the fact that Bane uses the "Super Soldier Serum" (does the name
"Captain America" ring a bell?).
3: Overall tone.  Apart from the characters, the film has absolutely
nothing to do with the current issues of Batman being put out.  Gone is
the dark, gothic tone of the comics, replaced by the gaudy colours of
the 1960's television show with Adam West.  Joel Shu-hack-her seems to
have failed to realize that comic books have since grown up, and so has
the audience.
4: Dialogue.  I had to bite my tongue to prevent myself from heckling
the dialogue (ie: Bruce Wayne says, "There are things about me you don't
know...", to which I respond, "HE'S GOT A THING FOR GERBILS!").  Instead
of intelligent speech, we are subjected to stupid one-liners.  "Let's
kick some ice!"  "Chill..."  "Kill the heroes!"  "It's the hockey team
from hell!"  A comic book written by Rob Liefeld (the much maligned
artist and writer, formerly of Image comics) has smarter dialogue than
that.
5: Action sequences.  Schwarzenegger and Clooney were given thirty pound
costumes that severely restricted their movement and made fight scenes
virtually impossible.  So, in lieu of real fight choreography, the
audience is given quick editing to give the illusion of a fast and
furious fist fight.  NOT.  Choppy editing is no substitute for real
fight choreography.
6: "Humor".  Batman flashes a credit card and says, "Gotham Express,
don't leave home without it."  Robin repeats a line from the previous
film, "Chicks dig the car, right?"  Mr. Freeze gives Batman a cure for a
disease and says, "Take two and call me in the morning."  Batgirl finds
out all of Batman's secrets, to which Robin comments, "I guess we're
going to have to kill her."  This was intended as humorous, I merely
groaned.  Loudly.  The only time I really laughed was when Dr. Fries (by
Arnold Schwarzenegger) falls off a ledge into a vat of chemicals and
screams on the way down.  Unfortunately, I don't think that was intended
to be funny.
7: Marketability over substance.  Sure enough, the film cost over $100M
to make, much of which was used to pay the big named actors'
astronomical salaries.  It's got a hot new soundtrack with tunes by
Smashing Pumpkins.  It's got a bunch of t-shirts to be made from it.
But with that much money, they could have made a much better film.
8: The gratuitous crotch, ass, and breast shots.  There are two
completely unnecessary sequences where Batman and Robin (at the
beginning) and Batgirl (near the end) are getting into costume.  The
camera focuses on butts, crotches, and breasts, successfully causing me
to STOP enjoying the film.  As soon as I saw Chris O'Donnel and George
Clooney's vinyl covered asses on sceen, I felt the sudden impulse to run
screaming from the theatre.  Unfortunately, I would have had no way of
getting home if I did (I was with friends at the time).
Surely enough, I'm not the only one who felt this way, as poor reviews
and word of mouth promptly sunk this film's grosses, causing it to
barely recoup its budget and marketing costs, and causing Warner
Brothers to consider dumping the franchise, as well as the Superman
franchise.
Later on, Joel Schumacher would go on to blame the film's lackluster
success on the "unpoliced internet" and on the die hard comic book fans
who didn't embrace the lack of faithfulness to the original source
medium.  George Clooney would later blame himself for the film's demise
at the box office and the destruction of the Bat-Franchise.  Judging on
who the two lead players of the film choose to lay blame, the one who
the audience can lay blame on is obvious.
--

Title
Review for 8MM (1999)
Someone please tell me why David Fincher didn't direct this one.
8 MM stars Nicolas Cage as a Tom Watts, a private investigator who is
called in after an elderly woman discovers her late husband owned an 8mm
film depicting a teenage girl being raped and murdered. While such
footage can easily be staged, Watts' task is twofold: to find out if the
footage is real, and to find out who is responsible if the footage is
real. To do this, Watts must delve into the world of underground porn
where moving images of any deviant sexual act can be obtained for the
right price. While Watts' task is difficult, maintaining his grip on his
morals and sanity will be even harder.
The film has a lot of promise, mostly due to the clout achieved by the
screenwriter, Andrew Kevin Walker, who is best known for his
collaboration with director David Fincher for the dark and disturbing
Se7en. Both films feature the protagonist facing off against really sick
and twisted individuals, being completely morally annihilated at each of
the films' conclusions. As well, 8 MM features Nicolas Cage, a very
capable actor.
However, with director Joel Schumacher at the helm, anything can happen.
While many are still stinging from the atrocity known as Batman and
Robin, Schumacher has proven himself to be a capable film director, with
such inventive films as The Lost Boys and Falling Down.  But after
watching this film, the opening question remains: why wasn't David
Fincher selected to direct this film?
Fincher's harrowing style was especially suited to the dark and
disturbing nature of Walker's screenplay in Se7en. The end result was a
powerful psychological thriller that had an extremely unsettling effect
on the audience. Unfortunately, one would be hard pressed to find that
in 8 MM.
While the dark atmosphere of 8 MM is firmly established, the film is
ultimately a haphazardly paced, with a lot of storyline elements that
are practically tacked on. The serial killer depicted in the film comes
off as very unthreatening when revealed at the end, the characters leave
the audience emotionally detached, and some of the dialogue makes for
many unintentionally humorous moments. At least one Hollywood insider
report states that Walker was displeased with the direction of the film
and wished for his name to be taken off the credits. Unfortunately for
him, that never happened.
Admittedly, the film does have its moments. Joaquin Phoenix shines as
Max, an adult bookstore employee and Watts' guide into the underground
world of pornography. The film also has a few intentionally humorous
moments and a few cringe-inducing scenes reminiscent of Se7en.
Unfortunately, as a whole, they aren't enough to save the film.
I wanted to enjoy this movie. I really did. Unfortunately, the film
fails to match up with the high standards left with Walker's screenplay
in Se7en. While 8 MM isn't completely unwatchable, the film isn't
memorable either. Save your money and wait for the video.
Rating: 5/10
-- 

Title
Review for Home Fries (1998)
    As the film opens up, expectant unwed mother Sally (played by Drew
Barrymore) encounters her baby's father in a fast food drive-through
window. After he gets his milkshake, he drives off, only to be pursued
by a military helicopter. From this moment forward, you know that this
isn't going to be your run-of-the-mill romantic comedy.
    Home Fries tells the tale of the relationship between Sally and
Dorian (played by Luke Wilson), a helicopter pilot who has a different
kind of connection with Sally...more than he would care to admit (hint:
it has something to do with the father of Sally's unborn child). After
taking a personal (and professional) interest in her, he finds work at
the local fast food restaurant at which she works, and the fun goes on
from there.
    This movie is a lot of fun. It is comedic on two levels, as a
romantic comedy and a dark comedy. The romantic moments are sweet, yet
not sappy. One of the more poignant moments is when Dorian accompanies
Sally to Lamaze classes.
    However, the dark comedic moments are more memorable. This is also a
tale of revenge, and a funny one at that. The father of Sally's unborn
child also happened to be a married man, whose wife is played by
Catherine O'Hara. She does a wonderful portrayal of a jealous wife who
is targeting the person who had an affair, and is not above getting
other people to do her dirty work. (My apologies if this sounds cryptic,
but there is too much of the plot to give away).
    Rounding out the cast are Jake Busey as Angus, Dorian's overzealous
brother and Daryl Mitchell as Roy, Dorian's trainer at the fast food
restaurant. The dialogue is sharp and not filled with sappy overtones,
even with the romantic nature of the plot.
    If there are any complaints, it is over Drew Barrymore's
performance. While she does light up the screen, there are moments when
she doesn't seem all that convincing. The movie was filmed in Texas, and
most of the characters have southern Texan accents. Drew Barrymore's
accent tends to come and go (Luke Wilson doesn't seem to have this
problem). As well, she seems awfully agile for a woman that is eight
months pregnant.
    Still, this movie is one that will please many viewers. With plot
twists galore and hilarious dark moments, this is sure to entertain.
--

Title
Review for Corruptor, The (1999)
   Despite being proclaimed as one of the coolest actors in the world,
Chow Yun-Fat's first Hollywood picture, The Replacement Killers, failed
to have the desired impact. However, his latest, The Corruptor,
reassures Chow's coolness factor.
   The Corruptor tells the tale of two New York cops: the head of the
Asian gang unit, Nick Chen (played by Chow Yun-Fat) and Danny Wallace
(played by Mark Wahlberg), the young idealistic cop who's partnered up
with Chen amidst recent tensions between two gangs, the Triads and the
Fukienese Dragons. Both of Chen and Wallace have hidden agendas, as Chen
has ties to the Triads while Wallace is torn between his loyalties to
Chen and turning him in for corruption. 
   Coming up with a good short plot summary for this film (at least
without giving away the story) is difficult, although that is one of the
charms of the film. While The Replacement Killers is a mindless
shoot-'em-up action film, The Corruptor has a complex storyline with
characters you actually care about, which gives the ending a lot more
impact (loyal fans of Chow Yun-Fat will know what I'm talking about).
While the film is not without its action sequences, they simply cannot
compare to the masterful bullet-ballets of Chow Yun-Fat's frequent Hong
Kong collaborator, John Woo.
   Not that they aren't memorable, though. The film has its share of
wonderfully violent shoot-outs and a nerve wracking car chase on a very
busy street. The end result is that a lot of stuff gets trashed and few
people get to walk away from the incident.  
   Chow's English has improved much since The Replacement Killers, which
is a good thing, especially since his dialogue consists of much more
than "I...need...forged...documents" and "I...need...guns." This is a
film that requires a bit of thought, albeit a bit much, as some of the
storyline tends to gets a bit muddled near the middle. Either that, or I
was just anticipating the next shoot-out too much.
   Simply put, The Corruptor is not a film that you can just turn your
brain off before you watch. The film is more than endless scenes of
bullets flying and bodies falling. Best described as an "intellectual
action film," it puts story and characters ahead of the action
sequences, while still including one of the coolest car chase scenes in
recent memory. As well, the two leads pull off very good performances,
especially when compared to their last films (although I really did like
The Big Hit, also starring Mark Wahlberg).
   While saying this film is better than The Replacement Killers isn't
saying much, the film can definitely stand on its own (even if I did
happen to like both of them). While not the best film starring Chow
Yun-Fat, it is definitely one of the better films around, which is
something sorely lacking in today's film market of mind numbing fare.
-- 

Title
Review for Rush Hour (1998)
In some respects, Rush Hour is the ultimate exercise in cliched
filmmaking.  The hero is the renegade cop that prefers to work alone.
The cop in question cannot solve the case until he gets in trouble.  All
Chinese people are somehow involved in the criminal element.  The duo
must always be completely mismatched.  The hero has to say some
smart-assed comment before (and after) shooting someone.  However, that
doesn't necessarily make for a bad film.
Rush Hour is Jackie Chan's first major Hollywood film since the dismal
The Protector (1985).  Proving once again that Hollywood can learn many
things from foreign film markets (ie: Hong Kong), Jackie Chan is given
much more free reign than before.  Still, some die-hard Jackie Chan fans
may be disappointed, as even Chan himself has voiced displeasure over
the length of the fight scenes (which he views as too short, according
to one interview).
This film takes a familiar theme of east meets west.  Jackie Chan is
Lee, the straight laced inspector who is imported to help deal with a
kidnapping case, while Chris Tucker is Carter, the loudmouthed,
destructive cop that is `promoted' to the FBI to help him.  Or, at
least, so he thinks (also another classic notion in action films: the
FBI must always get in the way of our heroes).
Despite the necessary conventions of action films, Rush Hour is some of
the most fun you'll spend and hour and forty minutes watching.  Jackie
Chan continues to be one of the most exciting martial artists on the big
screen, continuing to perform his own stunts and dazzling audiences with
his flashy kicks and punches.  Chris Tucker, familiar from his whiny,
annoying role in The Fifth Element is more palatable, complementing
Jackie Chan's straight-laced character.
However, Jackie Chan still maintains his comic-slapstick edge, as
expected of him and his films.  Perfectly downplaying the
`fish-out-of-water' routine through his character's attempts at mixing
into American culture, he makes up for the down time his character
experiences.  When he is in action, however, you'll be amused and
dazzled.  Still being inventive in the use of objects to beat people up
(in this case, a steering wheel, a serving tray, and a barstool), Jackie
Chan proves to be THE pioneer of slapstick kung fu.
Chris Tucker's character may come across as irritating, yet is also
humorous.  Since he's not a physical actor to the level of Jackie Chan,
he uses his main weapon: his mouth (hence, the tagline, `Fastest hands
in the east meets the fastest mouth in the west').  While dialogue is
not necessarily Shakespeare, it is appropriate for the film and still
very funny.
While not necessarily poignant, attempts at character development and
growth between characters come off surprisingly well.  Lee's `knowledge'
of American pop culture (`That's the Beach Boys!') when contrasted
against Carter's lack of knowledge of Chinese culture makes for an
interesting scene where Lee teaches Carter the kung fu disarming trick,
while Carter teaches Lee hip-hop dance moves.
While Rush Hour is not at the same level as Police Story 3 and 4 (known
in North America as Supercop and Jackie Chan's First Strike,
respectively), it more than makes up for the poorly received films
Operation Condor and Mr. Nice Guy.  With its appropriate mixture of high
kicks and lots of laughs, it makes for a fun film.  As well, it is a
true departure from Jackie Chan films, as it is missing one common
element: a whiny female co-star.
Rating: 8/10
--

Title
Review for Razor Blade Smile (1998)
RAZOR BLADE SMILE
Running as part of the Vancouver International Film Festival
Played October 2nd and 4th, 1998.
Official release: Halloween
   `You think you know all about vampires...believe me...you know f*ck
all.'
   With these words, we are brought into the world of a sultry vampire
seductress by the name of Lilith Silver (played by Eileen Daly). Made
into an immortal a century and a half ago by the sinister Ethan Blake,
she continues to alleviate boredom with her state of being. So, what's
an undead girl to do, except squeeze into the tightest fitting clothes
possible, get out her guns, seduce a few guys, and kill a few people for
money and blood?
   With that out of the way, let me say this. This film is bad. This
film is really, really bad. Yet somehow, it is strangely enjoyable. With
all the elements of a direct to video horror flick – buxom babes, gore,
cheesy dialogue, and bad acting – any casual film viewer would be more
inclined to spend their money on renting Innocent Blood or going to see
Blade. Still, it is considered to be one of the finest British vampire
film. Agreed, it might be, but is far from being the best vampire flick
ever. Period.
   Razor Blade Smile has some rather high production values, shown by
the nice overall tone to the film. The film is also a bit of a departure
from popular vampire lore, with a vampire that can go out in broad
daylight without disintegrating, doesn't sleep in a coffin (but leaves
one next to her computer), and sees religion as the `opium of the
peoples' (hence, immunity to crosses). But aside from that, it doesn't
stray too far away from horror film conventions.
   That is, unless that is intentional. Razor Blade Smile literally goes
for the throat, then pumps the wound full of processed cheese. You can't
help but laugh when a female vampire gets decapitated and her severed
head goes flying into a puddle. You'll laugh even harder at the
hideously contrived situations (to distract two female guards, Lilith
tosses a cellular phone towards them and dials the number). You'll laugh
the hardest when a murder witness recants the tale and suddenly starts
sobbing uncontrollably. And then, there's the sudden twist ending (I
have enough heart not to give it away).
   The film refuses to take itself seriously, which is a good thing, as
by the time Lilith zips up her skin-tight body suit and then unzips it
just to show the right amount of cleavage, you've most likely forgotten
the main point of the story. But in case you really care, she's been
assigned to kill a bunch of people who belong to the so-called
Illuminati, and she's leaving a huge mess behind for the police to find.
   As much as my criticisms, this movie works best as a guilty pleasure
or as a film that you watch with your friends and within groups. Almost
destined for cult-status, the film's campy, cheesy overtones actually
work towards the film. While this may not necessarily be the film you'd
want to be seen watching by yourself, it makes for a fun time at the
movies.
Rating: 7/10
--

Title
Review for 10 Things I Hate About You (1999)
(originally written for the Ubyssey, the student newspaper for the
University of British Columbia.  Unfortunately, it got cut for space)
   Keeping in the spirit of the film's title, here are ten things to
either like or dislike about the film.
10: Likely inspired by the success of William Shakespeare's Romeo +
Juliet, 10 Things I Hate About You is a modernized retelling of
Shakespeare's Taming of the Shrew. While the original was about a much
loved Bianca who cannot marry until her older sister Kate is wed, the
retelling takes place in high school, where the most popular girl in
school (by Larisa Oleynik) can't date until her older, unpopular sister
does (by Julia Stiles). Not necessarily a bad thing in itself, but do
filmmakers really believe that all teenagers suffer from attention
deficit disorder and will only be interested in a more candy-coated
Shakespeare?
9: Note the key word "high school." This is a warning bell for any
moviegoer over the age of 21, especially with the teenage films with
very limited appeal for anyone not in the demographic. Fair enough. The
Generation X crowd had The Breakfast Club, Ferris Bueller's Day Off, and
16 Candles, but we look back at these films with fond memories. Will the
current rash of teenage films like The Mod Squad (which I hated), Cruel
Intentions, and 10 Things be remembered in by current teens when they
become adults?
8: Still, 10 Things has a lot of charm and humour that may just make it
memorable. Despite the crude level of humour in much of the film (ie:
penis jokes, sheep jokes, and kicks to the groin), the film comes off
surprisingly well, something not expected of a film aimed at teens. The
adult characters are the more memorable ones, including standouts as the
perpetually horny guidance counselor, Kat and Bianca's overprotective
father, and Kat's English teacher.
7: But as befits a teenage film, 10 Things is riddled with some bad
clichés and stereotypes. For example, Bianca is the most popular girl in
the school, she's about as dumb as a piece of toast (this stopped being
funny a long time ago). While Kat is the most unpopular girl in school,
yet one look and you'd wonder why. The most popular guy has a really
fancy car and is a real jerk. And so forth.
6: Also a modern epidemic in the film biz is the 90-minute music video
being passed off as a film. Much of the time it feels like the
filmmakers are trying to sell copies of the soundtrack instead of
entertaining the audience. Please refer to the comment on teenagers with
ADD.
5: The performances are actually pretty good, although not much of a
stretch, considering that the actors and actresses actually are
teenagers (although in real life, Larisa Oleynik and Julia Stiles are
the same age). However, it does break the convention of teenagers being
played by actors and actresses in their late 20s.
4: While many moments in the film are rather charming, it eventually
gets to the point of inducing hyperglycemia. While the "aww, shucks"
kinda moments are well executed, the film's conclusion (which is
predictable, even if you haven't read Taming of the Shrew) cannot go by
fast enough. Some audience members may benefit from bringing along a
toothbrush.
3: Most importantly, many of the more misogynist elements from Taming of
the Shrew were removed when adapted. Despite the earlier complaint about
a candy-coated Shakespeare, 10 Things definitely have more resonance
with a more contemporary audience. 
2: Unless you want to be reminded of your age and how long it has
actually been since you've attended high school, this film is not for
you. For anyone who has been out of high school for more than two years,
this film is guaranteed to make you feel extremely old.
1: Regardless, 10 Things is a worthy adaptation of a classic, which
despite its limited appeal, actually manages to entertain.
Rating: 6.5/10 (8/10, if I was much younger)
-- 

Title
Review for Blade (1998)
Based on the relatively unknown (in comparison to Spider-Man) Marvel
Comic book, Blade tells the story of half-vampire half-human (played by
Wesley Snipes) who was born of a vampire's latest meal.  Now swearing
vengeance against all vampires, Blade hunts them all.  His latest
challenge is his biggest though...he must stop the vampire Deacon Frost
(played by Stephen Dorff) from summoning the blood god and turning the
rest of the world into vampires.
Admitedly, comic books are one of the least appreciated mediums, often
viewed as juvenile by most standards, even seen as illiterate by some.
Judging by a series of poorly recieved (financial and critical) comic
book based films (such as Batman and Robin, Steel, Barb Wire, The Crow:
City of Angels, and the list goes on), one would come to the conclusion
that comic books are the worst medium to translate into film.
To some degree, I agree with this sentiment.  Having read comic books
since the age of nine (I'm 21 right now) I can count the number of good
comic book based movies (not including Japanese manga) one hand: 1: The
Crow (1994), 2: Batman (1989), 3: Superman, 4: The Mask, and now, #5,
Blade.
("Men in Black" is not on this list because it is an extreme deviation
from the original comic book)
Why is this?  For the most part, it is because the filmmakers understand
the comic book medium and come up with an appropriate atmosphere to
match.  The Crow and Batman comics call for a dark gothic atmosphere,
which the director provided.  The Mask features a wacky superhero with
off the wall antics, which the casting and CG effects reflect.  Superman
is not over the top with colour and flash, and the film reflects this.
Blade uses common notions of vampires and incorporates them into the
film, creating an appropriate atmosphere.
This is in stark contrast to Joel Schumacher's contrived vision in
Batman and Robin, reflecting the dated atmosphere in the 1960's
television show.  Batman and Robin proved that the director failed to
realize one fundamental fact: Comics have grown up, and so has the
audience (I'm working on a scathing review of Batman and Robin and will
post it up when I'm ready).
Which brings me back to Blade.  Although he may be a familiar character
to some, due to his appearances in the Spider-Man animated show on Fox,
one will find no single trace of the warm-and-fuzzy vampire hunter as
depicted in the cartoon.  The film depicts a vicious vampire killer that
uses every single means at his disposal to reach his ends.  The end
results are not pretty by any means.
The story elements work very well -- for a comic book story.
Screenwriter David Goyer (who also wrote The Crow) incorporates
interesting elements of vampire lore, using science to explain many of
the ideas often dismissed in vampire films.  This is presented through
Karen, a hematologist portrayed by N'Bushe Wright.  This leads to
inventive use of standard medical treatments to kill vampires.  Add this
to the neat little gadgets that Blade uses (including a titanium sword
complete with an "anti-theft device"), and one has an interesting
premise.
However, the film works best as an action film.  Actor Wesley Snipes has
an extensive background in martial arts (most of which comes from
Capoeira, a Brazillian form incorporating flashy kicks), choreographing
every single move.  Proving that quick, flash cutting edits are no
substitute for choreographed fight sequences (see Batman and Robin for a
good example of that), Wesley Snipes dazzles the audience with some
incredible fight scenes.
Regardless, this film is far from perfect.  The film suffers from at
least one major plot hole, regarding the summoning of the blood god.
The ritual requires that a number of pure blood vampires are standing on
marked squares, yet one of them is viciously murdered, allowing the
ritual to pass (and the murdered vampire is later shown standing on the
square).  Obvious continuity errors also surface, especially during a
scene where Deacon Frost takes a drag on his cigarette and is not
exhaling it in the next frame (there is no trace of smoke either).
Much of the special effects are not that spectacular either.  While
vampire disintegration scenes are intriguing to watch, other CGI
(computer generated imagery) effects are almost slapped together, which
is surprising when given the amount of time the film was given to be
released (the film's release date was pushed back multiple times).
Scenes with computer generated blood look extremely fake, knocking the
believability factor down a few notches (but then, I'm really hard to
impress).  The film's R rating comes from gory violence, but the lack of
realism made me wonder why it got such a rating (for realistic violence,
watch "Saving Private Ryan").
The overuse of CGI in films has made me yearn for the days of director
George Romero and makeup wizard Rob Bottin, both pioneers in the art of
gore without extensive use of CGI.  Still, scenes involving non-CGI
special effects do surface (and look much more impressive), such as one
particularly gruesome scene where a vampire tries to use Blade's sword
without deactivating the "anti-theft device".
Wesley Snipes is the saving grace behind what would have otherwise been
a muddled mess.  While not talking much, he is a grand physical
presence, leaving other comic book superheroes in the dust.  A descent
(by comic book film standards) storyline also helps.
Rating: 7/10
--

Title
Review for Orphans (1997)
   As the film opens up, we are shown an agonizing mise-en-scene in
which three brothers and their sister pay their respects to their
recently departed mother. This somber scene barely even sets the tone
for what we are about to see: a wild romp through the night in the lives
of Thomas, John, Michael, and Sheila Flynn, all of whom are separated
after a scuffle in a bar.
   An impressive feature debut by Scottish director Peter Mullan (best
known for a role in Trainspotting), Orphans tells the tale of each
individual character as they try to make their way to their mother's
funeral the next morning. Each character is given distinct
personalities, goals, ambitions, and lives. Thomas (by Gary Lewis) is
the strict catholic that refuses to leave his mother's side. John (by
Stephen Cole) the younger brother, seeking vengeance against the one who
wounded his brother Michael (by Douglas Henshall). Sheila (played by
Rosemary Stevenson) is the disabled sister, who tires of Thomas' vigil
and leaves, only to have her motorized wheelchair break down in the
middle of nowhere. Michael is the `normal' one in the bunch, trying to
reconcile with all the family members and bring them back together for
the next day's funeral.
   While the premise lends itself to an unmarketable state (which led to
its dropping by Film Four studios), each character goes through some
very absurd moments, many breaking past the reaches of dark comedy.
Before leaving in a huff, Sheila causes Thomas to break a statue of
Mary, which he is frantically trying to piece together (his efforts are
eventually rendered moot). On one of his vengeance seeking tirades,
John's friend finds out the hard way why he shouldn't bother a man while
he masturbates (and you thought that the `hair gel' scene in There's
Something About Mary was bad). And then there's the scene where Michael
finds himself in the worst bar in Glasgow.
   Scenes like these effectively break up the somber narrative, although
a Tarantino weaned audience would with to see more of the dark and
comedic stuff. Still, the solid characterization more than makes up for
what audiences otherwise expect. With vivid clarity, this is an amazing
portrayal of a family in obvious turmoil. Michael is slowly bleeding to
death. John is about to make the biggest mistake of his life. Thomas
doesn't even care and just wishes to watch over his mother's body. And
the three of them have no idea where their sister is.
   The film also deals with some heavy religious allegory. As well as
representing various biblical figure (Thomas, as the faith-shaken
apostle; John, possibly the apostle that slices a guard's ear off prior
to Jesus Christ's arrest; Michael as an angel of sorts), there are
interesting metaphors. One such involves vengeance seeking bar patrons
chasing the evil bartender through the streets, with one of them
dropping a large stone as soon as Michael sees this (I'll let you figure
that one out). Things like these only enhance the storytelling.
   With some of the most solid acting that you'll see in a while and a
well written storyline, Orphans is easily one of the best films I've
seen in a long time. While some may lose patience with the buildup, the
payoff is ultimately worth it.
--

Title
Review for Blade (1998)
Based on the relatively unknown (in comparison to Spider-Man) Marvel
Comic book, Blade tells the story of half-vampire half-human (played by
Wesley Snipes) who was born of a vampire's latest meal.  Now swearing
vengeance against all vampires, Blade hunts them all.  His latest
challenge is his biggest though...he must stop the vampire Deacon Frost
(played by Stephen Dorff) from summoning the blood god and turning the
rest of the world into vampires.
Admitedly, comic books are one of the least appreciated mediums, often
viewed as juvenile by most standards, even seen as illiterate by some.
Judging by a series of poorly recieved (financial and critical) comic
book based films (such as Batman and Robin, Steel, Barb Wire, The Crow:
City of Angels, and the list goes on), one would come to the conclusion
that comic books are the worst medium to translate into film.
To some degree, I agree with this sentiment.  Having read comic books
since the age of nine (I'm 21 right now) I can count the number of good
comic book based movies (not including Japanese manga) one hand: 1: The
Crow (1994), 2: Batman (1989), 3: Superman, 4: The Mask, and now, #5,
Blade.
("Men in Black" is not on this list because it is an extreme deviation
from the original comic book)
Why is this?  For the most part, it is because the filmmakers understand
the comic book medium and come up with an appropriate atmosphere to
match.  The Crow and Batman comics call for a dark gothic atmosphere,
which the director provided.  The Mask features a wacky superhero with
off the wall antics, which the casting and CG effects reflect.  Superman
is not over the top with colour and flash, and the film reflects this.
Blade uses common notions of vampires and incorporates them into the
film, creating an appropriate atmosphere.
This is in stark contrast to Joel Schumacher's contrived vision in
Batman and Robin, reflecting the dated atmosphere in the 1960's
television show.  Batman and Robin proved that the director failed to
realize one fundamental fact: Comics have grown up, and so has the
audience (I'm working on a scathing review of Batman and Robin and will
post it up when I'm ready).
Which brings me back to Blade.  Although he may be a familiar character
to some, due to his appearances in the Spider-Man animated show on Fox,
one will find no single trace of the warm-and-fuzzy vampire hunter as
depicted in the cartoon.  The film depicts a vicious vampire killer that
uses every single means at his disposal to reach his ends.  The end
results are not pretty by any means.
The story elements work very well -- for a comic book story.
Screenwriter David Goyer (who also wrote The Crow) incorporates
interesting elements of vampire lore, using science to explain many of
the ideas often dismissed in vampire films.  This is presented through
Karen, a hematologist portrayed by N'Bushe Wright.  This leads to
inventive use of standard medical treatments to kill vampires.  Add this
to the neat little gadgets that Blade uses (including a titanium sword
complete with an "anti-theft device"), and one has an interesting
premise.
However, the film works best as an action film.  Actor Wesley Snipes has
an extensive background in martial arts (most of which comes from
Capoeira, a Brazillian form incorporating flashy kicks), choreographing
every single move.  Proving that quick, flash cutting edits are no
substitute for choreographed fight sequences (see Batman and Robin for a
good example of that), Wesley Snipes dazzles the audience with some
incredible fight scenes.
Regardless, this film is far from perfect.  The film suffers from at
least one major plot hole, regarding the summoning of the blood god.
The ritual requires that a number of pure blood vampires are standing on
marked squares, yet one of them is viciously murdered, allowing the
ritual to pass (and the murdered vampire is later shown standing on the
square).  Obvious continuity errors also surface, especially during a
scene where Deacon Frost takes a drag on his cigarette and is not
exhaling it in the next frame (there is no trace of smoke either).
Much of the special effects are not that spectacular either.  While
vampire disintegration scenes are intriguing to watch, other CGI
(computer generated imagery) effects are almost slapped together, which
is surprising when given the amount of time the film was given to be
released (the film's release date was pushed back multiple times).
Scenes with computer generated blood look extremely fake, knocking the
believability factor down a few notches (but then, I'm really hard to
impress).  The film's R rating comes from gory violence, but the lack of
realism made me wonder why it got such a rating (for realistic violence,
The overuse of CGI in films has made me yearn for the days of director
George Romero and makeup wizard Rob Bottin, both pioneers in the art of
gore without extensive use of CGI.  Still, scenes involving non-CGI
special effects do surface (and look much more impressive), such as one
particularly gruesome scene where a vampire tries to use Blade's sword
without deactivating the "anti-theft device".
Wesley Snipes is the saving grace behind what would have otherwise been
a muddled mess.  While not talking much, he is a grand physical
presence, leaving other comic book superheroes in the dust.  A decent
(by comic book film standards) storyline also helps.
--
