Authors
Jesse Kaplan
Number of Reviews
10

Title
Review for Con Air (1997)
Cast:  Nicholas Cage, John Cusack, John Malkovich, Steve Bushemi, Ving
Rhames, Colin Meamy and a bunch of no-name Cons
Produced by Jerry Bruckheimer
Directed by Simon West
Is this the sequal to THE ROCK?  Thats what I was wondering as I first
saw the trailers for this movie.  I mean, Jerry Bruckheimer, the mad
producer and Nicholas Cage action star.  Apparently thats what he wants
us to believe.  Segal, Ford, Stallone, Willis are all getting older so
why not a new one.  Well, I don't know if Cage can be that guy.  With
CON AIR, he comes off looking like a dirty old redneck who is trapped in
one of his earlier films, RAISING ARIZONA.
Cage (THE ROCK, LEAVING LAS VEGAS) stars as Cameron Poe, an imprisoned
man going home to his family after eight years in the big house.  You
see, Poe is one of those Movie heroes who is perfect in every regard.
He was in jail because he defended his wife from some thugs and
accidentally killed a man.  On his way home, aboard a plane, The
Prisoners of whom he was travveling with take control of the plane and
he is forced to react back.
        The Cons are lead by Cyrus "The Virus", a man so deadly he has
diseases named after him.  I'm not sure hwy all the prisenors started
listening to him aboard the plane, I could actully smell the bad breath
from the auidence.  Anyway, they take over the plane and Cage is a good
guy up there who must stop them.
        On the ground, FBI agent Vince Larken (John Cusack, CITY HALL,
GROSSE POINT BLANK) is trying to salvage the plane.  While another fat
guy agent (Colin Meamy) wants to blow up the plane.
        What to say about CON AIR?  You know exactly whats going to
happen the whole way.  This is a predictible noisy thriller.  Where THE
ROCK had great acting, an exciting plot and great editing, CON AIR has
neither.  Malkovich is not convincing nor Cage.  Cusack gives one of the
few good performances in this flim.  Another good one goes to Steve
Bushemi (PULP FICTION, FARGO), whom I always like, as a Hanibal Lecter
charachter.  He gets all the best lines.
        CON AIR has some good scenes no doubt, but the main reason it
falls is beacuse you have seen it all before.  Forget this film and go
see AIR FORCE ONE for some real terror in the skies.
        For some good laughs, decent action and John Cusack's
performance, I give this film **1/2.  It's Rated R for graphic language
and violence.


Title
Review for Spawn (1997)
SPAWN        A Film Review By Jesse A. Kaplan
Cast:  Michael Jai White, John Leguizamo, Martin Sheen, Theresa Randle,
Mindy Clarke
Directed By mark A.Z. Dippe
So many movies are coming out now from former comic books and change
much so they can appeal to the general public who are not as familiar
with the stories.  SPAWN is no exception to this, the problem here is
that the plot, the directing, the effects, and the acting are so poor
that anyone even remotely interested in the movie will lose that slight
bit of interest 25 minutes into it.
        The plot deals with an assassinated hitman Al Simmons, (White)
who dies, makes a deal with the devil to lead his armies to taking over
the world in exchange for seeing his fiancee Wanda (Randle).  Violator
(Leguizamo), who looks like a cross between a constipated Danny Devito
and Chris Farley on a bad hair day, is there to make sure Simmons, now
called Spawn, lives up to his end of the deal, which includes killing
global kingpin Jason Wynn (Sheen) who is going to blow up the world if
he dies by a deal made with the Violator.
Yawn!! Who cares.  Leguizamo gives a horrendous and annoying
performance here, Sheen looks bored even though he couldn't be in a
better picture, and White doesn't have much to do as Spawn, as the
costume and effects on him steal the spotlight.
        Most of the effects in this movie, which were so anticipated and
talked up, look like you're playing Doom II on a 3DO system, its
completely computer and looks it, so the scenes of hell are ridiculous
and unrealistic.  This is another movie, such as TWISTER and
INDEPENDENCE DAY, where the plot and storyline are simply there to back
up the Special Effects, which can not and will not make a movie.
        The only positives I enjoyed from SPAWN are Mindy Clarke, not
for her acting but for some other features (nice rubber) and the special
effects on Spawn himself.
        I give this movie a single star * and do not recommend it to
anyone, there are much better movies out worth seeing.  AIR FORCE ONE,
anyone?
Copyright 1997 paladin@mhv.net    Jesse A. Kaplan

Title
Review for Face/Off (1997)
Cast:  Nicholas Cage, John Travolta, Joan Allen, Alessandro Nivola, Gina
Gershon, Dominique Swain
Directed By John Woo
        To tell you what, I was not impressed at all by the only other
John Woo film I have seen.  Starring Travolta, BROKEN ARROW was a
mediocre action movie at best, and I really could have cared less about
anything when I saw it.  Not ture here.  I went into FACE/OFF expecting
the same and was blown away!!      This is by far, one of the best films
of the year.  Amazing action sequences, stunts, explosions, some hott
girls, and (is this the best thing?)  Characterization!!!!!
John Travolta (PULP FICTION, PHENOMENON) stars as Sean Archer, leader of
an L.A. Anti-terrorist squad.  He is still working to find and kill
Castor Troy, Nicholas Cage (THE ROCK, CON-AIR).  Cage, you see, had
killed Archer's son several years back and his life hasn't been the same
since.  After an amazing shoot out involving aiplaones and hangars, Troy
is captured as is his brother Pullocks (Nivola).  However everything is
fine from peachy as Castor has planted a bomb somewhere in L.A. and
Archer has no idea how to find it.
    So, the doctors recommend switching faces, so Archer can be at jail
as Troy to find out where the bomb is.  In a rediculous sequence,
Travolta and Cage switch faces.  However Cage is left without one and is
out like a light.  Prolems begin when Cage wakes up and is able to get
Travolta's face on him, then he kills the medical staff.  The movie
really takes off from there and let me tell you, Cage deserve's an
Acadamy Award Nomination for this one.  First he is the evil cold heated
villian Troy, then he must win back our hearts as Archer.  Not that
Travolta good either, he certainly had fun.
        Joan ALlen plays Archer's wife who is confused and hen scared as
she slowly realizes the man she's living with is not her husband.
Dominique Swain is great as Archer's misunderstood daughter.  And Gina
Gershon (remember SHOWGIRLS) gives a good performance as Troy's
ex-girlfriend, who tells Cage (as Archer) that her son is his.
    The action sequences here are memorable.  One of the best includes
Gerhon's son listening to "Over the Rainbow" as a fight goes on all
around him.  ANother includes a mexican standoff in a church, complete
with the doves and the whole megillah.
    The only prob's i had with FACE/OFF is that its about 25 minutes too
long,  Just when you think its over, there is another chase scene
involving speed boats, etc.  This scene is actually better then the
entire movie of SPEED 2.  Thats another stor yall together though.
FACE/OFF runs way too long at 2:20. It is rated R for violence and
language.  See it, but check your brain at the door.  *** 1/2
Copyright 1997 paladin@mhv.net  Jesse A. Kaplan

Title
Review for Speed 2: Cruise Control (1997)
SPEED 2: CRUISE CONTROL A Movie review By Jesse A. Kaplan
Cast:  Jason Patric, Sandra Bullock, WIlliam Defoe
In a summer of Blockbuster Movie Sequals, one of the more unnessary ones
made was non other than SPEED 2.  I see no reason for this movie to be
made.  Besides the graet explosion scenes, and there are only a few,
this movie has little plot, little acting, and little enjoyment.
Sandra Bullock (A TIME TO KILL, THE NET) makes her return to the action
genre as Annie, who seems to be in the wrong place at the wrong time.
Consider her DIE HARD's femals John McClane, minus his funny wisecracks
and ability to fight.  Considering the fact that SPEED star Keanu Reeves
dropped out of the project in the early stages, replacement Jason Patric
(SLEEPERS), basically plays the same role as Reeves did, a Los Angeles
SWAT team member with a knack for saving the day and having no
conscience onto what happens to him.  This time, Patric's character
Alex, is on a cruise with Annie.  Little does he know that evil and
insane William Defoe (CLEAR AND PRESENT DANGER) is plotting to steal the
ships jewels and blow up the boat because he ways layed off of his job
as computer specialist for the cruise line.
You've seen this one before entering the theater so take a guess what
happens.  Yep thats it, Defoe out smarts the cruise ship's crew and
takes control of the boat so Alex must save the day. Like I stated
previously, the acting here is week.  After givcing strong roles in THE
NET and A TIME TO KILL, Bullock is genuinly annoying in this picture and
while watching it I didn't really care what happened to her.  Defoe was
absolutely horrible as the mad bomber and hopefully he will stick to
small, supporting roles for the future.  I'm not sure how great Patric
was.His character was completely one-dimentinol so there was no reason
to care about him.  Basically, I could have said his lines the smae and
it would have made no difference.  Temuera Morrison is good as Juliano,
the ship's first mate.  Christine Firkins is wonderful as Drew, a deaf
girl who gets trapped in the underbody of the boat.  She steals every
scene she's in.
Beside's some great underwater shots, a couple of explosions, and Sandra
Bullock in some of those outfits, SPEED 2: CRUISE CONTROL, may have a
cool name, but thats about it.  ** thats all.
SPEED 2 runs longer than necessary at 2:13. It is rated PG-13 for
disaster action and violence.
Copyright 1997 paladin@mhv.net Jesse A. Kaplan

Title
Review for Raiders of the Lost Ark (1981)
RAIDERS OF THE LOST ARK     A Film Review By Jesse A. Kaplan
Cast:  Harrison Ford, Karen Allen, Paul Freeman, Ronald Lacey, Denholm
Elliot, John Rhys-Davies
Directed by:  Steven Spielberg
 Raiders of the Lost Ark (1981) is the spectacular, cliff-hanger,
breathlessly-paced, non-stop action/adventure film of the early 1980s,
an immensely successful summer box-office hit. George Lucas, producer,
and director Steven Spielberg made RAIDERS,
first of three Indiana Jones movies, as a tribute in homage to the
Saturday matinee thrillers and serials of yesteryear - the 1930s and
40s. It is a thoroughly entertaining film, with some of the greatest
gee-whiz technical effects, stunts, and action sequences ever filmed.
The musical score by accomplished composer John Williams (famous for
work on JAWS, STAR WARS, and THE EMPIRE SRIKES BACK) adds an air of
excitement.
        I'll say it right now, RAIDERS is better then STAR WARS.  There
you go.  I actually will go out on a limb and say it.  This is the movie
that led an entire decade into big budget action/adventure movies to
which the films of the 1980's are now known for.  Both Harrison Ford and
Karen Allen give probably their best efforts right here.  Who better to
cheer on then an American trying to recover a peice of Jewish History
against "The Armies of Darkness"  (Nazis).
        The Plot has Indiana Jones (Ford) trying to rescue the lost Ark
of The Covenant with the sacred 10 Commandments from the Nazi's who are
searching for it themselves for Hitler, along with Jones' Arch Rival
Renee Bollaq  (Freeman).  I have no idea why i'm botrhering to go over
this because obviously you have been living under a rock if you don't
know about the excitement, adventures, and action created by the movie.
See it.
    RAIDERS happens to be my second favorite movie of all time
(CASABLANCA) and obviously I give it my top rating of ****  Excellent
Copyright 1997 Jesse A. Kaplan paladin@mhv.net

Title
Review for Feiying gaiwak (1990)
OPERATION CONDOR  A Film Review By Jesse A. Kaplan
 The newest of Hong Kong, and world Superstar Jackie Chan's (RUMLE IN
THE BRONX, SUPERCOP) movies has arrived to the US. Operation condor
definately rates as one of his best.  Not since RUMBLE IN THE BRONX, has
Chan delieved the amount of fighting and humor the American Audiences.
Basically in this story, Chan plays a hing kong special agent named
Jackie.  He needs to find a lot of gold that the nazi's left in the
Sahara desert in which many a shady character are trying to get their
hands on.  If you think there are references to all of the INDIANA JONES
sagas, you are right on.  However the plot means nothing as we come
looking for the action.
Chan fights through hotels, the desert, underground castles, and wind
tunnel in this one boys and girls.  As only Jackie Chan can do, he uses
any weapon available, let it be either a scorpion or a towel.  OPERAION
CONDOR is great fun and and great action as Chan mixes funny humor with
amazing kung-fu.  Of course there are outtakes at the end so stay tuned
for them.
"Have you had enough?"
"HA HA HA HA.....NO!!"
 Copyright 1997 paladin@mhv.net  Jesse A. Kaplan

Title
Review for Fifth Element, The (1997)
THE FIFTH ELEMENT:  A FILM REVIEW BY Jesse A. Kaplan
Cast:  Bruce Willis, Gary Oldman, Milla Jovivovich, Chris Tucker, Ian
Holm, Luke Perry
Directed by Luc Besson
Wow!  When I orginally found out about THE FIFTH ELEMENT (T5E) I was
amazed by not only the plot, the effects, the sets, and the casts, but
just how what an incredibly different movie it was going to be.  Well
now its out all over and has gotten some mixed reviews.  Let me tell you
something ladies and gentlemen, this movie is terrific.
    All the future will be lost unless the fifth element is found.  I
don't even know how to explain the movie so I won't.  Let me say this
then.  If you like action, Sci-Fi, great costumes, an amazingly hott up
and coming actress, shoot 'em up, futuristic ride of your life the T5E
is the movie for you this summer.
    Bruce Willis (DIE HARD, PULP FICTION) is at his best as an Ex-Marine
turned taxi who has to save the world from annialation from the
unltimate evil.  Evil is helped by the crooked arms dealer billioniare
Zorg, played by Gary Oldman (THE PROFESSIONAL, AIR FORCE ONE).  Leeloo,
as the Fifth Element, the surprime being must be used correctly to
defeat this evil with help from a struggling to save priest, Holm, and
his assistant.  Once the action moves to the space resort we are met be
D.J. Ruby Rodd ,Chris Tucker (FRIDAY) who is a great cross between
Prince, Dennis Rodman, and Orpah Whinfrey.
    The sets and costumes and the best part of the movie and the $90
million dolllar budget certainly isn't wasnted at all in this movie.
Definately one of the true hits of this summer.  Although compared to
Sci-Fi thrillers such as STARGATE and BLADE RUNNER, T5E works because
its not deep at all.  Simply great mindless fun, guarenteed to make your
$7.50 worthwhile.
THE FIFTH ELEMENT runs 2:07 and is worth every minute. It is rated PG-13
for brief female nudity, cartoonish violence, and a little profanity.
A definate winner,  *** 1/2.
Copyright 1997 paladin@mhv.net  Jesse A. Kaplan

Title
Review for Total Recall (1990)
Cast:  Arnold Schwarzenegger, Rachel Ticotin, Sharon Stone, Michael
Ironside, Ronny Cox
Directed by:  Paul Verhoeven
    This simply Arnold Schwarzaegger's best movie.  Forget about T2, and
TRUE LIES.  This is the most violent, most expensible made, most
perverse Arnold movie.  We got mutant martians, Sharon Stone, and too
many questions about whats going on.
        I've always loved movies that make you think about what's going
on.  12 MONKIES, MISSION IMPOSSIBLE are some like  those.  In TOTAL
RECALL its the same.  Is the movie really happening?  Or is it simply
Arnold's recall from the movie.  I still have no idea.
        Schwarzenagger stars as Douglas Quaid, a constuction worker
living on Earth in 2084 with a beaufitul wife of eight years, Lori,
(Sharon Stone, whom we almost see topless, oh well).  He frequently has
dreams about Mars and another girl.  Thinking it will help, Quaid stops
into Rekall Inc,which can implant memories of a trip into your head.
Cheaper and Safer then vacations!!!  However after Quaid orders a trip
to Mars as a secret agent, he begins to be attacked first by co-workers,
then his wife and he realizes no one is really who they were.  He was
really a secret agent from Mars who was sent to Earth to help Mars out
because they are not getting the air they need to survive from evil
dictator Cohaggen and his sidekick, Richter (Cox and Ironside).  Soon it
becomes total war, total action, TOTAL RECALL, wow that sounded like a
promo....

Title
Review for Air Force One (1997)
Air Force One A Film Review By Jesse A. Kaplan
cast Harrison Ford, Gary Oldman, Glenn Close, Wendy Crewson, Xander Berkeley
Directed by Wolfgang Petersen
 Before I make any comments about this flic let me say this,
at the last Harrison Ford movie I saw, THE DEVIL'S OWN, I was dismayed
at the show and how mediocre it was.  I began wondering the impossible,
IS Harrison Ford getting to old for action movies?  The verdict, most
definitely not.
 Ford (STAR WARS, RAIDERS OF THE LOST ARK) stars at James Marshall,
The President of The United States who must respond single handily as
his plane, Air Force One, is hijacked by Russian Extremist terrorists led
by Ivan Korshunov, Gary Oldman (THE FIFTH ELEMENT, MURDER IN THE FIRST).
THe terrorists demand the release of the great rebellious Russian leader,
General Alexander Radek.  The President must respond as the free world
is held hostage.
Thinking Marshall has Escaped, Oldman and his thugs put their plan into
action.  However, as a chief of White House staff puts it, "(Marshall)
knows how to fight."  Marshall surprises the terrorists and does what he
can to save the day.
On the ground, Vice President Katherine Bennett (Glenn Close, 101 DALMATIANS),
is a resourceful and knowledgeable leader, helping to bring about the
safety of the hostages which include Marshall's wife and daughter.
The Music is exciting and the shots of AF1 look great.  It seems that no
expense in the air was saved as great shots of the planes are seen.  The
computer special imagings are also quite god and realistic.
Ford is terrific as President.  So many actors have recently tried the
role.  Some look good as Michael Douglas in THE AMERICAN PRESIDENT,
others ridiculous such as Jack Nicholson or Bill Pullman.  Ford acts
diplomatically and distinguished but is also a first rate ass kicker.
However, Oldman steals the show.  As Ivan Korshunov he plays the role almost
too convincingly.  While on screen, I loathed his prescience.  Rude,
Nasty, and evil, Oldman is the best villain in Hollywood.  Close is also
quite good as VP and Xander Berkeley, William H. Macy, and  Wendy Crewson
are excellent in smaller supporting roles.
AIR FORCE ONE checks in at a little over 2 hours and by the end my
adrenaline was flowing.  Certainly the best action movie of the summer
so far, a little better (and even more realistic!!!) then FACE/OFF.
Could the events in this film actually happen?  Probably not.  Is it
far fetched?  Definitely, but its Hollywood and a great Harrison Ford
movie.   I recommend this film to all and give it my top rating of
**** (Rated R for graphic violence and language)
 Copyright 1997 paladin@mhv.net  Jesse A. Kaplan

Title
Review for Batman & Robin (1997)
Cast Arnold Schwarzenegger, Geroge Clooney, Chris O'Donnell, Uma
Thurman, Alicia Silverstone, Elle McPhearson, Michael Gough, Pat Hingle
Directed by:  Joel Schulmaker
I don't even know where to start.  It's this simple:  BATMAN AND ROBIN
is the worst movie I have ever seen in the theatre.  Now I have seen
some bad ones.  CONGO, LAST ACTION HERO, THE BABYSITTER.  But this movie
sucks!!!!!!  I think Ed Wood is spinning in his grave.  I refuse to see
another Joel Schulmaker film again.  Why the hell did they make this
movie anyway?  George Clooney as Batman?  He sucked!!  Arnold
Schwarzengger, in the worst perrormance of his life as Mr. Freeze who
wants to freeze all of Gotham because his wife is dying.  Oh boo-hoo.
Who the hell cares.  Chris O'Donnell in a robin suit with nipples.
AHHH!!!! Someone save me.  Alicia Silverstone as the renegade chick with
attitude who forms yet another partnership in the batcave.  Give me a
break.  Where are the nipples on that costume hmmm?   Uma Thurman as
Poision Ivy? Ohhhh, suductive.  Yuck.  what an awful movie.  Throw in
faithful butler Alfred dying and giving stupid quotes to say along with
Elle McPhearson trying to act as Bruce Wayne's girlfirend and you have
Joel Schulmaker's worst flop ever.  I mean, the guy can direct some good
stuff such as A TIME TO KILL, but this movie is just plain stupid.
Also, I have never see nso much purple in my life!!!!
This is the first movie I am giving a 0.
mmensely by teenagers. I recommend the show to you and give it ***.

Oh yea, YES there is going to be a 5th film of batman.  Rumor has it to
feature the Scarecrow and a female joker of some sort.  Yawn!!  I can't
wait for the Winnie the Pooh film at this rate.
