Authors
Mark Santora
Number of Reviews
8

Title
Review for Highlander II: The Quickening (1991)
     Well, in Miami last night HIGHLANDER 2:THE QUICKENING premiered.
And I must say that I paid no heed to the warnings given by the European
members of this VAX system to the nature of the movie.  I was determined
to give the film a fair chance.  And I did.  However, a fair chance from
a man who loved the first HIGHLANDER immensely could not save it from
the inevitable failure it would end in.
     First, let's start with the title.  Or better yet, the subtitle;
THE QUICKENING.  I still know nothing about it after seeing this film
except that both Ramirez and MacLeod put their fingers in this glowing
orange stuff.  They referred to the quickening a few times and that was
it basically.  There wasn't anything new about it that we didn't learn
in the first film.
     Next let's start with the plot.  In the opening minutes we see a
young MacLeod with another man as they stand in a bunker raising a
shield over the now ozoneless Earth.  We cut to 25 years later, MacLeod
is an old man and sitting in an opera house.  He dreams of being from
the planet Zeist; a super tells us this is 500 years ago.  He was a
rebellion leader with Ramirez.  This is where they dunk their fingers
into the glowing orange stuff.  Than we see the rebellion killed off by
Michael Ironside and the troops of the planet.  Ramirez and MacLeod are
captured and sentenced to life on Earth as immortals until only one
remains.  Once that one is left, he may return to Zeist.  They send them
to Earth.
     Now, 500 years later, they don't want them back.  So they send two
assassins down to earth to kill MacLeod.  They don't.  He dispatches
their heads and becomes young again.  Immediately after this he jumps
into bed with Virginia Madsen, who plays an environmental terrorist who
believes the ozone layer has repaired itself and that the shield can be
turned off.  Her character is worthless and has less depth than a
saucer.
     In fact, the entire plot and dialogue is horrible.  I winced every
time something was said.  It was painful to watch them try to find some
reason in the script.  Fortunately for the writers of the first
HIGHLANDER, they were not involved in this script.  Which is a major
problem with it.  The new script just suffers too many inconsistencies.
A major one is at the end where MacLeod and Ironside are sword-fighting.
MacLeod loses the sword he is using.  In the next scene, all of the sudden
he has the Japanese sword back from the original film.  This sword
hasn't been seen in the entire film.  It makes a cameo for the last two
minutes.
     Connery has some good lines and his return is well-handled.
Granted, they could have made him a little more crucial to the plot, as
he really wasn't needed the way the story was handled.  His death was
worthless and unimportant.  Connery must have been paid very well to
act here.
     Filmically, it lacks greatly from the first film.  The first had
beautiful scndapes and wondrous transitions between scenes, the
fishtank.  This didn't have any.  It was boring to watch.  Not to
mention the sets were horrible.  It was like watching Batman again.
They didn't look real.  They had a fake quality to them.  I was not
impressed.
     As for Russell Mulcahey, when his name appeared before the film,
there was a lot of cheering.  However, now I wonder what possessed him to
accept a script this bad.  Why did he not use his, obviously, talented
camera work?  This film might set back the help that RICOCHET did to his
carrer.
     Stuart Copland did the music.  It was uninteresting and neither
moving nor suspenseful.  A song by Queen, "Who Wants to Live Forever?," is
played by MacLeod on a jukebox in a bar.  Also a piece from Michael
Kamen is used when Madsen is going through MacLeod's attic.  Here we
Americans get to see a still picture of MacLeod in WWII, the scene
deleted for HIGHLANDER's original release here.  Aside from that, there
is nothing special musically.
     I don't think I can stress how unimpressed and disappointed I was by
HIGHLANDER II: THE QUICKENING.  I had extremely high hopes that the film
would at least bear some resemblance to the original.  It does not.  If
you loved the first one, you can wait to see H2 on video.  You won't
miss much.  Trust me.  There is no "MAGIC" in HIGHLANDER 2.  Do
something good with your money, go purchase the original.
 The opinions expressed in this review are my own and I have no 
affiliations with the film in any way.

Title
Review for Star Trek VI: The Undiscovered Country (1991)
[I am posting five reviews of STAR TREK VI.  I could easily swamp the group
with reviews of this movie, so I will probably not post any more unless
they say something very different than those posted here (e.g., a review
of the fashions in STAR TREK VI :-) ).  Followups are directed to
rec.arts.startrek to keep the discussion in the appropriate group.
-Moderator]
     Okay, so the last(?) Star Trek film has opened.  Well to start off 
with something like, it's better than TREK V would be kind of be like
saying TREK II was better than I.  Anyway, it opens, and  deserves to
open big.
     We start approximately three years after TREK V, or at least three
years since Sulu took over command of the Excelsior.  Anyway, a Klingon
moon explodes and this sets the stage for the Klingons coming to the
Federation for help, and peace.  Then Spock volunteers the Enterprise
and Kirk to go to meet the Klingons.  However, when the Klingon ship is
attacked, Kirk is blamed.  Bones and Kirk beam over to help the wounded
and are accused of killing the Klingon Diplomat.
     Plot-wise, the story moves quickly in TREK VI.  This I give credit
to the wise mind of Nicholas Meyer.  Meyer has had his hand in the two
biggest successes in the TREK movie series (II and IV).  His direction
is obviously geared toward the intensity of the scenes.  He also manages
to capture a little of the claustrophobic feel that space and the
Enterprise has.
     The sets, even the redressed Next Generation ones, are quite good.
There is one I must take issue with, however.  The design of the 
Klingon "Hoth" planet prison.  I found it very human.  It lacked any of
the feel that would be associated with the Klingon Empire that we have
seen before.  I would also like to take this time to make point with
the fact that I found the time spent on the planet too short.  It in
fact just managed to get by.  There was not a lot of time associating
it to any real prison.
     Michael Dorn in TREK VI is wasted.  He is on the screen for a 
matter of minutes.  It is not that his character was bad.  It was just
that all of the sudden he was there.  There is no background for WHY he
is there.  I guess it was left on the cutting room floor.
     The special effects, which I took heavy issue with in TREK V, are
top-notch ILM effects.  There are the standard effects, including a
great one of the Enterprise getting whipped by a photon torpedo.  But
there are also some great shots when some imitation Federation Marines
go around killing Klingons and their floating blood, which by the way is
computer-generated.
     The Music: No film review would be complete without a quick listen
to the music.  Anyway, the music by Cliff Eidelman is very good.  It
takes off in a new direction from the previous scores by Jerry
Goldsmith, James Horner, and Leonard Rosenman.  Remember that it was
Meyer who brought on Horner who composed, I believe, my favorite music
from the STAR TREK series (II and III).  My only problem with the score
for TREK VI, was the fact that the traditional fanfare that is *always*
before the opening of the films was curiously absent.  The score would
have been greatly enhanced by the use of it.
     Overall, I find STAR TREK VI: THE UNDISCOVERED COUNTRY to be
a worthy of the fandom that Star Trek has created over the years.
While I find it to be lacking sometimes, all films do.  This is 
not the best of the series--see STAR TREK II for that--this
is high up there.  And to paraphrase one of my favorite quotes
from another Trek film, "...they'll never be gone, as long as
we remember them."

Title
Review for Wayne's World (1992)
     Tonight I got a chance to see an advance screening of WAYNE'S
WORLD.   Based on the sometimes comical skit on SATURDAY NIGHT LIVE, I
had mixed feelings going into this film.  But, two minutes into the
film, I was laughing my ass off.  This film is really funny.
     Quick Summary:  Wayne has a public access television show he runs
from his basement.  Garth is is best friend and sidekick on the show.
The show is really popular in their small town.  A big time producer
(Rob Lowe) sees the show.  He decides to buy the show and make it more
commercial.  By the way, Rob Lowe is the "bad" guy in this film, but you
knew that already I'm sure.
     Both Wayne and Garth address the camera directly.  They do it
really well too.  Fortunately they don't overuse this and allow a small
story to develop around the characters.  They also take time out to poke
fun at everyone.  Reebok, Pizza Hut, Nuprin, ... nobody is too far away
to attack.   But they do it smartly and do not insult the audience's
intelligence.
     Along the way, Wayne falls in love with a female rock singer.  Rob
Lowe attempts to steal her away.  This leads to a scene with Alice
Cooper as they sir around and discuss the philosophy of the town of
Milwaukee.   And while in Milwaukee, they don't forget to pay tribute to
the two most famous people in Milwaukee, Laverene and Shirley.  These
scenes are really great.  There is also a great scene where Wayne,
Garth, and their three crew members are driving down the street singing
"Bohemian Rhapsody."  It is really good.
     I don't want to give anything away, which is why I am being so
vague.   What I will say is that you should look for cameos by Ione Sky,
Robert Patrick (grin), Ed O'Neil, and Chris Farley.  They all play
interesting roles.
     How would I rate this movie?  It is really funny.  It is just the
type of mindless humor that is what makes films fun.  Don't expect to
see any Oscar nominations, even though they even poke fun at that, just
expect a good time.

Title
Review for Memoirs of an Invisible Man (1992)
     The teaming up of John Carpenter and Chevy Chase, sounds
interesting, doesn't it?  Well, I was uniquely intrigued.  I am not a
very big Chevy Chase fan.  But, because I am a very big fan of
Mr. Carpenter's work, I decided that I would give the film a chance.
Here are my findings.
     First, this is not a typical John Carpenter film.  There are no
underlying messages in the film.  There are no clever subtexts for the
audience to wrestle with.  I must admit, it threw me.  But as soon as I
realized that the film was simply for enjoyment, I started to get into
the film.
     I must admit, although Chevy Chase's recent films have recently
made me quite weary of him, this should do a great deal to revitalize
his carrer.  First, he plays the movie straight.  Granted, he should
have been doing this years ago, but the film benefits from it.  Of
course, playing an invisible man, Chevy gets to walk and bump into
things for a little slapstick.  But it is part of the film's natural
progress.
     Here is a quick plot summary.  Chevy Chase plays an investment
banker who meets Daryl Hannah one night.  They hit it off.  Anyway,
after she leaves, he gets drunk.  The next morning he has a lecture to
attend.  When he arrives hung over, he goes to find a bathroom.  Chevy
falls asleep in a sauna.  An accident makes the science lab loose
control over their machinery and causes portions of the building to
appear invisible.  This is a *great* effect, from the fun guys at ILM.
Anyway, when some CIA guys find out about him, headed by Sam Neill, they
instantly start out after him.
     The effects are good.  The mirror images of Chevy are not overused
in an attempt to make him appear invisible (oxymoron).  John Carpenter's
direction is again top-notch.  I believe that this is his biggest studio
film since BIG TROUBLE IN LITTLE CHINA (a personal favorite).

Title
Review for Lethal Weapon 3 (1992)
     It has been a couple of years since we last saw Riggs and Murtaugh
battle the forces of evil.  And now they are back to battle them once
again.  Sounds like fun, don't it?
     First off, it is refreshing to see the two actors, Mel Gibson and
Danny Glover, back at work in my favorite roles of theirs.  The two
always look like they are having fun in these rolls.  Even as the
characters progress, it is easy to see how the relationship between the
two actors and characters has developed.
     As for the characters in the third installment of the "Lethal
Weapon" films, they face their most difficult challenge yet, Murtaugh's
retirement.
     Yes, sports fans, the film opens with Murtaugh being only eight
days from retirement.  But there is one great adventure left for them.
In LETHAL WEAPON 3 they face an ex-cop who has stolen confiscated guns
and is selling them back to the streets.  Let's also not forget that
there are armor-piercing bullets to be had throughout this movie.
     As required, Mel Gibson has a love interest in this film, played by
Rene Russo.  She plays an internal affairs cop who is the female version
of Riggs.  She loves the Three Stooges, is well versed in martial arts,
and can go body scar for body scar with Riggs.  This leads to the
required love-making scene.
     Joe Pesci is back as Leo Getz.  Now he is a real estate broker
trying to sell Murtaugh's house so they can move after his retirement.
He is also the source of information about yet another bad guy.  This
leads to a great scene during a King's hockey game and hospital scene.
Joe Pesci is not in the film a lot, but does play a principal part in
the storyline.
     What LETHAL WEAPON 3 lacks, however, is an interesting bad guy.  In
both the first and second film, the bad guys were forces to contend
with.  In LETHAL WEAPON 3, he is little more than a pain in the ass with
a gun.  He is not a real challenge for the two and in fact is found a
little too easy.  I would have preferred a little more challenge to him.
     Also what the film misses is the dark look of the first two.  They
had a dark feel to them that added to the excitement and suspense.  Now
they play the film for laughs and gags while having a lot of things
blowing up around them.  I am not saying this is bad--watch for a great
scene when they are busted down to patrolmen and catch a jaywalker.
This is a classic scene.
     LETHAL WEAPON 3 also attempts to undertake the children with guns
theme.   Murtaugh kills a 15-year-old boy, who happens to be a friend of
his son's, in self defense.  There is drama.  In fact until the glasses
and hat are removed from the body people believe it to be his own son.
This would have seriously crippled the film.
     The action is there.  The gags are there.  It is just the overall
feel of the first two that is not.  There is something different, and it
is entertaining, but not great.  The film is good entertainment.  Too
bad it is nothing more.
      ALSO STAY THROUGH THE CREDITS AT THE END OF THE FILM.  There is a
sight gag at the end worth hanging around for.

Title
Review for Last Boy Scout, The (1991)
     I saw a preview of this film last Saturday with a sell out crowd.  
Needless to say, the crowd was a little rowdy.  Anyway, the crowd will
not influence this review.
     Well, this film is the latest "buddy" film from writer Shane
Black (of LETHAL WEAPON fame).  Bruce Willis plays an ex-Secret Service
guy who now owns his own private investigators license.  Damon Wayans
plays an ex-football quarterback who was banned from the game for drug
use.   Basically, these two get teamed up when Bruce is put on a case to
watch an exotic dancer who just happens to be Daymon's girlfriend.  She
bites it and then it is off to find the bad guys.  The bad guys are
people who want to legalize sport gambling.  Hence Daymon gets something
to do than act stupid.
     Plot wise the film holds together like all other action films.  No
need to get really specific, but it works.  There is one problem.  The
direction, by Tony Scott is horrible.  Tony Scott's previous work,
including TOP GUN, REVENGE, BEVERLY HILLS COP II, and DAYS OF BLUNDER
(oh, that's THUNDER, isn't it?), all headed towards a dark filmic
style.  Well, here he goes overboard.  It just kills the film.  There
are parts that you want to scream at the screen for the idiot to put a
few lights on so we can see what is going on.  The direction seriously
impairs the film.
      Also, I will take *serious* issue with the opening credits.  I am
about to get technical on you.  The film is shot scope, a ratio of 2.35
to 1.  In other words, it uses the full screen.  However, the opening
credits are shot on a 1.33 to 1 ratio (that's the TV ration folks).  What
does all this mean?  It means that when they go to transfer this to
videotape it will just go along smoothly.  Now some will say that it is
parody off the Monday Night Football song as that is what type of song
Bill Meadly sings.  But they just seemed so cheap.  I felt cheated.
This did not put me in a good mood to start off this film.
     Now, let's not forget character--in a Tony Scott film?  Anyway,
Bruce's wife and kid hate him because he is such a sleaze.  This sets up
nicely for the end of the film reunion with family  giving it a second
try.  And the ending is so-o-o set up for a sequel.
      Michael Kamen did the score.  It reminded me a great deal of his
DIE HARD music.  Okay, there were some really nice parts, but hey, it's
an action flick.  No need for amazing musical treats like Lawrence of
Arabia.  If Michael Kamen decides to do another action flick, I hope he
decides to use some new instruments and refrains.
      Overall, the movie just makes it.  Hampered by the direction and
the somewhat predictable script, it is an okay action flick.  Bruce
Willis should really think about doing that third DIE HARD film, know
what I mean?  Damon Wayans should come out ahead of himself.  He does a
pretty good job with his shallow character.  But Tony Scott has got to
lay off the dark lensing.  It is just too much.  Take a date.  Have a
mindless evening.  Other people will.  Or save your money and see THE
ADDAMS FAMILY, BEAUTY AND THE BEAST, and STAR TREK VI.  

Title
Review for Twenty-One (1991)
     The film TWENTY-ONE is an excellent piece of filmmaking.  In all
respects, this film stands as one of the best films I have seen this
fall season as most of the film releases have been fallen short of many 
expectations.  But this film's simple storyline, a 21-year-old British
woman's look back at her love life, is charming, funny, and even a
little sad.
     The lead character is played by Patsy Kensit, who should be
remembered from LETHAL WEAPON 2.  She is quite excellent in the role of
Katie, a distraught, cynical woman who is already fed up with life at
21.  And this role will undoubtedly bring many scripts to her door.
     The film starts off in New York City.  Here Katie is living in her
very nice apartment, by herself, and converses directly with the
camera.  This creates a sense of intimacy with the character of Katie.
Katie is quite frank.  She says what is on her mind.  In the course of
the film she talks about sex, her parents, her friends, lovers, and
herself.
     Katie's love life includes an affair with a married man whom he
flirts with at his wedding.  This affair is completely a sex-oriented one.
Another affair is with a heroin addict.  This is an affair of love,
with no sex.  Hence her affair with the married man.  This is all
handled quite well without any "Hollywoodizing" of the sex scenes.  This
is an adult-themed film, and it is treated accordingly.
     TWENTY-ONE is an excellent film.  It stands alone in its field, for
lack of any other flims like it at present.  Patsy Kensit controls the
film with a high degree of screen magnetism.  The rest of the cast
supports her character accordingly and the entire cast plays off
each other very well.  This is an excellent film and is not one to be
missed.

Title
Review for Back in the U.S.S.R. (1992)
     Tonight I had the good fortune to see a preview of this new film.
I must admit I was a little turned off by the name, stolen from the
Beatle's song, which by the way does not even appear in the film.  But
from the start you come to realize that this film is not the cheesy-
looking film depicted in the horrible advertising campaign.
     The film is of high caliber.  The script and acting are all first
rate.  The cinematography is beautiful.  The entire film was shot in
Russia, which attributes to the look of the film.  (We also get a look at
the Moscow McDonald's!)  I am sure that Roman Polanski's acting forces
were also felt behind the camera.
      The plot revolves around a missing artwork (icon) that is recovered
by the church in the opening minutes.  Stolen just minutes later, the
film becomes a chase to find it.  There are plenty of plot twists and of
course, the occasional chase, but it is the story and characters that
hold the film together.
      As I mentioned before, the film does not feature the Beatle song
which shares the same name of the film.  In fact, there is no rock music
except in the end credits, which is okay with me.  The orchestrational
score for the film is a must hear.  It is a definite purchase for all
those soundtrack collectors out there.
     In the end, I recommend this film.  It is a good time and most
importantly it moves along nicely and uses its time wisely.  Do not
think of this as a simple film.  It is not.  But I consider it the first
film of 1992 that is worth seeing.
