Authors
Matt Pusateri
Number of Reviews
3

Title
Review for Austin Powers: The Spy Who Shagged Me (1999)
FILM REVIEW: Austin Powers: The Spy Who Shagged Me (1999)
Austin Powers has gone mainstream. The original Austin Powers: International
Man of Mystery came from nowhere. Saturday Night Live alum Mike Myers
gambled with a quirky concept and a ridiculous character and won. It is one
of the funniest movies of the decade and has become an instant classic. In
contrast, a monstrous marketing campaign and unavoidable hype preceded
Austin Powers: The Spy Who Shagged Me. Suddenly, white bread top-40 radio
announcers and cheesy TV morning show hosts are making reference to
Powerisms such as "groovy, baby" and "shagadelic." Myers' unlikely cult hero
is pasted on billboards, bus stop signs, and on magazine ads everywhere.
Unfortunately, while The Spy Who Shagged Me is packed with laughs, it is a
far less clever and satisfying than the original.
The Spy Who Shagged Me starts where the first film left off, with Powers and
his new bride, Vanessa Kensington (Elizabeth Hurley), on their honeymoon.
Without spoiling the start of the film, I'll only say that things don't work
out well for the newlyweds, and very quickly, Powers is back in action and
single again. And it's not a minute too soon, because Dr. Evil is also back,
scheming once again to dominate the globe. He is joined this time by a
temperamental miniature clone of himself, "Mini-Me." Dr. Evil hatches a new
world-domination plot centered around eliminating Powers' interference by
going back in time and "stealing his Mojo" while also setting up a powerful
laser on the moon. Powers follows Dr. Evil back to the sixties, and, with
the help of a gorgeous CIA agent, Felicity Shagwell (Heather Graham), tries
to once more thwart Dr. Evil's diabolical schemes.
Mike Myers' performance is once again brilliant as both lead roles. His
comic timing, facial expressions, and willingness to do anything for a laugh
set him alongside Jim Carrey one of the funniest entertainers today. Graham,
sadly, is a disappointment. Unlike Hurley, Graham doesn't complement Myers
very well. As Vanessa Kensington, Hurley provided a contrast and a challenge
to Powers, while Shagwell is just a good-looking bimbo who wants to sleep
with Powers. She has some good lines, but they are all just snappy come-ons
instead of clever exchanges. Graham looks great in Bond-girl outfits, but
they gave her Bond-girl airiness as well.
And yet, unlike the original Austin Powers, Myers' physical comedy and wacky
characters drive The Spy Who Shagged Me, without the support of a decent
story. The Spy Who Shagged Me abandons the fundamental premise of the
original – that Austin Powers, and his arch-nemesis, Dr. Evil, were fish out
of water, 1960s characters thrust into the vastly different world of the
late 1990s. Much of the humor in the original Austin Powers film came from
Dr. Evil and Austin Powers' struggles to adjust to today's attitudes and
realities. In place of a decent story, The Spy Who Shagged Me substitutes
juvenile bathroom humor. As if to try and out-do There's Something About
Mary, this film has more than its share of bathroom humor – a shame, since
the original was funnier without anywhere near as many junior-high gags.
Without the conflict of Powers not fitting in, the feel of the film shifts.
Whereas the recurring joke in the first film was that Powers was an
unattractive, ridiculously dressed, hairy pervert who was hopelessly
out-of-date, in The Spy Who Shagged Me, he has become fashionable,
irresistible to women, and in-tune with the times. Taking Powers and Evil
back to the 1960s doesn't add much to the story. Except for the outfits and
cars, most of the plot and story would have worked fine in the present day.
Still, while imperfect, The Spy Who Shagged Me is a lot of fun. It's worth
the ticket price just to see the opening credit sequence (words can't do it
justice), Dr. Evil's appearance on the Jerry Springer show, and any of Dr.
Evil's tirades against his "not-evil-enough" son, Scott Evil (Seth Green).
Also, the film does well by not taking itself too seriously. In one scene,
as Powers prepares to go back in time to stop Dr. Evil, he begins asking the
Chief of British Intelligence, Basil Exposition (Michael York), about the
paradoxes and implications of his impact on the flow of time if he goes back
to the sixties. York tells Powers not to worry about it and just "do what
you always do: have a good time," then turns to the camera and says to the
audience, "and that goes for you too!" Myers looks at the camera as well and
nods in agreement.
The Spy Who Shagged Me offers a lot of laughs, but the film feels more like
a long string of skits and memorable lines rather than a complete movie. It'
s an enjoyable romp, but a far cry from its classic predecessor.
Copyright 1999 Matt Pusateri
Check out other film reviews, game reviews, features, and columns at The
Separate Radio Volume Knob (http://www.pusateri.org/knob.htm)

Title
Review for Star Wars: Episode I - The Phantom Menace (1999)
STAR WARS: EPISODE 1 - THE PHANTOM MENACE (1999)
Few movies evoke nostalgia, enthusiasm, and affection like George Lucas'
1977 classic, Star Wars.   The original blockbuster film and its two sequels
not only evoked wonder and passion in a generation of filmgoers, but has
deeply entrenched itself in American pop culture. Arguably, more Americans
today can explain what "The Force" or a "Jedi" is than a budget deficit or a
Serb.
So 22 years after the release of the original, and 16 years since the third
film, The Return of the Jedi, how can any new Star Wars film withstand the
weight of incomparable expectations and anticipation?  Can a new storyline
and a new cast of characters possibly compete with the legends of the first
trilogy - Luke, Han Solo, and Darth Vader -all cultural icons?  Against this
challenge, the fourth Star Wars film, Episode One: The Phantom Menace hit
the screens last week. And despite some early critical reviews in the major
media, the film is neither a flop nor a disappointment.  While The Phantom
Menace is certainly not the finest film in the series, it is nonetheless
engaging, exciting, and visually breathtaking.  It is a worthy sequel  - er,
prequel - to the original Star Wars films.
The Phantom Menace takes place decades before the setting of original films.
As the film opens, Obi-Wan Kenobi (Ewan McGregor), the wise old master who
introduced Luke to the Force in the original Star Wars, is only a young Jedi
apprentice, still learning from his fellow Jedi and instructor, Qui-Gon Jinn
(Liam Neeson).  The Republic government has sent the two Jedi to settle a
trade dispute that has developed into a blockade of the planet Naboo by a
shifty Trade Federation.  The Jedi quickly find themselves not in
negotiations, but in the middle of a planetary invasion, rushing to protect
Naboo's young Queen Amidala (Natalie Portman).  Later, after eventually
rescuing Amidala and helping her escape Naboo, they are forced to stop at
Tatooine to repair their battle-damaged ship before bringing her to the
Galactic Senate to make an appeal for justice.  On Tatooine, Qui-Gon
discovers a young slave boy, Anakin Skywalker (Jake Lloyd), who not only can
help them get the parts they need, but displays uncanny intelligence,
insight, and instincts.  Qui-Gon senses the child is "unusually strong" with
the Force and begins to suspect that he may be "the One" prophesized to
"bring balance to the Force."  As anyone who has watched the original Star
Wars trilogy knows, far from being a galactic savior, the innocent-looking
9-year-old will in time become the ruthless Darth Vader. Complicating
matters further is a mysterious hooded figure, Darth Sidious, is behind the
trade blockade and invasion of Naboo, and sends out a lethal apprentice,
Darth Maul, to find and capture Queen Amidala.  While Amidala and the Jedi
fight to save her planet, they soon also have to deal with the deadly and
relentless Darth Maul.
If the plot sounds a bit complicated, it is. The Phantom Menace not only
introduces an earlier generation of characters and an immediate crisis, but
sets up the foundation for the events that will eventually lead to the fall
of the Republic, the demise of the Jedi knights, Anakin's turn to evil, and
the rise of the dark Empire of original trilogy.  But the complexity is not
overwhelming.  The story moves quickly, with the only drawback being that
many questions, predictably, remain unanswered at the end of the film,
setting the stage for the next episode.  One of the reasons the film's story
seems hazy is not that it is too confusing, but too unfocused.  It's unclear
whose story Phantom Menace is.  In the original trilogy, the movies were
clearly Luke's story, with the stories centering around his growth from
farmboy to rebel hero to Jedi knight.  But it's unclear whether this new
film is Anakin's story or Obi-Wan's.
If this trilogy is centered on Anakin, it's a shaky foundation.  Lloyd, like
many child actors, lacks the subtle acting skills of adult performers, and
as a result, his character seems shallow and unimpressive.  On screen, we
see nothing that suggests a dark side lurking underneath his little-boy
face, or for that matter, any presence that would make him seem so special
that Qui-Gon is willing to believe he is "the One."  The rest of the cast
does fine, though they often work with some iffy dialogue by Lucas. Neeson
is perfect as an aging Jedi knight. McGregor is well-cast as Obi-Wan and
conveys a balance of youthful energy and calm sensibility.  Portman fits the
role of a young queen well, but her lines were often very formal, giving her
little room to give her character much personality.
The biggest problem with The Phantom Menace is not the plot or the
characters, but the interaction between them.  Individually, the characters
in this new film are no less developed than those in the original Star Wars,
and the storyline is not more confusing than previous films in the series.
But unlike the previous trilogy, Lucas doesn't do as good of a job playing
the characters off one another.  In Star Wars, there were immediate
contrasts and memorable exchanges between Luke and Han, Han and Obi-Wan, and
Leia and Luke.  The ensemble played off each other and immediately showed
their distinct attitudes and personalities.  In the sequence in where Luke,
Han, and Chewbacca attempt to rescue Leia from her cell on the Death Star,
the audience learns a lot about all four characters in the ways they react
to the immediate problems and each other.  There is no comparable sequence
in The Phantom Menace to flesh out the characters and their relationships
with each other.  Individually, they are interesting characters with clear
motivations and interests, but Lucas develops little chemistry or tension
between the them.  This is perhaps the most glaring weakness of this film,
and is probably the reason it has disappointed many reviewers.
But despite the need for a richer dialogue and stronger character
interaction, the film is still very engaging.  Many of the wonderful
elements of Lucas' previous films make The Phantom Menace both memorable and
entertaining.
First, of course, is the remarkably rich and imaginative universe Lucas
creates.  The characters visit magical underwater cities, evade
dinosaur-sized sea monsters, fight battle droids and menacing "destroyers"
on Venetian-looking planet of Naboo, watch a spectacular event, part
Roman-chariot race, part Nascar circuit, on the arid desert planet of
Tatooine, then head to Corsucant, the gothic urban capital of the Republic
and home to the Galactic Senate and the Jedi Council.  Each location is
elaborate and complex.  Lucas never settles for vague ideas about the look
of his settings, he creates rich, spectacular landscapes, palaces, and
skylines. Most of the new special effects in his re-released Special Edition
trilogy in 1997 were changes that allowed him to give the earlier movies the
look and feel that just weren't possible when the films were made.
More than ever, in this new film, Lucas' universe is filled with a menagerie
of creatures, robots with personalities, and a supporting cast of aliens who
interact with the main characters.  The best such character is Watto, a
greedy Tatooine junk dealer who owns Anakin and his mother as slaves.  Watto
has a scratchy Italian voice and a short, paunchy body with oddly mismatched
wings that flutter like a hummingbird as he floats around the room.  Of all
the computer-generated characters in the film, Watto is the best done and
most enjoyable.
Speaking of computer-generated characters, no review of The Phantom Menace
is complete without mentioning the most controversial figure in the film:
Jar Jar Binks.  With more than 80 minutes of screen time, Jar Jar is the
realization of George Lucas' dream to include a fully computer-generated
character into the cast of the new trilogy.  Jar Jar, a clumsy amphibian and
member of the Gungan race, literally stumbles his way into the path of the
Jedi knights early in the film and becomes Qui Jon's accidental sidekick.
Jar Jar usually performs a comic-relief role in the film, lightening scenes
with his mishaps and inability to stay out of trouble.  The animation of Jar
Jar is nearly seamless, and he interacts with the characters throughout the
film as if he were really on the set with the actors.  However, despite the
technological magic that makes his character possible, Jar Jar isn't
completely convincing.  He still moves and sounds too much like a cartoon to
blend into a scene.  Throughout the movie, Jar Jar never transcends a "Roger
Rabbit"-like presence.  You accept that he's there, but you never lose sight
of the fact that he is an animated character.  Initially, I found Jar Jar
annoying, but grew to enjoy the humor he added to the film. On my second
viewing of the film, Jar Jar was a lot of fun and I didn't mind him at all.
A second reason this film continues the fine tradition of Star Wars movies
is that the film is replete with humor and small details that flesh out the
world Lucas creates.  Despite all the film's struggles between good and
evil, and the sober musings about one's destiny and "the Force," like all
Star Wars films, The Phantom Menace never takes itself too seriously.
Fortunately, Lucas hasn't lost sight of the fact that his films are
entertainment, not high art.   From the bumbling Jar Jar, to a one-man,
two-headed announcer team calling the action at the film's thrilling
pod-race sequence, to a cameo appearance by E.T. in the film, The Phantom
Menace is simply a lot of fun, with lots of half-hidden jokes and humor that
can easily be missed.
And finally, The Phantom Menace works because, as in all his films, there is
no shortage of speed and action.  From beginning to end, there are
light-saber battles, hair-raising chases, and thrilling duels between good
and evil.  The pod-race sequence on Tatooine is one of the most entertaining
and exciting scenes in any Star Wars film, and the final showdown between
Obi-Wan, Qui-Gon, and Darth Maul is arguably the best choreographed, most
thrilling fight sequence Lucas has filmed.
The Phantom Menace won't win any major Oscars.  It probably won't beat
Titanic's box office record.  And it's not even the best Star Wars film (I'd
put it third, after the original and The Empire Strikes Back).  But it's an
exciting and entertaining film, far better than your typical summer
blockbuster.  The film can't live up to it's hype - no film, not even the
original Star Wars, could have done that.  But it's still worth seeing...
probably more than once.
Copyright 1999 Matt Pusateri
Check out other film reviews, game reviews, features, and columns at The
Separate Radio Volume Knob (http://www.pusateri.org/knob.htm)

Title
Review for Matrix, The (1999)
With many big-budget science fiction films, great ideas are often wasted by
bad scripts, cheesy plot twists, and, terrible acting. The Fifth Element,
The Abyss, and Godzilla had great concepts squandered by bad acting,
writing, or both. At first glance, The Matrix, Larry & Andy Wachowski's
sci-fi/kung-fu/shoot-em-up spectacular, looks like a prime candidate to join
the list of high-concept bad movies, especially with dopey Keanu Reeves in
the leading role. But despite high levels of cheese and gaudy dialogue, The
Matrix works. It's an uncanny blend of action and surreal fantasy that
borrows from dozens of other films (most obviously the Terminator films,
Star Wars, and Total Recall), but remains refreshingly original and
interesting throughout.
Reeves plays Neo, a computer hacker who stumbles into an initially
bewildering set of encounters with "Trinity" (Carrie-Anne Moss), a rival
hacker who has supernatural powers and stunning good looks, a unseen,
omniscient cult figure known as "Morpheus" (Lawrence Fishburne), and a trio
of creepy men in dark suits who act like IRS agents from Hell. Neo quickly
learns that the world he has known all his life is not what it seems.
Moreover, he discovers that the grim, bleak world he is introduced to has
been waiting for him to save it. Neo is reluctant to assume the role of
messiah, with grave doubts that he is actually "The One" prophesized to come
and save the world.
Reluctant or not, what follows is a mix of Hong Kong-style slow-motion
shootouts, surreal dream sequences, high speed chases, and comic book
Kung-Fu fights. The film also raises interesting philosophical questions
about reality. How exactly do you know what is real and what is in your
mind? And if the real world were much harsher and grim than a fantasy one
you were living in, would you want to face the true world or continue to
live in a more comfortable illusion? Unfortunately, The Matrix doesn't
provide many answers to the questions it raises, but at least it puts some
ideas behind all the explosions, shoot-outs, and flying roundhouse kicks.
Perhaps stealing the entire show in The Matrix is Australian actor Hugo
Weaving, who plays Agent Smith, the leader of the creepy agents in
sunglasses and suits who seem capable of being anywhere and doing anything
to stop Neo and friends from destabilizing the Matrix. Weaving's stony
appearance, deadpan voice, and chilling comments put a grim human face on
the haunting, evil technological force that controls the Matrix. Like Robert
Patrick as the shapeshifting T-1000 Terminator in Terminator 2: Judgement
Day, Weaving is more frightening than any monstrous alien or homicidal robot
because, despite his power and seeming invincibility, he looks ordinary,
even scrawny. Weaving embodies his role with a memorably chilling presence.
The film features some truly breathtaking special effects and stylish
cinematography. It seems to be deliberately kitchy, with stylized fight
sequences directed by Hong Kong stunt specialist Wo Ping that reportedly
required months of martial arts training by the actors. In a few scenes, the
posing and posturing is unintentionally funny. Just seeing Keanu Reeves
engaging in serious Kung Fu is a bit jarring. However, with the comic-book
style and tone of the film, you can sustain willing disbelief long enough to
enjoy the ride without losing patience.
The Matrix isn't a classic. Its open-ended and confusing conclusion raises
more questions than it answers. It fails to resolve many of its own plot
twists and philosophical questions. It also relies on some conventional
sentimentality to save the hero - the kind of shmaltzy feel-good goo that
most of the film avoids. Reportedly, the producers have high hopes for the
film being the first in a trilogy and have already begun work on the story
for the sequel. Unfortunately, audiences deserve a little more than a vague
sense that the story will continue in the future. The Matrix is an fun,
enjoyable diversion, like a big puff of cotton candy at a carnival. Just
don't be surprised half an hour later when you still feel a little hungry.
Check out other film reviews, game reviews, features, and columns at The
Separate Radio Volume Knob (http://www.pusateri.org/knob.htm)
