Authors
Atul Khare
Number of Reviews
3

Title
Review for Seul contre tous (1998)
"Tour de force", would be classic euphemism for this film which hits
you with the force of a fifteen pound sledgehammer smashing into your
skull.
Well, the movie is about a butcher in Paris (superbly played by
Philippe Nahon) who has been released from prison following a stint on
assault charges (for stabbing an innocent person whom he suspected of
trying to rape his autistic daughter) and finds himself alone, jobless,
angry and depressed. He meets a fat salon keeper, who becomes his
mistress, and they move out to the country, but let's say that things
don't quite work out for them.
So, he returns to Paris in the hope of finding a job, but that proves
to be a futile exercise. All his friends are either destitute or don't
care a damn about him. Thus begins his long and nihilistic journey to
the edge of the abyss, and possibly beyond, but that's for you to judge
at the end of the film. As usual, I won't go into the details of what
transpires as it spoils the experience of people who haven't watched
the film yet.
Suffice it to say the director Gaspar Noé, who wrote, directed (and I
think shot, and edited it as well), has created a brilliant, shocking,
and unforgettable film, certainly one the year's best, IMO.
However, be warned, be very warned, that this isn't a film for the
squeamish, weak hearted and such, and even people who could stand
movies like "Happiness", might have a hard time sitting through it. The
film is disturbing on even on a physical level, and the loud gunshots
that accompany several quick cuts can be particularly unsettling.

Title
Review for Earth (1998)
It is impossible to review Earth without giving some background into
the events that precipitated one of the worst holocausts that mankind
has seen. It was 1947, and Britain, ravaged by World War II was faced
with the unimaginable: The sun was finally setting on the empire, and
the new labour prime minister, Atlee, had decided to relinquish the
treasured Jewel in the Crown, India. Lord Mountbatten, the last Viceroy
to India, was assigned the task of overseeing this onerous task. It was
decided that the British raj would be vivisected into two separate
entities along religious lines: India and Pakistan and what resulted
was one of the largest migrations that history has witnessed. Twelve
million  Hindus, Sikhs and Moslems crossed the borders of the
northwestern part of the Indian subcontinent, and an estimated one
million lost their lives in the massacre that ensued.
Deepa Mehta's powerful new film, Earth (Hindi / Urdu with English
subtitles), is the second installment of a trilogy, the previous one
being the acclaimed Fire. The movie is based on the novel "Cracking
India" by Bapsi Sidhwa, and is set in Lahore in late 1947. It is
narrated mainly from the viewpoint of its eight year old protagonist,
Lenny, played by newcomer, Maia Sethna. Lenny's parents are Pharsees --
a fire worshipping community that traces its origins to Persia -- and
are therefore "neutral", in sense that they do not belong to the either
of the three communities involved in the conflict. Lenny's Hindu Ayah
(nanny) Shanta, played by the duskily beautiful Nandita Das, has
suitors from all communities, notably, Ice Candy Wala (ice candy man)
Dil Nawaz, played by Bollywood matinee idol Aamir Khan, and Molish Man
(the masseur) Hasan,  played by newcomer Rahul Khanna.
The fact that the three communities existed in an atmosphere of
cordial brotherhood is well captured by the depiction of the kite
flying spring festival. Hindus, Sikhs, and Muslims, intermingle with
one another and their relationships are so cordial that they even makes
jokes about dietary choices.
However, when the partition is announced,  the same people who had
coexisted in a peaceful brotherhood for centuries now realize the
prospect of usurping each other's land and property in the name of
religion. The mutual mistrust that had been festering below the surface
only adds fuel to the fire, and frenzied mobs from all communities
engage in acts of unspeakable savagery.  In one of the best and most
harrowing scenes in the film, an anxious crowd awaits a belated train
of Moslem refugees from Gurdaspur on the Indian side of the border. A
pall of gloom falls as the train ominously chugs into the station,
and...
Reprisals follow,  terror grips the region, and a mass exodus -- Hindus
and Sikhs to India and Moslems to Pakistan begins. Others, who have no
choice decide to convert to a different religion, or face the
inevitable.
We watch in horror as the ten year old daughter of a sweeper is married
off to an old dwarf to convert the family to Christianity. All this in
an atmosphere of gaiety replete with song and dance, and as a character
in the film comments, "Fear makes all of us to abandon reason". Another
character converts to Islam to save himself, and in one of the most
excruciating scenes in the film, is forced to show "proof" of his
religious identity by a mob baying for blood.
The cast in earth is uniformly good, and Nandita Das and Maia Sethna
are outstanding in their roles.  IMO, it a must see film for anyone
interested in the history of the Indian subcontinent, but be warned
that it isn't an easy movie to watch,  and the ending is devastating.

Title
Review for Joe the King (1999)
In a way Joe the King is a movie that feels too bad to be true :
surely, it couldn't be happening at this time, and definitely not in
this country?
Well, that's a question for the audience to answer, and film depicts
the plight of its 14 year old character, Joe Henry, well played by Noah
Fleiss. It's impossible to ignore the similarities with Truffaut's 400
Blows while watching the film, but to its credit, the story is told in
an uncompromising fashion without any sentimental moralizing baggage.
Joe's absentee father -- convincingly played by Van Kilmer (with a beer
belly and all) -- is an alcoholic janitor who works at his school. Joe
is subject to countless taunting and humiliation revolving around this
fact, and even his teachers don't seem immune to it. His mother (Karen
Young) works full time, and is too tired to care for Joe. His father's
absenteeism may be for the better, as his idea of discipline seems
to be brutalizing his son.
Joe also works at a small eatery to try and make ends meet, and his
woes are multiplied by his father's debtors who hound him regularly.
The uncared and lovelorn Joe plays truant, and resorts to petty theft,
but very soon things spin out of control.
Debutant writer-director Frank Whaley's film tells it as it is, but
don't go to the movie expecting the king to be redeemed.
