Authors
Benjamin Zaretsky
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Deep Blue Sea (1999)
There are two kinds of people out there. There are the kinds who enjoy
movies about thinking sharks that terrorize a demographic slice of
post-Baywatch American society and those who do not. I happen to. The term
"popcorn movie" is a great term and it fitfully describes DBS. The set-up
is pretty blah and the movie doesn't really get going until Samuel L.
Jackson arrives at the shark base--think the island that the dinosaurs
lived on in Jurassic Park only this is a concrete island with titanium
still cages that go all the way down to the ocean floor, and behind those
cages--we'll get to that in a second. 
So Samuel Jackson arrives there and he meets the shark team--our cast of
characters that (I don't remember any of the characters names) are going
to duke it out with the Makos. Now the shark team is assembled to do
something very scientific, they're running tests on the sharks 
and in the course of doing that, they have made the sharks super smart.
And the theme of the film which probably Jurassic Park spear headed, or
you know flagellated upon everyone, is that of "man's complete and utter
idiocy in thinking he can control nature." There it was Disney Dinosaur
land, here in DBS the doctors Dr. Cleavage, Dr. Spritely, Dr. German
accent and Dr. Generation-X are all convinced that they can control the
sharks no problem, no problem. 
Well surprise, surprise they can't. A tropical storm blows in and wreaks
havoc (think Jurassic Shark now) and the sharks get loose and the audience
gets to play the baiting game, trying to figure out who will end up alive
at the end of the film and who will just end up. Because there are three
very smart and very angry Makos on the loose. The humans try and get to
safety with the sharks close on their tale,  and here the script features
some nice twists and a handful of "gosh I wouldn't want to die that way"
scenes. 
The directing is right on, and Renny Harlin does some really cool things
such as this one point where everyone is trapped in this huge elevator
shaft and the water is filling up from below and there is a huge fireball
looming from above. I was like "hey man the hot and the cold." The
technological and goretastic thrills are there and the performances are
strong (especially Ice Cube as a charming cook) but and here is where I'm
forced to hearken back to JAWS (blah, blah right). That dorsal fin in Jaws
is one of the coolest cinematic treats of all time. Seeing it course
through the water--really something, really something. Here in DBS you get
the whole shark thanks to computer graphic doo-dads and it looks real,
down to the pearly whites--but I found myself missing that dorsal fin
zipping through Martha's Vineyard like it did. Hey Hollywood! Quit showing
me what everything looks like, let me imagine the scary stuff (i.e. that
witch project thing I keep hearing so much about). 
The design of the film is that everyone is trapped underwater in this
concrete viewing thing and they have to get back to the surface and the
sharks are zipping through the corridors, and that makes the whole picture
dark and clautrophobic in a way that it couldn't really help but being.
The next day I'm still caught thinking about when one of the sharks
"disarms" Dr. _____ I mean that was a great moment, but the movie also
made me want to go see JAWS again, just for that lyrical rush the movie
had of being out on the water, just cruising with a mean old dorsal fin
cruising behind you. 
