Authors
Croal, NGai
Number of Reviews
3

Title
Review for Jason's Lyric (1994)
     George McHenry isn't depraved enough to show a son giving his
father uncut heroin to shoot up, but that's about all that separates
his directorial debut JASON'S LYRIC from being as twisted as this
year's earlier entry in the inner city black pathology sweepstakes,
SUGAR HILL.  Still, he gives it the old college try, with scenes of
patricide, torture, spousal abuse, car-jacking and good old walk-by
shooting--if you're a bourgeois black filmmaker, it's the perfect
backdrop for an old-fashioned love story.
     Like many other young black male filmmakers, McHenry's aspirations
are blood simple: he wants to be a genre filmmaker.  But unlike their
white counterparts, most brothas don't have the courage of their
convictions (Carl Franklin's ONE FALSE MOVE is a rare exception).  As
if sex and violence weren't enough, they feel the need to further
commercialize their films by setting them in the 'hood.  Hence, the
all-star rap soundtracks, the use of rappers in key roles, and the
bullshit veneer of social consciousness.
     The final result is often a hodge-podge that starts nowhere and
spins its wheels in place for two hours, while delivering a set of
stereotypes--absent/dead fathers, crack hoes, gun-toting gangstas and
drug dealers--that could serve as a Klan recruitment tape.  Meanwhile,
white filmmakers like Quentin Tarantino, Roald Dahl and the Coen
brothers run celluloid rings around directors like John Singleton,
Matty Rich and the Hughes brothers.  Unfettered by ghetto "reality" and
too independent to know what the word "sellout" means, their
hard-boiled visions soar while ours remain embarrassingly earthbound.
     Like SUGAR HILL, JASON'S LYRIC is another lazy retelling of the
Cain and Abel myth.  Jason (Allen Payne) is the intelligent, upright
older brother who works at a television repair shop, never sasses his
moms and wakes up every night dripping in sweat, induced by nightmares
about his father's murder.  Joshua (Bokeem Woodbine) is that crazy
muthafucka from around the way--a gangsta that couldn't hold a job if
his life depended on it, sets his mother's nerves on edge and wards off
nightmares with a cold forty or a bottle of gin, no juice.
     Both live in Houston's Fifth Ward, which, as a result of McHenry's
efforts, might just have a twelve-gauge shot at replacing South-Central
L.A. as the mythical killing field of urban lore.  As the genre
demands, Jason is determined to be his brother's keeper.  But then he
meets a fine sista (is there any other kind in these movies?) named
Lyric (get it? Jason's Lyric) and starts dreaming of a world outside of
the ghetto (surprise, surprise).  At the same time, recent parolee
Joshua finds himself being pulled further in the local ghetto games by
Lyric's half-brother Alonzo (Treach of Naughty by Nature fame).  Before
we can say "Shakespearean tragedy," a bank job is botched and the walls
of Lyric's house are being painted the color of Elsinore: blood-red.
     You might think that producing NEW JACK CITY, which McHenry did,
would have gotten the need to make a 'hood film out of his system.  But
a man that would make two "House Party" sequels and once planned a
sequel to NEW JACK CITY is not a man to be noted for his originality.
JASON'S LYRIC lives up to that limited vision, encasing its actors in
all too-familiar roles.
     Forrest Whitaker, whose work in films as good as THE CRYING GAME
and as bad as BLOWN AWAY has generally been inventive phones in a
performance so shockingly bad that we want to avert our eyes.  The
good-father-that-goes-away-to-Vietnam-and-comes-back-in-shambles is old
hat by now, a lazy form of shorthand designed to evoke pity.  A better
director might have encouraged Whitaker to play Maddog against type, to
suggest an willfully unchecked self-loathing akin to Laurence
Fishburne's coke-addled Ike Turner in WHAT'S LOVE GOT TO DO WITH IT?"
Instead, McHenry pushes him into an undisciplined, boozy incoherence
that overshoots sentimentality and lands squarely on embarrassment.  By
the time one of his sons puts a bullet in him, it feels like we've been
put out of our misery.
     The film's leads don't fare much better.  Allen Payne has been
likened by some to a younger Denzel Washington, but that would suggest
that he can act, which no one should accuse him of.  His tough-loving
big brother act is only marginally more convincing than similar
performances by Cuba Gooding Jr. or Morris Chesnut, but it's just as
boring.  The scenes where he tries to woo Lyric have a sweet corniness
to them, which suggests that a respectable love story could have been
told had McHenry not been so preoccupied with Houston's mean streets.
     Bokeem Woodbine is no better--he doesn't have the
you-don't-like-how-I'm-livin'-well-fuck-you swagger of Ice Cube's
Doughboy from BOYZ N THE HOOD or the craziest-nigga-alive bravado of
Larenz Tate's O-Dog of MENACE II SOCIETY fame.  Fortunately, he
doesn't need it.  Joshua is a gangsta with a heart of cotton candy; he
doesn't have the heart for a life of crime, but it's the only way he
knows how express his anger.  The film awkwardly drives this home in
its only honestly powerful scene: when Joshua's mother throws away the
surprise dinner he cooked for her because it was bought with his drug
money, he runs out of the house and commits a violent car-jacking.  A
scene like this, coupled with Woodbine's rarely seen, beautiful smile
suggests depths that the screenplay doesn't have--it concludes that
Joshua is bad because he's just like his father.
     Ironically, the best of the three leads, Jada Pinkett, fares the
worst, because she's a prep-school brotha's wet-dream and an intelligent
knockout who spreads her legs on date number three--and nothing more.
After a couple sex scenes that look like outtakes from a bad Spike Lee
film, Lyric has nothing to do but cling to her man, try to get him out
of the 'hood and take a bullet at point-blank range.  It's this
insistence on simplistic pathology on the part of numerous black
filmmakers that makes so many black people call for a moratorium on
"negative images" when what's called for is complexity.  And if black
actors are in bad shape when looking for complex characters to play,
black actresses are in critical condition.  But McHenry don't love them
hoes anymore than he loves us in the audience.  Otherwise he would have
made a different film.

Title
Review for Specialist, The (1994)
     In his heyday, Alfred Hitchcock always searched for the
flesh-and-blood incarnation of the perfect blonde ice queen: first
Tippi Hedrin, then Kim Novak and finally Janet Leigh, shaping and
molding them into approximations of his fantasy. The tough-as-nails
exteriors of Hitchcock's blondes were simply a front; inside, they were
all vulnerable little girls waiting to curl up next to the right man.
But as twisted as the master of suspense's mind was, he would never
have dreamed up Sharon Stone, who couldn't play vulnerable if her life
depended on it. Everything about her screen persona is carefully
calculated, but not with the classically trained intelligence of a
Jodie Foster or the street smart cunning of a Juliette Lewis. Rather,
Stone radiates the bitchy confidence of someone who's taking a
difficult exam but managed to get hold of the answers in advance.
Coupled with a model's face and a pinup's body, it's no wonder
Hollywood is falling all over itself to cast her: she's the mother of
all ice queens.
     The only person who knows how to best use Stone is Dutch director
Paul Verhoeven. He understands that we desire her, but can never
sympathize with her, which makes her the perfect villain; a Barbara
Stanwyck for the '90s.  In Verhoeven's TOTAL RECALL, it took an AK-47
divorce at the hands of Arnold Schwarzenegger to put her down. But her
magnum opus was BASIC INSTINCT. Her performance as Catherine Trammell
embodied straight male paranoia: smarter, sexier and more lethal than
anyone else, her unabashed bisexuality meant that men and women were
equally disposable. Michael Douglas was ostensibly the lead, but she
stole the part from under his nose. His hard-boiled cop was no match
for Stone's audaciously seductive brand of evil--her swaying body,
come-hither eyes and throatily profane voice turned him into a
quivering, horny mess. We knew Douglas' dick couldn't measure up to her
ice pick, so even Verhoeven's sell-out ending couldn't erase the fact
that we had seen an ovaries-out star-making performance from Stone.
     Since then, she's been smart enough to try to avoid typecasting,
but not smart enough to understand her considerable limitations.
SLIVER was a failure from its inception because Stone played the
helpless victim instead of her natural calling, the omnipotent killer
(imagine Sharon Stone as a rich voyeur-murderer and William Baldwin as
a naive neo-virgin who falls under her spell; now that would have been
trash worth seeing). Instead, the film died a quick death, as did
INTERSECTION, which made the mistake of putting Stone in the role of
the wronged wife instead of the other woman.  With her career
disappearing faster than her clothing, she hot-footed it into an
as-yet-unreleased western THE QUICK AND THE DEAD and Martin Scorsese's
upcoming gangster drama, CASINO. Unfortunately for Stone, THE
SPECIALIST came out first, and even its $14 million opening weekend
can't erase the stench that this stink bomb leaves behind.
     It's no longer possible to make a good film with Sylvester
Stallone; an veteran bomber in real-life, he now feels compelled to
play one in the movies. At the start of the film, Ray Quick (Stallone)
and Ned Trent (James Woods) are sent by the CIA in the mid-'80s into an
unnamed South American country to take out an evil drug lord by blowing
him up as he drives across a bridge. After Stallone plants the bomb, he
sees that the criminal isn't alone--the man's daughter is in the car
as well. When Woods refuses to deactivate the bomb remotely, Stallone
races out to stop it from exploding.  He fails, of course, leaving us
to ponder whether life is imitating art or vice versa.
     When we cut to the present, Stallone is already involved in a
series of tape-delayed phone-sex conversations with May (Stone).  Her
parents were murdered by another drug lord (Eric Roberts) and his
henchmen, so she's sworn to get even with them, even if it means
sleeping with Roberts to get close enough to do the job herself. She'd
like to hire Stallone, but he refuses for some unknown reason --
perhaps he needs to follow her around and watch strange men run their
hands all over the body he lusts for to psyche himself up. When he
finally gets angry and starts blowing people up, the Cubans bring in a
bomb expert of their own to defuse Stallone. I'll bet you can't guess
who that might be.
     The film is cobbled together from several different movies, one
for each actor. Sylvester Stallone models himself after Gene Hackman's
existentially morose loner from Francis Ford Coppola's THE
CONVERSATION, James Woods reprises his fast-talking arrogant bastard
from Oliver Stone's SALVADOR and Stone tries on a helpless Lana Turner
impression--circa 1946's THE POSTMAN ALWAYS RINGS TWICE--for
size.  Rod Steiger, as a Cuban godfather, struggles to imitate Al
Pacino's tour de force Cuban accent in SCARFACE, but he misses wildly,
overshoots even Pacino's lackluster Puerto Rican accent in CARLITO'S
WAY and lands somewhere next to Lucille Ball imitating Ricky Ricardo.
     At some point, writer Alexandra Seros and director Lluis Losa
should have tried to bring the actors into the same film; as it stands,
everyone seems to be working from a different script, none of which is
any good.  Seros takes a SLEEPLESS IN SEATTLE approach to suspense,
which means that none of the three main characters meet until late in
the film. There's a hotel room love scene between Stallone and Stone
that's supposed to be explosive, but it's so sluggishly choreographed
that they seem to be suffering from narcolepsy.  Stallone's legendary
physique was never meant to be seen completely au naturel; someone
should tell him that veins popping off of one's ass isn't very
attractive. At least the scene doesn't last very long, which befits the
last name of Stallone's character, who seems to be saving his sexual
energy for his work.
     Since Stallone and Stone play the film as though it were a
production of "Hamlet," Woods is left to carry the film, which he very
nearly does. He isn't content to chew the scenery; by the end of the
film, he's devoured the camera, the lights, the props and Stallone's
elevator shoes to fuel his ferociously hammy performance.  Woods has
always been a volatile performer, and here he lets that side of him
hang out, playing Ned as a natural-born control freak who gloats when
things go his way and throws fits when they don't. Several of his
scenes seem to have been included only to show how scummy he is, but
his go-for-broke style makes them welcome diversions from the plot. By
the time Woods pushes a fat tourist out of an elevator with the
admonition, "Get a new shirt," we're rooting for him to kill off the
entire cast so that he can continue his one-man show without
interference.
     Bad movies are nothing new, particularly for Stone and Stallone.
But whenever we're watching a bad movie, there comes a point at which
we stop worrying about whether or not it's going to improve; in fact,
we pray fervently for it to get worse, to become so spectacularly bad
that it becomes perversely entertaining: a classic ode to the power of
misguided intentions. It's a measure of the witlessness of the creators
of THE SPECIALIST that by the film's end, they can't even achieve
that.

Title
Review for Quiz Show (1994)
     QUIZ SHOW is the worst good film of 1994, which says as much about
the current state of American film as it does Robert Redford's most
recent directorial effort.  It sports an intriguing premise, a
top-notch cast, an ace cinematographer (Scorsese partner-in-crime
Michael Ballhaus) and a famously intelligent director.  But all of
these elements, like the trappings of the actual quiz show scandals,
are smoke-and-mirrors that conceals the fact that something is wrong at
the center--in this case, Paul Attanasio's screenplay--but for only so
long.
     The film begins with great promise.  Congressional investigator
Richard Goodwin (Rob Morrow) circles a spanking new convertible at the
center of a gleaming showroom; circling directly overhead is a
smooth-talking salesman who recites the specifications of the car like
the virtues of a lover.  Redford and Ballhaus depart from the Sundance
Kid's notoriously formal style; here, the two cross-fade from shot to
shot as Goodwin walks around the car, a rhythm that establishes the
seductiveness of the moment as well as its artifice.  The scene has
nothing to do with the narrative, but it's got everything to do with
the film's theme: the importance of probing beneath shiny surfaces.
     Redford effortlessly tops anything he's done to date with the next
sequence, which introduces us to the quiz show of the title,
"Twenty-One."  The camera prowls the studio where the show is shot,
introducing producers, contestants and a rapt studio audience.  Outside
the NBC building and across the country, men, women and children flock
to their television sets to watch long-running champion Herbert Stempel
(John Turturro) defy the odds and win yet again.
     The sequence is a marvel of simple-yet-effective cross-cutting, but
Redford doesn't stop there.  As he shows us the brilliantly scripted
puppet show taking place on national TV, he pulls back the curtain to
reveal the puppeteer standing behind it; in this case the Geritol
sponsor (director Martin Scorsese).  While the bosomy blonde sitting
next to him remarks that Stempel's face was "was made for radio," the
sponsor calls up the head of the network, who in turn calls up the
show's producers, who in turn inform Stempel that it's time for him to
go.
     The search is on for a new face--a "Twenty-One" champion "who
looks like he could get a table at Twenty-One."  Enter Charles van Doren
(Ralph Fiennes), an Ivy Leaguer who teaches at Columbia and whose
family seems to breed literati like rabbits.  A WASP among WASP, he's
the perfect replacement for the overbearingly Jewish (or is it Jewishly
overbearing) Stempel.  Needless to say, Stempel doesn't take the coup
very well, and determines to show the uncircumcised Hamptoner what
little Queens boys are made of, kicking off a grand jury investigation
that catches Goodwin's attention.
     What Stempel and Goodwin don't realize is the full extent of the
power wielded by the two institutions they're taking on--the old
whiteboy network and big business.  Goodwin is very nearly seduced by
the former; in investigating Charles van Doren, he finds himself so
drawn to their easy, erudite life of privilege that he resists
implicating van Doren until he can no longer protect him.  And the
latter, with millions of dollars behind it, walks into Goodwin's line
of fire and emerges unscathed.  "I thought I was gonna get television,"
he says, "but the truth is, television's gonna get us."
     For a while, QUIZ SHOW gets by on its gentle humor.  But Redford
is ill-suited to get to the bottom of the human comedy of the quiz
show scandal.  He trots out the usual suspects: Stempel is motivated by
his resentment of WASPs, Goodwin by his ambition and van Doren by an
Oedipus complex (minus the sexual component, of course).  None of these
are complicated enough to justify a two-hour movie--particularly one
with three main characters--unless it's balls-out satire.  Directors
with acid for blood, like Scorsese, Altman or Kubrick understand that,
which is why superficially superficial films like GOODFELLAS, THE
PLAYER and DR. STRANGELOVE shoot right to our core.  Redford is so
mistakenly brings a knife to a gunfight, so it's no surprise that he
fails to draw blood.
     Attanasio's script, while competent, is content to lay out a map
so complete that there are no surprises; there isn't a single moment in
the film that can't be predicted.  The source material may be
insubstantial, but there is a lot of ground the narrative has to
cover.  Attanasio's mistake is to attempt both breadth and depth
simultaneously; it's inevitable and unfortunate that both fail
spectacularly.
     The actors seem to understand that QUIZ SHOW should be a satire,
which has the effect entertaining us superbly even as it exposes the
hollowness at the film's core.  Ralph Fiennes, so effortlessly chilling
as Amon Goeth in SCHINDLER'S LIST reminds us why Day-Lewis status
isn't too far away for this young Brit.  Here, he strains for a
credible New York accent (as does Yank Rob Morrow), but the demons that
lie beneath his patrician exterior are only too believable.  Paul
Scofield puts in an award-worthy supporting turn as van Doren's father,
an man who intuitively, if not intellectually, understands the danger
that television represents.  And Martin Scorsese gives such a scabrous
performance an unflappable Geritol executive, that, at greater length,
could have rivaled his infamous backseat pussy-and-a-.45 monologue in
TAXI DRIVER.
     But the bravura performance is delivered by John Turturro.  He
sinks his teeth into Stempel's Jewish inferiority complex with such
over-the-top gusto that were this a Spike Lee film, cries of
anti-Semitism would be unleavened by Goodwin's good-Jew role.  More
sweaty, jittery and boorish than Tommy Lee Jones' warden in NATURAL
BORN KILLERS, the part is right out of Der Sturmer.  But Turturro
plunges so far into the part that he creates a truth completely outside
of Attanasio's scripting, refusing to sentimentalize Stempel in the
least.  It's as if Turturro were saying, "I double-dare ya to like this
shmuck."
     Unfortunately for Redford, the truth Turturro creates is so
effective that we can't be bothered to take him up on his dare.  Both
van Doren and Stempel may be frauds, but van Doren's smooth,
all-American beauty is far better company than Stempel's snaggle-toothed
chutzpah, so we can't begrudge Goodwin or Redford for deciding to spend
more time with van Doren.  We see van Doren at work, rest and play, but
every time we see Stempel, he's monomaniacally focused on "Twenty-One."
By hewing so tightly to Goodwin's point-of-view, Redford reinforces our
opinion that Charlie isn't so bad, and Stempel is a bit of a loser.  If
van Doren were more vacant, more greedy, more grasping than he turns
out to be, Redford could have punished us and Goodwin for falling for
van Doren's golden-boy charm.  Instead, Redford's even-handedness
becomes infuriating, and his insistence that television is the real bad
guy rings more-and-more hollow.
     Despite the screenplay's significant problems, QUIZ SHOW is very
entertaining.  Redford's skill with actors is very much in evidence,
particularly in the quiet scenes, and most impressively with Fiennes
and Scofield; the stunned expression on Scofield's face after hearing
his son confesses to him suggests a loss of innocence that was never
America's to lose.  But Redford slyly saves his best and most
disturbing image for last:  behind the end credits, a studio audience
laughs and applauds in ominous slow-motion, as if the scandal had ever
happened.  Turning the camera back on us, in fact, is the most
intelligent choice Redford makes in the entire film, a choice that
almost justifies QUIZ SHOW's existence.
