Authors
James Mork
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Coming to America (1988)
     If you are a Murphy fan, *definitely* see this one.  Eddie's character is
substantially tamer than usual in this new comedy/romance, but it was still
non-stop humor and action.  The African Palace related scenes very much
reminded me of a 1940s' movie (like the ones Alice Faye, Betty Grable, and all
of that crew did).  Remember the ones where the props were *obvious* facades
and the landscapes *obvious* paintings--*but* you didn't care because the
costumes and dances were so eye-catching....
     One comment about the movie:  The movie is incredibly Black.  Sure the
movie is about an African prince, but the theme, 99%!!! of the cast, the
jokes, and nearly every quality about the film seems to have been pulled out of
JET or EBONY magazines.  I can't say if this really hurts or helps the film.
In fact, pay attention and you will even catch a glimpse of a Black version of
a famous French painting (somebody help me out here...the one with the French
girl staring forward, dressed like a maid/waitress...Manet? or Monet?)  There
is quite a bit of background humor to watch for in this one.  If someone could
send me a note explaining the "Mortimer's money" joke...I'd be grateful (went
over my head...and the entire theater was clapping and cheering wildly.)
[Moderator's note: The two bums were the businessmen from Murphy's earlier
film, TRADING PLACES.]
     Murphy does an excellent job of retaining his "Eddie Murphyesque" within a
persona that is not his signature street-wise-foul-mouthed-wise-guy.  His
character is markedly naive to the ways in the "big city" this time.  Often I
saw his BHC smile on the screen and I had anticipations of his Axel Foley
character jumping out at any minute.
     The movie's "Ebony Magazine" setting pokes fun of countless Black
stereotype--countless.  There is a nice, pseudo-insult directed at Whitney.  A
lot of nice slams directed in the direction of McDonald's restaurants....
     If you like any Eddie Murphy flicks at all, this is a must to see, but
keep in mind that although he does bend his character a little here and there,
he is an African prince in this one.
