Authors
Matt Kristek
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for UHF (1989)
This is a good movie. Plan and simple. Not because 'Weird Al' Yankovic
plays George Newman, the lead role. It would have been just as great with
anybody in the lead role. However, despite what others may think,
Yankovic's acting is surprisingly convincing. He gets his point across.
I'm not going to give you a plot outline or anything like that. There's
plenty of reviews out there where you can find that out. Instead, I'm going
to tell you what I think should have been said in those reviews, but
wasn't.
The movie was cast perfectly, with the exception of Victoria Jackson as
Yankovic's girlfriend, but more on that later. Michael Richards (Kramer
from Seinfeld) gives (in my opinion) his best performance ever in this
movie as the lovable dim-witted janitor, Stenley Spadowski. Kevin McCarthy
(and his thugs) perfectly play the role of the villians, so much to a point
where you have to laugh. David Bowe (who I've never seen in anything else)
is Yankovic's friend Bob, and is quite cool. He can catch grape after grape
in his mouth from across the room. You have to respect that. And he can
act, too. Fran Dresher is the secretary/newscaster, who I've never been a
big fan of in the first place, actually isn't too bad in this movie. Other
great parts are the bum, the midget cameraman, George's uncle, the karate
teacher (Stupid!!! You so stuuuupid!!!!!) and a lot more. The only bad
thing about the cast (and the entire movie, I think), which I mentioned
earlier, is Victoria Jackson. She could never act. She was pretty
unconvincing. Oh well.
This movie is full of little gems that you just have to laugh at. For
instance, the bum and a blind guy are sitting on a bench, and the blind guy
has a Rubik's cube. He turns one side, hold it to the bum and asks, "Is
this it?" The bum responds, "Nope." He then turns it again, and the whole
process repeats. Little fun things like this are scattered everywhere in
this movie.
Not to imply that this movie doesn't have a plot. It does, and a good one
at that....I've never seen a plot like it. It's intricate and doesn't slow
down or have any holes in it.
Also scattered throughout the movie are little spoofs of television shows
and commercials that air on U-62, the TV station where it all goes down in
this movie. These, in my humble opinion, are the funniest things in the
movie. Shows like "Conan the Librarian" and "Town Talk," a talk show with a
neo-nazi, a klansman, a little girl, and an axe-welding maniac all in one
sitting. And many more other funnies like this, but I don't want to spoil
the surprises.
I highly recommend this movie. You'll love it. You'll love the characters,
you'll love the story, you'll love the humor.
