Authors
David Peak
Number of Reviews
4

Title
Review for Fight Club (1999)
Fight Club - Directed by David Fincher.  
      There is a certain elegance and grace to Fight Club that is rarely seen
in movies today.  The scenes flow from one to another, the dialogue seems fresh
and realistic, and the whole movie comes off as being effortless.  That, of
course, is not true, a lot of work must of gone into the production of Fight
Club, and all of that work was work paid off.  Few movies have ever achieved
the greatness that Fight Club manages to pull off, it is a marvel of film
making.
     Watching Fight Club is an adventure in itself.  Sitting in your seat
noticing all the little details in this film is what makes it so great.  I
couldn't help but think to myself how far the movie-making industry has come in
order to make movies like this.  This is by no means a conventional movie, it
took the path less traveled and made something truly unique, with lots of
original scenes, (aka the scene where "cigarette burns" are explained to the
audience).  Fight Club definatley has a lot of depth and care given to each
scene, and this makes for a more enjoyable movie experience.  Watching Fight
Club for the first time is like being introduced to a whole new world, a
temporary environment where you can just let yourself go and be a part of
something, and when it ends, reality comes crashing down.
     There is very little else to say about this movie, it is almost an escape
for the viewer.  There are so many little things that I would love to talk
about, however half of the fun of this movie is to find them out for yourself. 

Title
Review for Repo Man (1984)
More and more movies today are being made using a formula.  There are many of
these formulas.  For example, Something bad happens and the hero must save the
girl, that is one of hollywood's standard formulas for movies.  However, a
while ago (1984), a movie was made that broke all formulas.  The movie was
Repoman.  This movie is the kind of movie that hollywood doesn't understand, it
follows no known formula making it one of the most original and exciting movies
to be made in the recent years of movies.  
The movie centers around a young man who is unknowingly sucked into the life of
a repossesor, the life of a repoman is a strange one indeed.  I'm not going to
give away any of the plot, but I will say that the movie does go on to include
aliens, flying cars, a bum that seems to know everything,  a rival group of
repoman, some drug addicted punks and some very odd scientists later on.
If you ever get sick of watching movies that seem to be just like other movies,
I reccomend to go out and rent a copy of Repoman, I cannot gurantee that you
will like it, but if you can appreciate low budget genius movies of this sort,
than you may get a kick out of it.  At least rent it to throw some variety into
your movie life.
If you've read this far, thankyou for your time, I appreciate your patience in
hearing what I have to say.

Title
Review for South Park: Bigger, Longer and Uncut (1999)
Not since Animal Farm has a story been so important to its time.  Not since
Animal Farm has a story used such intellectual satire.  In the way that Animal
Farm portrayed our governments, South Park portrays our current day society and
does it well.  The people that complain about south park are missing out in its
hidden messages of parenthood and childhood.
People may complain about the vulgarity of the senseless violence in South
Park. But you must admit, if they are complaining about the movie then they
have obviously noticed it.  Maybe even seen it.  There are some movies that
need to be seen twice, once just to see and twice to analyse, this is one of
those movies.  This movie gets another thing straight too, kids aren't these
sweet angels that they seem to be, deep inside even the nicest kid is a bastard
lurking to come out, this movies jus has the guts to say so.
I applaud Trey Parker and Matt Stone for making this movie.  So what if you
don't think its funny, then don't see it.  If your offended, then don't take it
so seriously.  Every once in a while we need an alternative to seriousness and
this movies gives us one.  It allows us to laugh guilt free at some of the most
controversial topics in our modern society.  If you've read this far in my
review than I thank you for listening to me and I hope that you agree with me. 
I definately reccommend watching South Park at least once, there hasn't been
anything this funny in a long time.

Title
Review for Big Lebowski, The (1998)
Starring - Jeff Bridges, John Goodman, etc.
Running time - close to two hours.
The Big Lebowski starts off with narration, like so many other movies do. 
However this narration doesn't seem to be going anywhere.  We are introduced to
the movies main character "the dude" (Jeff Bridges) and before you can think
about anything the movie gets off to a start.  I'm not here to explain the plot
of the movie. You can watch the movie to see that plot, I'm here to explain the
importance of this movie in modern day filmmaking.
I may be biased on the topic of this movie but the Big Lebowski is like no
other movie.  It's flow of scenes is a relief to movies with a formula scene
structure.  It's characters are so deep and different that while watching the
movie you feel like they actually exist.  The acting is also well done as each
actor/actress ( there aren't too many females in this movie ) plays their role
well and keeps the characters interesting.  The first time you watch this movie
it definately holds your attention.  I've watched this movie with a lot of
people, some liked it, some loved it and some didn't care for it.  But all of
them admitted it was an interesting movie.
I'm not someone giving this movie a plug so everyone will go out and rent it. 
I'm just a fan of movies and particulary this movie.  The Big Lebowski is
exactly the kind of movie to watch when you need a movie that can make you
think into it.  While watching this movie you almost become part of it.  Few
movies have that power anymore. The Big Lebowski is a gem among modern movies.
