Authors
Ellen Eades
Number of Reviews
3

Title
Review for La Bamba (1987)
     By this I mean that it's very difficult for me to really enjoy a movie
that contains masterpieces of scary-monster makeup, things that go bump in the
night, or sex that is so steamy I start feeling vicariously sore, or that
acquaints me intimately with things that should have stayed inside human bodies
rather than being exposed to the light and heat of the camera.  (I've had EMT
training, but gore in movies is quite different from gore in reality).  It's
hard for me to separate out the *quality* of a movie (good direction, good
acting, good script) from the emotions it evokes.  Thus, I tend not to go to
many movies because I know what to expect and that I won't like it.
     I saw LA BAMBA this Saturday and really loved it.  It has a certain 
quality which is best summarized as the triumph of the spirit over all
obstacles, including death.  There is a real love between the characters here
which is rare in movies today--love between brothers, love between children
and parent, love of young people for one another, love of music and the sharing
between performer and audience.  
     It's not rare for me to cry at movies; I cried during THE MISSION and HAIR
and, so help me, ROMANCING THE STONE.  It is rare for me to feel as though
there could be a smile behind the tears.  Despite tragedy, LA BAMBA brings me a
feeling of hope, not least because its message seems to be that music will
always be remembered long after the musicians have gone, as with all art.
     The only criticism I can make of LA BAMBA is that it is often heavy-handed
in its foreshadowing of Ritchie Valens's death.  The movie opens with a plane
crash, and this theme repeats often.  Despite this (and the heavy-handed
treatment of the Yaqui charm Ritchie wears), it was possible to forget at times
that tragedy was coming.  In particular, the performances of Esai Morales as
Ritchie's brother and Lou Diamond Phillips as Ritchie himself were very
convincing.  The performance scenes were very well done in the style of the
period.  I've learned to expect very good things from Luis Valdez, and this is
no exception.

Title
Review for Princess Bride, The (1987)
     I went to see THE PRINCESS BRIDE at a sneak preview in Seattle on Saturday
night.  Admittedly, I went with extremely high expectations--perhaps the
highest I have ever had for a movie--due to positive reviews and the presence
of some extremely talented people on the movie credits.  It is perhaps to be
expected that I was not *completely* delighted with the movie; but that is more
because, due to time constraints, so much was left out, than because anything
was seriously screwed up.
     It is, indeed, a very, very enjoyable film.  I would give it a solid 8 on
a scale of 1-10, with previous 9s being STAR WARS, LA BAMBA, and CASABLANCA,
LABYRINTH another 8, and ROMANCING THE STONE and LADYHAWKE a 7.  (Now you know
what I like, so you can adjust your perceptions accordingly ;-) )  The dialog is
crisp and the costuming is appropriately colorful, just this side of silly
(real fairy-tale stuff, not historically accurate medieval rags and
linsey-woolsey :-) ).  The music was slightly jarring, though--I found that I
noticed it just a bit more than I like in a movie, and the final song,
"Storybook Love," playing during the credits, was frankly awful.  I admit that
I have little experience rating direction, but I think that, as far as I could
tell, it was very good.
     In general, though, I liked it a lot, and will go back to see it again at
least twice.  It is extremely light-hearted unabashed romantic silliness, which
I think is just fine.  As a swashbuckler movie, it leaves a little to be
desired--the swash and buckle are somewhat uneven--lots in the beginning and
end, little in the middle--but the characterization, as noted before, is
*excellent* : Buttercup really does have "hair the color of autumn" and Westley
really does have "eyes like a sea before a storm," Inigo and Fezzik are
excellently cast, and Rugen is wonderfully slimy.  I found Wally Shawn as
Vizzini the Sicilian somewhat jarring because much of his character was
eliminated--he's not telepathic, for example, in the movie, nor was he a
hunchback, and the comic elements were emphasized more than the "dizzying
intellect."  Billy Crystal and Carol Kane as Max and Valerie were enjoyable,
although I found that I really would have liked to see Buttercup's parents and
the Princess Noreena of Guilder, three characters the movie leaves out
entirely.  The King and Queen of Florin had much smaller roles in the movie, as
well.
     The settings were great, with one exception.  On-location scenes in
Ireland and England were wonderful.  However, the duel on the top of the Cliffs
of Insanity was, just a little too obviously, filmed on a sound stage.  I found
the transition from that to the real-location scenes following a little bit
weird.  
     General conclusion:  It was great.  Go see it.  You will almost certainly
like it.  I have minor quibbles, but that's IT.  Definitely one of the top two
movies of the year for me.
     My one quibble is with the extent in which the movie was true to the
spirit of the book.  Spoilers follow, so be warned.
     In general, the movie is much, much more light-hearted than the book.
Westley's deaths, both the first and the second time, are treated more
seriously in the book--Buttercup's reaction to the first death is handled with
more tragedy in the book, and little Billy's reaction to the second death is
explored in more detail in the book.  I found that after the second death in
the movie, I was in a state where I was convinced he would come back (Forget
for a moment that I read the book  and *knew* he would come back) and wasn't
taking it as seriously as I did in the book, when I was beginning to get
worried after the second death that he really was dead.  Additionally, a lot of
William Goldman's sniping in the book is gone--sideswipes at his wife, his
editors,  his publishers--and so the undercurrent of black humor is missing.
THE PRINCESS BRIDE the movie is much more a fairy tale than THE PRINCESS BRIDE
the book, which was almost a satire at many points.
     Also, I disagree with the person who stated that the dialog followed that
in the book almost exactly.  This really isn't so to the degree I had hoped.
Part of the problem is that THE PRINCESS BRIDE the book is able to utilize long
descriptive passages by Goldman and THE PRINCESS BRIDE the movie has to show
these scenes rather than allow one to imagine them.  A lot was left out, for
example, of Buttercup's early years.  We are completely at a loss to understand
how Buttercup met Prince Humperdinck and married him--a few lines of voiceover
between Westley's death and Buttercup's presentation to the people of Florin is
all we get.  Inigo Montoya's story *is* well done; he tells it to the man in
black essentially as it was in the book, but Fezzik's is left out entirely.
The whole Snow Sand episode, which I found one of the most exciting in the
book, is difficult to reproduce on film, so all we see is Buttercup falling in,
Westley diving in, and the two of them emerging.  I *wish* Princess Noreena of
Guilder had been left in!!
     The part I feel most ambiguous about (no wonder) is that the ending of the
film is completely different from the ending in the book.  Now, I realize that
a fairy tale movie ought to have a fairy tale ending, but I really miss the
sense of "HUH?!"  I got at the end of the book.  It was fun to be completely
misled that way.  The ending of the movie, while sweet and happily-ever-after
nice, simply does not give you that feeling.  (Those of you who feel that the
way the book ended was complete and absolute heresy *will* like it, though!)

Title
Review for Last of the Mohicans, The (1992)
     THE LAST OF THE MOHICANS was originally a novel by the execrable
James Fenimore Cooper (and was pilloried by Mark Twain in an
unforgettable essay titled "The Further Literary Offenses of James
Fenimore Cooper," in which he sharpens his sword of wit and his pen of
editing to razor's edges and has a great deal of fun).  This new
screenplay, based on the original 1936 screen-play, has been updated
for modern audiences considerably.  In my opinion, it's a huge
improvement.
     I was never able to plow through Cooper's novels as a child.  I was
riveted by the movie.  The cinematography alone is worth the full price
of admission; sweeping views of mist-covered rolling mountains, roaring
rapids, rocky pinnacles and virgin forest are the backdrop for an
impressively romantic storyline.  Far less grim and sophisticated than
BLACK ROBE, THE LAST OF THE MOHICANS manages to cloak its absurdities
in a reasonably historic style, where even villains have reasons and
heroes are capable of demi-godlike achievements of strength, endurance
and spirit.
     Daniel Day-Lewis stars as Nathaniel (Hawkeye in the novel), a white
orphan raised by the Mohawk, Chingachgook, alongside his own son.  This
trio seems as much a part of the Atlantic forests as the deer and the
cougar.  Also starring is Madeleine Stowe as Cora Munro, the daughter of
the British general commanding Fort William Henry.  Several other
supporting roles are very well done, among them Alice Munro, Cora's
sister; Major Duncan, Cora's suitor; and Chingachgook's Indian son.  A
special mention goes to the villain of the piece, Magua, a Huron Indian
who allies his war-party with the French general besieging Fort William
Henry to revenge himself on General Munro and his colonial and Mohawk
allies.  Far from being wholly evil, as in the novel, Magua by the end
of the movie is still brutal, vicious, and vengeful, but managed to 
evoke not a little sympathy from me.  
     Daniel Day-Lewis never fails to impress me, whether in MY BEAUTIFUL
LAUNDRETTE, MY LEFT FOOT, or THE LAST OF THE MOHICANS.  The man is
simply splendid, bringing a nobility to the character of Nathaniel which
even a jaded modern cannot fail to find humbling.  As Cora, Madeleine
Stowe manages to find a balance between strength, spirit, and the need
to make her character a believable woman of the 1700s.  But the true
strength of the movie is in the camera's eye and the magnificent
backdrop (filmed mainly in North Carolina's Chimney Rock State Park, but
beautifully evoking the Green Mountains of Vermont), against which the
heroic characters almost pale.
     Anyone with an interest in period films must see this movie; anyone
who admires native American history, early colonial history, or simply
loves the forests of the Atlantic seaboard, should go see this on the
big screen.  Pay what you need to.  
