Authors
Mike Townsend
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Braveheart (1995)
     Mel Gibson directs himself in BRAVEHEART, a three hour epic about
13th century Scot Sir William Wallace and his fight for Scottish
freedom from England.  The film takes many liberties with the
historical Wallace.  So much so that the historical Wallace gives way
to the mythical Wallace, something of a Scottish George
Washington/Nathan Hale/Patrick Henry, and one of the first voices of
the nationalistic fever that remade the face of Europe.
     Wallace is reluctant to fight the English presence in Scotland
despite having experienced their terror as a child (James Robinson).
But when the English brutalize his young wife Murron (Catherine
McCormack), he changes from would be farmer to rebel leader.  The
rebellion becomes enmeshed in a complex web of intrigue centering on
two families, the English Plantagenets, King Edward I and his son
(Patrick McGoohan, Peter Hanly), and the Scottish Bruces (Ian Bannen,
Angus McFayden), claimants to the vacant Scottish throne.  Fathers are
pitted against sons, Bruces against Plantagenets, Bruces against rival
Scottish claimants, and Plantagenets against the young Princess of
Wales (Sophie Marceau), who finds herself simultaneously attracted to
the charismatic Wallace and repulsed by her husband and father-in-law.
Wallace, whose earlier pacifism has been replaced by a single-minded
nationalism, is unaware of many of these conflicts and bewildered or
angered by most of the rest.  He ultimately is overpowered by the
forces surrounding him, but comes to accept it with an almost religious
equanimity.
     Gibson and screenwriter Randall Wallace do not stray from the
traditional epic format.  The film has all the textbook features:
panoramic shots, bold and sweeping themes, a protagonist of heroic
proportions, a larger than life treatment, and a long running time.
     Moreover, the film borrows heavily from other sources.  The basic
story line is more than reminiscent of Stanley Kubrick's SPARTACUS, and
the relationship between Wallace and his lifelong friend Hamish
(Brendan Gleeson) is clearly patterned after that of the Saturday
matinee Robin Hood and Little John.
     But there are many distinctive touches as well.  Gibson's version
of the battle of Stirling arguably is worth the price of admission.
The staging and editing (Steven Rosenblum) leave the audience both
enthralled and horrified.  The archers, calvary, and infantry provide a
13th century version of a football kickoff; there is even Wallace's
Knute Rockne like pep talk.  The hand-to-hand combat is choreographed
rather than directed, and the strategies unfold gradually, giving
viewers the feeling of watching a lawn chess match using people as
pieces.  Finally, the battle proper is framed by shouting and posturing
of such primal intensity that one is uncertain at times whether the
Scots are men or some pre-human ancestors.  The film has smaller
effective moments as well.  The parallel between the two key families
is maintained at many levels, even down to the fathers' health.  Viewed
in this light, the controversial scene in which the King ejects his
son's male lover is an essential counterpart of the elder Bruce's
treatment of Wallace, the young Bruce's object of fascination.
Parallelism is order of the day--note the segment in which deer is
hunted by man who is hunted by assassin who is hunted by counter-
assassin.  Other things worth looking for include the recurrent use of
dream imagery to highlight the mythical Wallace, and several muted
references to the Scottish love of learning that was to culminate
centuries later in the Scottish Enlightenment.  Viewers also should
examine the way the movie uses simple objects such as a thistle and two
wedding cloths to develop the story.
     For Gibson fans, the film will be a triumph.  He creates a
Wallace who dominates the movie without being oppressive.  Indeed,
those who like well-defined supporting roles should be pleased.
Despite limited screen time, McCormack and Marceau produce such
striking characterizations that BRAVEHEART fairly can be
described as a love story.  Other smartly done characters include
Hamish's father Campbell (James Cosmo) and Wallace's Irish aide-de-
camp Stephen (David O'Hara), a madcap who provides much of the
film's comic relief.  Action-adventure fans will not be
disappointed, nor those interested in complex political intrigue. 
Technical buffs will enjoy the production values.  Check out the
sets (Tom Sanders--especially the progression of forts), costumes
(Charles Knode--especially the dresses for the Princess), and
cinematography (John Toll--especially the Wallace/Murron wedding
night scenes).  Film score enthusiasts will appreciate James
Horner's melding of original music and well-known Scottish motifs.
     Viewers expecting historical epics to be historically accurate
will be disappointed by what is added to, and deleted from, the
film's Wallace.  Those preferring protagonists to have dark sides
will find this Wallace to be simplistic, if not superficial. 
Viewers more comfortable with a standard two hour length and
relatively uncluttered story line will have trouble with the three
hour running time and multitude of subplots.  Finally, this picture
is not for the truly squeamish.  Most of the violence is quick or
off screen, and many of the most gruesome types of incidents have
appeared in other mainstream films.  Nonetheless, the sheer volume
of mayhem combined with the intense emotional tone of the film will
leave few unaffected.
