Authors
redman@bvoice.com
Number of Reviews
3

Title
Review for Alien: Resurrection (1997)
"You're not Ellen Ripley. She died 200 years ago" accuses space pirate Call to
the newly cloned Ripley-8 in the fourth film of the Alien trilogy.
That's the primary defect with this movie: she's not the heroine of the first
films, but..."something else".
        A couple of centuries after the alien-fighter made her long beautiful dive
into molten metal to rid the universe of the dripping slimy killing machines,
scientists for a top secret military operation have succeeded in recreating
her from a blood sample found on the prison planet in "Aliens 3". Not only
that, but they've extracted the queen from her chest.
Working, as always, for the good of mankind, they allow the queen to hatch 12
new beasts. It's not ruining anything to reveal that the aliens escape their
prisons and destroy almost the entire crew: that's a given in any Alien movie.
The "heroes" this time around are a rag-tag group of rough space pirates who
deliver humans to the science ship to serve as hosts for the infant
monstrosities. The space-age highwaymen are a likable bunch for folks who sell
living people to be used as incubators. We grow to like them before most get snuffed.
Especially appealing in a humorously Rambo way is Johner (Ron Perlman). The
hyper-tough guy and Weaver bounce off each other admirably: "So. I hear you,
like, ran into these things before. "Yeah." "What did you do?" "I died."
Crippled Vriess (Dominique Pinon) is the realest member of the cast.
"Little girl playing pirate" Annalee Call (Winona Ryder) seems a bit too nice
to be mixed up with the rest. She and Ripley form a relationship reminiscent
of her  attachment to the little girl in "Aliens". One touch of love in an
otherwise detached film.
Due to the cloning process, Ripley (Sigourney Weaver) has a mix of Alien DNA
which gives her superhuman strength, acidic blood and a telepathic sense. She
has become something more - or less - than human. The queen mother has picked
up some Homo Sapiens DNA in the process and the creatures have become more man-like.
Easily the best scene in the film is when Ripley discovers the flawed previous
seven clones. Touching and grotesque at the same time, the moment allows her
to briefly touch her humanity and help her sisters in the only way that she can.
What constitutes humanity is a theme of the film. Our heroine is part alien.
One of the characters is unveiled as an android. Vriess is something of a
cyborg, attached to a high-tech wheelchair. The aliens have feelings. The
scientists are monsters.
There is a particularly interesting scene where the alienated Ripley is
talking to a very humanized android in the ship's chapel. The clone is aloof
and emotionless throughout almost the entire film. The android is sobbing
because it is only a machine. Which one has a soul?
The creatures are great for the most part. They have always been one of the
best-designed visuals in any film. Now that computer technology has advanced
further, they look even better, but it is disturbing that they sound and move
exactly like the raptors in "Jurassic Park". 
The new type of alien near the end of the film is disappointing and could have
been lifted out of "Seven Voyages Of Sinbad". H. R. Giger, designer of the
original film, should have been brought back for this rather than using a
rubber suit found in cinematic storage.
The transformation of Ripley ruins one of the most appealing aspects of the
previous films. As she is sniffing around for aliens (and everything seems to
be smelling everything else in the film -- there's even a breathalyzer as a
door lock) and ripping metal off the walls, she seems almost invulnerable. The
old Ripley was constantly in danger: one person against an unstoppable force.
This one is above that. There's no audience investment in her safety.
There are some intriguing aspects of director Jean-Pierre Jeunet's ("City Of
Lost Children") film. Ripley, reborn after dying for mankind's sins, relearns
of even more sacrifice. Witnessing unselfish actions by others, and although
she unplugs the high-tech Bible from the computer, the final scene is straight
from that book.
As the baby boomers age, older actresses have had the opportunity to be
leading women and with good reason.  At two years shy of 50, Weaver is an
accomplished performer and easily as sexy as anyone on "Bay Watch". Her
performance clearly overshadows the youthful Ryder's. She plays exactly who
she is supposed to be. It's just disappointing who that person is.
This is a difficult one to write. "Alien: Resurrection" was my most
anticipated film of the year and coming out of it, I was filled with very
mixed emotions. It's fun but not nearly as much as it should be. Weaver is
great in her role, but that role is disappointing. Asked numerous times, I've
responded with my three-word review: "good, not great".
Oh well. There's always the next one and trust me, there will be an "Alien 5".
Count on it.
(Michael Redman has written this column so long that this is his fourth
"Alien" review. He's overjoyed to announce that he is again one with the
electrons at redman@bvoice.com. Now if he'd only get something there.)
[This appeared in the 12/4/97 "Bloomington Voice", Bloomington, Indiana.
Michael Redman can be contacted at redman@bvoice.com ]
-- 
mailto:redman@bvoice.com
This week's film review at http://www.bvoice.com/
Film reviews archive at http://us.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Michael%20Redman

Title
Review for Flubber (1997)
Robin Williams is a comedic genus. That is, he is one when he's in a film that
allows him space to move. "Flubber" straps him in a straitjacket, covers him
with duct tape, stuffs him in a coat closet and piles furniture against the
door to make sure that he doesn't get out.
In a re-make of its own 1961 "Absent Minded Professor", Disney offers us proof
that more is definitely less. Recycling old films ("That Darned Cat", "101
Dalmatians") dressed up as new is the newest money machine from the home of
the mouse that roared.
Professor Phillip Brainard (Williams) is a terminally forgetful scientist
teaching at a small college. His fiancee, Sara Jean Reynolds (Marcia Gay
Harden), president of the college is none too happy with him because he's left
her waiting at the altar due to his lack of short-term -- and long-term --
memory. She's giving him one more chance.
He blows that chance when he invents "flubber" (FLying rUBBER) and is so
excited by his discovery that Sara Jean is once again awaiting him in her
white dress. His tardiness is helped along by his jealous flying robotic
assistant who wants him all to herself.
It's not all bad news. Flubber is a green jello that can magnify and reflect
energy that is applied to it. Brainard realizes the commercial potential
within the goo can save the school from bankruptcy and being taken over by the
town's evil industrialist Charles Hoenicker (Raymond Barry).
While he's busy with his new breakthrough, the slighted sweetheart is being
wooed by his sleazy rival Wilson Croft (Christopher McDonald). There's a
flying car, flubber-enhanced basketball game and an assortment of broken lab
equipment: none of which are the least bit interesting or funny. At one point,
my son looked around the audience and asked "Why are these people laughing?"
Although Williams turns in one of his least inspired roles, he is easily the
most lively of the actors. Everyone else comes across as half-asleep. The
re-make is successful in that respect. It feels like a bad Disney movie from
the sixties. I remember the original as being charming, but my guess is that
the memory from almost four decades ago has been artificially enhanced by the years.
There have been some updates. Fred MacMurray's flying Model T has been
replaced by a T-Bird. His faithful dog Charlie is now "Weebo", the hovering
robot. The biggest change is that, with sophisticated computer animation, we
now can have films show off special effects without being at all entertaining.
Flubber is anthropomorphized into a being supposedly with personality. The
gloop has little arms and legs and splits into tiny little gloopettes for a
big dance number. This has nothing to do with the story. The only possible
reason is to create merchandising opportunities so that kids can badger their
parents into taking them to McDonalds for the toys.
Not that contributing little to the plot is a big problem. There are very few
aspects of the film that move the story and those that do don't make sense.
The discovery of flubber is going to save the college because Brainard can
sell his flying car to Ford. Anyone with half a brain would be able to see
that his intelligent flying automaton is worth billions.
It's unbelievable that his lover (well, probably not a lover -- after all this
is Disney) starts dating Croft after the aborted wedding. There's not one
appealing component of this man.
After the professor discovers that smearing a golf ball with the gunk causes
it to bounce uncontrollably around his lab wreaking havoc, I cringed as he
picked up a bowling ball. This guy is beyond forgetful, venturing into the certifiable.
Co-writer John Hughes used to direct light-weight but thoughtful teen films.
The care behind "Pretty In Pink" and "The Breakfast Club" all went out the
window after his "Home Alone" franchise heated up the box offices. Looking
much like "Home Alone 3 1/2", "Flubber" even features a couple of vapid goons
who get banged around and a cute little boy who screams a lot.
In some ways, it's difficult to judge this film. I have a suspicion that I'm
not it's target audience. After all, I measure my age in two digits.
(Michael Redman has written this column for over 22 years and can't believe
that there are only some unspecific number of shopping days before all those
holidays that fall on December 25. Email gift ideas to redman@bvoice.com)
[This appeared in the 12/10/97 "Bloomington Voice", Bloomington, Indiana.
Michael Redman can be reached at redman@bvoice.com ]
-- 
mailto:redman@bvoice.com
This week's film review at http://www.bvoice.com/
Film reviews archive at http://us.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Michael%20Redman

Title
Review for Braveheart (1995)
Mel Gibson is William Wallace, the Scot commoner who started and lead the
rebellion against the English and shamed Robert the Bruce into joining and
finishing their fight for freedom. An epic film in all senses of the word, the
movie is a spectacular feast for the senses.
In this story, Wallace goes on a killing spree when the occupying English
troops kill his wife to draw him into battle. His search for revenge draws in
their village and eventually the entire country.
The rebellion of sons and the fulfillment of their father's desire themes runs
throughout the tale. Wallace is raised by an uncle when his father is killed
and he is living his father's warrior legacy. The treacherous English King and
his son have a strained relationship to put it mildly, as do Bruce and his
Machiavellian father.  Two of Wallace's most trusted warriors are a father-son
team. 
The battle scenes as the blue-painted `Woad Warrior' Gibson and his army of
berserkers attack the invaders are impressive and convincing in their blood
and gore. It makes sense that a war with hundreds of men armed with swords and
battle axes would not be a pleasant sight, but viewers with an aversion to
graphic violence are forewarned. Gaping wounds and decapitated bodies by the
score surround the blood-splattered Scots.
There are a few cultural stereotypes – a hot-blooded French babe, a weak gay
prince, a mad Irishman – that go against the grain of the current politically
correct wave, but they're still intriguing, believable characters.
The film is long, but you won't want to miss a minute. Skip the 10-gallon
Coke, you won't find a convenient time for that trip to the restroom.
[This appeared in the 5/30/96 "Bloomington Voice", Bloomington, Indiana.
Michael Redman can be contacted at redman@bvoice.com]
-- 
mailto:redman@bvoice.com
This week's film review at http://www.bvoice.com/
Film reviews archive at http://us.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Michael%20Redman
