Authors
news@ix.netcom.com
Number of Reviews
3

Title
Review for Big Night (1996)
I live in Wheaton, Illinois, a suburb of Chicago. It is a
place where you can hardly open your car door without
banging into a goose. During egg sitting time in the Spring,
the suckers rush you if you are out for a stroll in the
park. But, no matter,  you can't go to the park without
stepping in goose poop anyway. The people around here are so
enamored with fauna that they feed the geese so that they
stay around all year and have lost the ability to migrate.
We have goose crossing signs along certain roadways for
heavens sake! Not long ago, some teenage kids found a
wounded goose and abused it to death. They were arrested and
the news commentary stated that "charges were pending in the
goose homicide." Just think about that sentence. So, in my
area, animals have been raised to genus homo' and the world
goes mad. 
So I knew what I was in for when I went to see this movie.
And, while I am not one of the converted, I have to say that
it was a wonderful kid/animal movie. You have seen this
story many times before, albeit usually with horses or dogs
and lately with whales and sea lions. But this film is
significant in that we have at last moved out of the mammal
class. Here we have the reliable formula:  sad child forms 
relationship with needy creature(s) somewhere lower on the
food chain. The two grow mutually dependent and both are
(usually) saved from some kind of trouble. It works
wonderfully well. Here too. 
But we should be able to broaden things a bit. How about it?
Can we get a kid/animal movie with amphibians? Beetles?
Lobsters? Demand equal rights for bottom feeders! If a goose
can cuddle, (a needed requisite in kid/animal movies), why
can't a ... whatever? Just put a little food juice on the
nose or in the hair and you have a relationship!
I especially enjoyed Jeff Daniels as the eccentric Canadian artist. His
performance was the result of a terrific character/culture study. 
The triumph in this particular film is the flight photography. It is a
real feast for the eye and the heart. Take your kids and your inner kid
to this one. 

Title
Review for Shining, The (1980)
STANLEY KUBRICK'S "THE SHINING"
Starring Jack Nicholson and Shelley Duvall
        "The Shining" is about the happenings at the Overlook Hotel
having to do with our main character, Jack Nicholson, and his wife,
played by Shelley Duvall, as the caretakers of the hotel over the
winter.  It is also a good chance for Jack Torrance (Nicholson's
character) to get started on his new writing career, but there is
undoubtedly something wrong with the granted isolation.  Their son,
Danny (I don't quite remember the young actor's name), possesses some
sort of clairvoyance, known in the film as "the shining".  
        Halloran (Scatman Crothers), who also has 'the shining', is
the head chef of the hotel who establishes a slight communication
between himself and Danny earlier in the film.  Therefore, if
something should go wrong in their place for the winter, Danny would
be able to telepathically message him. 
        And boy, does it go wrong.  A month passes, and we already
start to see the craziness in Nicholson's character.  Mainly, this is
found in the parts in which Jack is typing, trying to work on his new
career.  Wendy (Duvall) disturbs him, and at this point, the insanity
progressively increases.
        The hotel's past is overshadowed with evil that lingers.
Danny is able to see some of the things his family can't.  His eyes
can see memories of the dark past as if they were real, as well as
future events.  He can see the evil spirits that reside in the halls
and the rooms of the Overlook Hotel.  These scenes are nothing short
of extraordinary, portraying Kubrick's brilliance in a vivid way.
        Many of you may disagree with my rating.  But I have many
reasons to back up the ***1/2.  The atmosphere is simply dazzling,
both eerie and terror-packed at the same time.  The characters could
use some work, but that is understandable, because Kubrick obviously
didn't want to waste time in giving his message.  They are just
representations of evil, good, and fear.  But the mood more than makes
up for the problems in the film, either way.  Nicholson does an
excellent job in taking the role of an insane man, as it is both
entertaining and scary.  
        The other big reason why I gave this film my rating is that it
was intelligently meaningful.  On the surface, "The Shining" is just a
good horror film.  But on am much deeper level, it is *filled* with
discreet messages that represent Kubrick's object of the film: the
origins of evil.  You may have to watch it more than once to get all
of it, but rest assured, it is well worth it.
        "The Shining" is a film about evil and its different forms.
Some people have said it was overlong, but I couldn't care less,
because I found myself entertained and bombarded with many important
Kubrick-style messages straight through to the end.
        Ignore the negative gripes that critics have said about this
masterful work.  Instead of all that flack they gave you, I found it
to be intelligently symbolic, absolutely *amazing* in the atmosphere
department, and a good horror film on the surface either way.
        People, this is a *must-see*.  It is a masterpiece.  See "The
Shining" at any expense.   

Title
Review for Big Night (1996)
Co-Directors: CAMPBELL SCOTT and STANLEY TUCCI
Screenplay by: JOSEPH TROPIANO, STANLEY TUCCI
At the end of this fine food film, after all the Italian
passion -- the shouting, the kissing, the fighting, the
yearning -- is over, and defeat is certain for all has been
spent, there is still the cooking of an omelet. 
Secundo, the brother whom we think has lost the most, (he
possesses none of the  genius of the food artist Primo), cooks
an omelet as an act of service for his helper and his brother.
This simple three egg omelet is perhaps the last bit of food
that will be given life in this restaurant called "Paradise." 
We watch as this omelet is made. We watch the whole thing,
without aid of time lapse photography, words, or music -- only
the clicks of spatula and fork and our melancholia to help us.
We watch the omelet from the idea of it, to the gathering of
material for it, through the cooking, the serving, and at last
the eating of it. And when at the final bite, a hesitant arm
is extended over the great divide --  Secundo to Primo,
business man to artist, pragmatist to idealist -- we know we
have seen something god-like. It is an act full of love and
forgiveness and promise. 
It is quite a divide that must be bridged because this is a
culture clash film. It is Old World vs. New World; principle
vs. utility; fine cuisine vs. beer and pizza; the holiness of
genius vs. base and filthy lucre. 
Secundo, who cooks the omelet and extends the arm, is not the
cook. He is the business man. He and his brother Primo are
immigrants from Italy who have come to make their fortune in
America. Secundo would like to compromise in matters of taste
for the sake of the business. Primo cannot -- will not -- do
it. "If you sacrifice, then the work dies." 
If you know an artist (in the radical sense of that word) for
whom to compromise artistic standards in any way means
pandering to the philistine taste of base people or else
prostituting the artistic soul for mere money or worldly
success, you will be reminded of him or her in this film. 
In art the question is always, "Who is art for?" Is art for
the sake of ART or perhaps for the "gods?"  Is the work the
thing? Is the artist's authenticity and integrity ultimate?
Must the artist be true only to himself and the rest be
damned? Or is business the god who must be served? You have
heard the arguments before. "You have to give people what they
want or you won't be able to give them any thing at all." In
this movie the line is, "I am a business man. I am what I need
to be at the time." 
So which wins in this movie? Neither. After a final "Big
Night," and an omelet the morning after,  Paradise must close.
Business has lost -- art too. 
But as we leave we are hopeful if somewhat melancholy. Hope
arises as Secundo cooks and then places his hesitant hand on
Primo's shoulder. These acts are a bridge across the divide.
They suggest a third and better way: not art for ART, nor art
for money;  not the artist as rare self-indulgent eccentric, nor as
pitiable prostitute who has sold his genius for a mess of the world's
tripe.. Rather art as service, art as love, art as, "let me make
something beautiful for you." 
This movie has an "R" rating because of rough language and a suggested
adulterous sexual situation. 
For more reviews by John Schuurman see:
http://www.mcs.com/~wcrc/movies.html
