Authors
Karl Rackwitz
Number of Reviews
10

Title
Review for Bridge on the River Kwai, The (1957)
Directed by David Lean; Written by Michael Wilson and Carl Foreman,
based on Pierre Boulle's novel; Cinematography by Jack Hildyard; Music
by Malcolm Arnold; Edited by Peter Taylor; Produced by Sam Spiegel; With
Alec Guinness, William Holden, Jack Hawkins, Sessue Hayakawa, James
Donald, Geoffrey Horne
In this year's July the American Film Institute (AFI) chose David Lean's
war picture "The Bridge on the River Kwai" as number 13 on its list of
the 100 greatest American movies. Not to mention that "The Bridge on the
River Kwai" is a British picture, the AFI's decision expresses in the
first place the same lapse of taste that the Academy of Motion Picture
Arts and Sciences showed in 1958 by giving Lean's film seven Oscars.
Much better movies came away empty-handed in those days, among them
Lumet's "12 Angry Men", Wilder's "Witness for the Prosecution" and
Kubrick's "Paths of Glory" (the latter wasn't nominated in any
category).
"The Bridge on the River Kwai" is set in Burma in 1943. A batallion of
British soldiers in Japanese war captivity is forced by the Japanese to
build a strategically momentous railway bridge over the River Kwai. But
the British commanding officer, Colonel Nicholson (Alec Guinness),
insists - corresponding to the Geneva Conventions - that his officers
needn't work as simple workmen. Struggling toughly, Colonel Nicholson
forces the Japanese commandant, Col. Saito (Sessue Hayakawa), to give
way in this respect. Afterwards Colonel Nicholson assiduously commits
himself for the building of the bridge. He considers it an opportunity
to raise his men's morale, and he wants to prove superior British
capabilities to the Japanese. But the British High Command sends a few
soldiers who shall destroy the bridge, among them the American Shears
(William Holden) - an escapee from the Japanese prison camp - and the
British Major Warden (Jack Hawkins).
The film is racist in a certain sense because the Japanese people are
presented as intellectually inferior to the British. For example, in the
filmmakers' opinion the Japanese seem to be incapable of building a
bridge.
Lean's picture partly succeeds in showing the madness of war. But the
movie opportunistically avoids a really consistent and clear treatment
of this theme. This is probably one of the reasons for the picture's
popularity. But unfortunately it also hinders "The Bridge on the River
Kwai" from being a real anti-war film. Much helped by Alec Guinness'
superior performance, there's at least the interesting study of Col.
Nicholson, a man possessed by the idea of being a hero. Although you can
find some ironic dialogue concerning the military spirit in the film,
David Lean doesn't really question the military "logic" as Stanley
Kubrick does in "Paths of Glory". Lean seems rather fascinated by the
military hierarchies. This is also perceptible in the conversations
between Col. Nicholson and Col. Saito. It is symptomatic of the film's
attitude that Shears, who doubts the military logic, is such a cynical
an unpleasant person. The audience is supposed to applaud Col.
Nicholson's perseverance concerning the question if his officers shall
work on the bridge or not. The spectators are supposed to neglect the
risks Nicholson takes for his men. (The plot systematically by-passes
these risks.)
Lean's direction is quite effective, but didn't deserve the Academy
Award it earned. (Compare the direction in "The Bridge on the River
Kwai" with Sidney Lumet's amazing and more subtle work in "12 Angry Men"
and Wilder's achievement in "Witness for the Prosecution".) The film is
well-photographed too and has an apt score. There is also no denying
that the picture is suspenseful. But the characters often seem little
more than a plot device.
"The Bridge on the River Kwai" is cynical, especially in the both
dramatic and implausible showdown. The filmmakers are obviously more
interested in clichés than in the characters of the film.
"The Bridge on the River Kwai" could have become an important
anti-militarist motion picture and an interesting study of complex
characters with clashing interests. But it hasn't. The formal cleverness
of Lean's film and its suspense can't obscure the fact that it is
questionable in its contents. There are, of course, worse films, but I
also know far better ones.
(C) Karl Rackwitz (Klein Köris, Germany, 1998)

Title
Review for Running on Empty (1988)
A film review by Karl Rackwitz (Berlin, Germany, 1997)
Copyright 1997 Karl Rackwitz
Director: Sidney Lumet
Original Screenplay: Naomi Foner
Director of Photography: Gerry Fisher
Music: Tony Mottola
Editor: Andrew Mondshein
With River Phoenix, Christine Lahti, Judd Hirsch, Martha Plimpton, Jonas Abry,
Ed Crowley, L.M. Kit Carson, Steven Hill, Augusta Dabney
Sidney Lumet is one of my favourite directors. It's not difficult to forget
that some of his films aren't great ("The Appointment", "The Last of the Mobile
Hotshots", "The Morning After", "A Stranger Among Us", "Guilty as Sin"),
because there are many superb motion pictures among his films, like "Twelve
Angry Men", "Long Day's Journey Into Night", "The Pawnbroker", "Serpico",
"Dog Day Afternoon", "Network", "Prince of the City", "The Verdict", the often
underrated "Q & A" and this excellent drama "RUNNING ON EMPTY".
In 1971, when they were radical students, Arthur and Annie Pope (Judd Hirsch,
Christine Lahti) committed a bomb attack on a napalm laboratory to stop the war
in Vietnam. Therefore they have been on the run for 15 years, chased by the
FBI. Now they have two sons, 17-year-old Danny
(River Phoenix) and 10-year-old Harry (Jonas Abry), who must share their
parents' destiny.
In the first scenes of the film the Pope family must again change home and
identities - as many times before. Now Danny falls in love
for Lorna Phillips (Martha Plimpton), the daughter of his music teacher
(Ed Crowley), who discovers Danny's musical talent and gets him to apply
for a study at Juilliard School. But that would destroy the
family. Danny gets into an inner conflict. On the one hand there are his
love to Lorna and his wish to live his own life. On the other hand he
wants to support his adored parents. When they notice that
conflict, they don't know what to do either.
With "RUNNING ON EMPTY" Sidney Lumet returns to the theme he has already
treated in his film "Daniel" (1983). Lumet and his screenwriter Naomi
Foner didn't want to make a political film in the first place. They
wanted to show how children can be affected by the activities of their
parents, and it's a film about the problems of families if the children
want to leave home. Actually it would have been imaginable to treat this
theme in front of a non-political background. But the political aspects
enrich the film and stimulate us to discuss about what's more important:
to change the world with dangerous actions or also to remember the
consequences of these actions not only for one's own life, but for the
lives of one's children too.
By his quiet and sensitive direction Sidney Lumet creates a high inner
suspense. And all the actors are - as usual in a Lumet film - excellent,
especially River Phoenix, who earned a well deserved Academy Award
nomination for his masterful performance (maybe the best in his much too
short life), and Christine Lahti. Another remarkable point is the well
considered editing with an apt use of dissolves and cuts.
This is one of the best films I've seen up to now, a movie that you
mustn't miss.
My rating: ***** out of ***** (A MASTERPIECE)

Title
Review for Second Best (1994)
Directed by Chris Menges; With William Hurt, Chris Cleary Miles, Keith
Allen, Jane Horrocks, Nathan Yapp, Alan Cumming
A wonderful little movie that is really interested in its characters and
in its theme.
The scene of "Second Best" is laid in Wales. James (Chris Cleary Miles)
is a 10-year-old boy who must live in a home because his father (Keith
Allen) is in prison and his mother committed suicide. James is a
mentally unbalanced child. He can't forget what happened in the past,
and he dreams of living a happy life with his beloved father. In the
home he feels sadly and lonely. One day, a social worker (Alan Cumming)
teels him of a person who wants to adopt him. This person is Graham Holt
(William Hurt). Graham manages a post office and shop in a village. He
is a single and hasn't any real friends. His mother is dead, and his
father is ill and will die. Graham feels that he has been a
disappointment to his parents. There has never been real love between
his parents and him. Graham's monotonous life would get a new sense if
he could adopt James. But Graham has not only to convince the
institutions, but must also win the love of James. James and Graham have
to open theirselves. They must get to know each other and learn to
understand and trust the other person. James and Graham aid each other
to cope with their problems. But will their relationship really have a
future?
"Second Best" is based on a novel by David Cook who also wrote the
screenplay. The film was directed by Chris Menges who had made his
directing debut with the very good anti-Apartheid drama "A World Apart"
(1987/88). And maybe, "Second Best" is even a greater picture.
This precise, richly detailed, sensitively and convincingly directed
study about a special adoption treat its theme with great seriousness.
The breathtakingly intense film shows the necessity of human contact and
communication. William Hurt delivers an outstanding performance as
Graham Holt. And Chris Cleary Miles is remarkably convincing in the role
of the boy. The supporting cast is also fine (especially Jane Horrocks
as Debbie, a social worker who is charged to examine Graham's living
circumstances).
"Second Best" is an underestimated masterpiece. It's a pity that films
like this one are made so seldom.
I eagerly await Menges' next directorial work, "The Lost Son", which
will star Daniel Auteuil.

Title
Review for Little Nikita (1988)
A film retrospective by Karl Rackwitz (Berlin, Germany, 1998):
Directed by Richard Benjamin; With River Phoenix, Sidney Poitier,
Richard Jenkins, Caroline Kava, Richard Bradford, Richard Lynch
Here we have just another example of two fine actors wasted in a badly
written and weakly directed film.
The American teenager Jeff Grant (River Phoenix) applies for the
admission into the Air Force Academy. FBI man Roy Parmenter (Sidney
Poitier) examines Jeff's particulars and stumbles on contradictory
information about Jeff's parents (played by Richard Jenkins and Caroline
Kava). At the same time Parmenter works on another case: The former KGB
agent Scuba (played by Richard Lynch), who murdered Parmenter's
colleague 20 years ago, now commits a series of murders of Russian
agents to blackmail the KGB. Then KGB agent Konstantin Karpov (Richard
Bradford), who wants to catch Scuba, is seen in Fountain Grove, the
Grant family's place of residence. That makes Parmenter conjecture that
Jeff's parents are Russian spies. His investigations confirm this
suspicion. Jeff doesn't know of the espionage job of his parents. When
he is told of it by Roy, with whom he has made friends, he gets
thunderstruck. His parents - Russian spies?! Jeff's parents have been
living the life of ordinary American people for 20 years. They run a
garden nursery in Fountain Grove and use the false family name Grant.
Now KGB man Karpov instructs them, who are also potential victims of
Scuba, to become active again. They shall help in a surrender of money
organized to catch Scuba. The Grants don't want to take part. But Karpov
forces them by kidnapping Jeff ...
What may sound like an interesting idea, gets a disappointing film here.
"Little Nikita" doesn't nearly exhaust the opportunities of the subject.
It convinces neither on the level of Jeff's and his parents' identity
problems, nor in its treatment of the Cold War, nor is it a suspenseful
spy thriller.
The main problem of the film is its really weak screenplay (by Bo
Goldman and John Hill). We are told little about Jeff's girlfriend
although she doesn't seem unimportant in Jeff's life. The characters of
the parents aren't paid enough attention. The Russians are degraded to
cartoon characters. In short: The film can't be considered a serious
work. Yet it could have become an exciting film. It hasn't. The
screenplay is overly constructed and full of improbable incidents
leading to a totally unbelievable finale.
Another fatal problem is Richard Benjamin's clumsy direction, especially
in the action scenes of the film. An example is the weakly filmed scene,
in which Scuba makes a woman be run over by a ship. The directorial
flaws in the last 20 minutes of the film are much more serious than in
this scene. Benjamin's direction makes the implausible finale even more
absurd.
It is due to River Phoenix and Sidney Poitier that "Little Nikita" isn't
completely unwatchable. They give the film some interest and a little
bit suspense. Phoenix' performance is solid, partially fascinating,
although he sometimes tends to overacting here. His interpretation of
Jeff Grant hasn't the accuracy of his excellent performances in "Stand
by Me" (1986), "Running on Empty" (1987), "Dogfight" (1991) and "My Own
Private Idaho" (1991). Sidney Poitier is also quite good in the role of
the FBI man Parmenter.
There are some references to the bilateral policy of détente between the
Eastern and Western blocs. But to treat this theme convincingly it would
have needed a serious dealing instead of clichés.
After all "Little Nikita" is a disappointing film with some
entertainment value thanks to the two leads.
To all those who want to see better films starring River Phoenix, I
especially recommend the following film in his filmography, Sidney
Lumet's masterpiece "Running on Empty" (1987) in which Phoenix gives one
of the best performances of his career.
I give "Little Nikita" still a ** rating on the Maltin scale of four
stars.

Title
Review for Daniel (1983)
Directed by Sidney Lumet; Written by E.L. Doctorow, based on his own
novel "The Book of Daniel"; With Timothy Hutton, Mandy Patinkin, Lindsay
Crouse, Amanda Plummer, Edward Asner, Ilan M. Mitchell-Smith, Ellen
Barkin, John Rubinstein, Maria Tucci, Jena Greco, Joseph Leon, Tovah
Feldshuh, Lee Richardson, David Margulies, Carmen Mathews, Julie
Bovasso, Norman Parker, Colin Stinton
Sidney Lumet's film "DANIEL" and E.L. Doctorow's novel "The Book of
Daniel", which it is based upon, are inspired by the controversial
Rosenberg case.
At first some words about the complex story. Paul and Rochelle Isaacson
(Mandy Patinkin, Lindsay Crouse) were executed in the early 1950s for
alleged espionage. Their children Daniel and Susan can't get over this.
In the late 1960s, after an attempted suicide of his politically more
active sister Susan (Amanda Plummer), the rather unpolitical Daniel
(Timothy Hutton) tries to find out what exactly happened in the past,
tries to understand his parents' lives, tries to help his sister and to
get along with his own life ...
"DANIEL" shows how children can be affected by the lives of their
parents. And it is about the search of one's place in life. Lumet
treated these themes again later in his masterful "RUNNING ON EMPTY",
starring River Phoenix, Christine Lahti and Judd Hirsch. Another theme
of "DANIEL" is the wish of human beings to understand their parents.
Lumet described the film in a Village Voice interview in the following
way: "To me, 'DANIEL' is the story of a boy who buries himself with his
parents, and spends the rest of his life trying to climb out of the
grave." The movie uses a complex flashback structure to tell its story.
"DANIEL" illuminates from Daniel's view the history of the American left
from the 1930s to the late 1960s, including the different left
movements. In its criticism of death penalty and McCarthyism, the film
is also a political statement.
Sidney Lumet is one of the masters of the American cinema. He has given
us the masterpieces "12 ANGRY MEN", "LONG DAY'S JOURNEY INTO NIGHT",
"THE PAWNBROKER", "THE HILL", "SERPICO", "DOG DAY AFTERNOON", "NETWORK",
"PRINCE OF THE CITY", "THE VERDICT" and "RUNNING ON EMPTY". He also
directed other very good movies like "FAIL-SAFE", "THE DEADLY AFFAIR",
"THE OFFENCE", "MURDER ON THE ORIENT EXPRESS" and "Q & A". Lumet himself
is politically left-leaning, and "DANIEL" is probably one of his most
personal works. It was about seven years before he got the chance to
realize this project. Many people worked on "DANIEL" for the minimum
salary set by the union. Timothy Hutton turned down a million-dollar
offer on a film and worked on "DANIEL" instead for about 25000 dollars.
And Lumet is right when he writes in his very informative book "Making
Movies": "Despite its critical and financial failure, I think it's one
of the best pictures I've ever done." The film proves again Lumet's
ability to tell complex, emotionally absorbing, unsentimental stories.
Everything works in this uncompromising picture. A few of Lumet's films
were marred by their scripts ("THE APPOINTMENT", "POWER", "FAMILY
BUSINESS", "A STRANGER AMONG US"). But Doctorow's screenplay for
"DANIEL" is excellent and extraordinarily multi-layered. And Lumet's
direction is sensitive and fascinating. Timothy Hutton (who later
starred with Nick Nolte and Armand Assante in Lumet's cop thriller "Q &
A"), Edward Asner (who plays the Isaacson's attorney), Lindsay Crouse
(who also appeared in "PRINCE OF THE CITY" and "THE VERDICT"), Mandy
Patinkin, Amanda Plummer and Ilan M. Mitchell-Smith (who plays the young
Daniel in the early 1950s) stand out in a fine cast. Andrzej
Bartkowiak's impressive cinematography supports the flashback structure
by a careful use of color filters. The rich soundtrack, mainly
consisting of songs interpreted by Paul Robeson, perfectly fits and
illustrates the film's themes. The editing is excellent as well (a good
example is the brilliantly filmed end sequence).
There are many great moments in this movie. For instance, there is a
powerful rally scene in which you can feel that the Isaacson's children
are afraid of the world around them. Another moving scene is a sequence
in which young Daniel and young Susan (played by Ilan M. Mitchell-Smith
and Jena Greco) walk through New York in search of their home. This
scene, also showing Lumet's typically great use of the city of New York,
reminded me of Antonioni's "LA NOTTE".
I'm an admirer of Sidney Lumet's cinema. "DANIEL" is one of his most
underestimated motion pictures, really a must-see. Of course, don't
expect standard Hollywood entertainment, but a serious work.
(C) Karl Rackwitz (Klein Köris, Germany, 1999)

Title
Review for Roseaux sauvages, Les (1994)
A film review by Karl Rackwitz (Germany, 1998)
Copyright 1998 Karl Rackwitz
Directed by André Téchiné;
With Gaël Morel, Elodie Bouchez, Frédéric Gorny, Stéphane Rideau,
Michčle Moretti
German title: "Wilde Herzen"; American Title: "Wild Reeds"
I want to start at the end. The camera seems to have lost its
orientation. It rotates, seeking young people whose search of their
place in life was described in the film. Maybe some spectators are
looking for orientation in their lives too, and possibly the film could
help them.
The scene of André Téchiné's convincing, prize-winning autobiographic
drama "Les roseaux sauvages" is laid in the France of 1962, short before
the end of the Algerian War. France had already consented to Algeria's
independence under an agreement, but this peace treaty was combatted by
the OAS, a nationalist organization of French living in Algeria.
The main characters in the film are four boarders.
François (Gaël Morel) and Maité (Elodie Bouchez), the daughter of the
French mistress Mme. Alvarez (Michčle Moretti), love each other, but on
a purely spiritual level. More and more François perceives a homosexual
inclination in himself. He falls in love for his class-mate Serge
(Stéphane Rideau). But the latter doesn't reciprocate his love. They
sleep with each other only once. Serge is heterosexual and feels
attracted by Maité, but she feels reservations against him.
In a noteworthy scene at a party François confesses Maité that he slept
with a boy, but she explains François that this doesn't alter her love
to him.
At the beginning of the film François, Maité and Mme. Alvarez are guests
at the wedding of Serge's brother, who was a pupil of Mme. Alvarez in
former times and who is now a French soldier in Algeria. Serge's brother
asks Mme. Alvarez, a communist, to hide him, because he doesn't want to
return to Algeria. But she refuses. Later Serge falls a victim to an
assassination committed by the OAS.
Serge angrily leaves the funeral. François induces Maité to follow Serge
in order to console him. François wishes that these two people he loves
shall love each other as well.
Mme. Alvarez has a breakdown caused by a sense of guilt. Serge for the
present looks upon the newcomer Henri (Frédéric Gorny) as an enemy,
because Henri is an Algerian-French adherent of the OAS. Mme. Alvarez
and Maité also feel reservations against Henri, and somehow so does
François. But nevertheless François feels also attracted by Henri in
some way, what entails discussions with Maité ...
One theme of "Les roseaux sauvages" is tolerance. The tolerance motif is
also verbally expressed, when François reads out Jean de La Fontaine's
fable "Le chęne et le roseau" in a French lesson. You can find the
tolerance motif in connection with the liaisons of the protagonists - as
in the above-mentioned confession scene. And you can also find it in
connection with their views of life and their political standpoints (for
instance their attitudes towards the Algerian War), that are different
because of different origin and personal living circumstances. The film
shows impressively, that political disagreements needn't be an
insurmountable barrier on the way of friendship or love, but can be
overcome by mutual respect and interest in the thoughts, feelings and
living circumstances of the other person. That becomes especially clear
in the presentation of the relation between Maité and Henri.
But Téchiné's film is not a pure discourse on tolerance. "Les roseaux
sauvages" deals sensitively and believably with the relations, problems,
yearnings, fears and views of life of its young protagonists in a time
of political and personal transition. It narrates of their search of
political, social, sexual and human orientation.
Téchiné found fascinating images for that. He succeeded in making an
important, extraordinarily multi-layered film that gets along without
sentimentality or big effects. Téchiné's direction is outstanding. And
the young leads impress by very fine performances. Elodie Bouchez in the
role of Maité is especially riveting.
In the above-mentioned final scene the camera finds the teenagers.
They're crossing a bridge. In their search of the right way in this
difficult time they have found a bit orientation.
Excellent films like this one and Jacques Doillon's "Le petit criminel"
(1990), which in a very different context also treats young people's
search of stability and love, got me to pay more attention to French
cinema.
I give Téchiné's film a ****˝ rating on the scale of five stars.

Title
Review for Roseaux sauvages, Les (1994)
Directed by André Téchiné; With Gaël Morel, Elodie Bouchez, Frédéric
Gorny, Stéphane Rideau, Michčle Moretti
I want to start at the end. The camera seems to have lost its
orientation. It rotates, seeking young people whose search of their
place in life was described in the film. Maybe some spectators are
looking for orientation in their lives too, and possibly the film could
help them.
The scene of André Téchiné's convincing, award-winning autobiographic
drama "Les roseaux sauvages" is laid in the France of 1962, short before
the end of the Algerian War. France had already consented to Algeria's
independence under an agreement, but this peace treaty was combatted by
the OAS, a nationalist organization of French living in Algeria.
The main characters in the film are four boarders. François (Gaël Morel)
and Maité (Elodie Bouchez), the daughter of the French mistress Mme.
Alvarez (Michčle Moretti), love each other, but on a purely spiritual
level. More and more François perceives a homosexual inclination in
himself. He falls in love for his class-mate Serge (Stéphane Rideau).
But the latter doesn't reciprocate his love. They sleep with each other
only once. Serge is heterosexual and feels attracted by Maité, but she
feels reservations against him. In a noteworthy scene at a party
François confesses Maité that he slept with a boy, but she explains
François that this doesn't alter her love to him. At the beginning of
the film François, Maité and Mme. Alvarez are guests at the wedding of
Serge's brother, who was a pupil of Mme. Alvarez in former times and who
is now a French soldier in Algeria. Serge's brother asks Mme. Alvarez, a
communist, to hide him, because he doesn't want to return to Algeria.
But she refuses. Later Serge's brother falls a victim to an
assassination committed by the OAS. Serge angrily leaves the funeral.
François induces Maité to follow Serge in order to console him. François
wishes that these two people he loves shall love each other as well.
Mme. Alvarez has a breakdown caused by a sense of guilt. Serge for the
present looks upon the newcomer Henri (Frédéric Gorny) as an enemy,
because Henri is an Algerian-French adherent of the OAS. Mme. Alvarez
and Maité also feel reservations against Henri, and somehow so does
François. But nevertheless François feels also attracted by Henri in
some way, what entails discussions with Maité ...
One theme of "Les roseaux sauvages" is tolerance. This is also verbally
expressed, when François reads out Jean de La Fontaine's fable "Le chęne
et le roseau" in a French lesson. You can find the tolerance motif in
connection with the liaisons of the protagonists - as in the
above-mentioned confession scene. And you can also find it in connection
with their views of life and their political standpoints (for instance
their attitudes towards the Algerian War), that are different because of
different origin and personal living circumstances. The film shows
impressively, that political disagreements needn't be an insurmountable
barrier on the way of friendship or love, but can be overcome by mutual
respect and interest in the thoughts, feelings and living circumstances
of the other person. That becomes especially clear in the presentation
of the relation between Maité and Henri.
But Téchiné's film is not a pure discourse on tolerance. "Les roseaux
sauvages" deals sensitively and believably with the relations, problems,
yearnings, fears and views of life of its young protagonists in a time
of political and personal transition. It narrates of their search of
political, social, sexual and human orientation. Téchiné found
fascinating images for that. He succeeded in making an important,
extraordinarily multi-layered film that gets along without
sentimentality or big effects. Téchine's direction is outstanding. And
the young leads impress by very fine performances. Elodie Bouchez in the
role of Maité is especially riveting.
In the above-mentioned final scene the camera finds the teenagers.
They're crossing a bridge. In their search of the right way in this
difficult time they have found a bit orientation.
"Les roseaux sauvages" is a masterpiece, a much better movie than
Téchiné's average, rather banal "Rendez-vous" (1985) and his watchable,
but uneven "Le lieu du crime" ("Scene of the Crime", 1986).
Excellent films like "Les roseaux sauvages" and Jacques Doillon's "Le
petit criminel" (1990), which in a very different context also treats
young people's search of stability and love, got me to pay more
attention to French cinema.

Title
Review for Bridge on the River Kwai, The (1957)
Directed by David Lean; Written by Michael Wilson, Carl Foreman, based
on Pierre Boulle's novel; Cinematography by Jack Hildyard; Music by
Malcolm Arnold; Edited by Peter Taylor; Produced by Sam Spiegel; With
Alec Guinness, William Holden, Jack Hawkins, Sessue Hayakawa, James
Donald, Geoffrey Horne
I want to correct what I wrote last year in my retrospective of David
Lean's war picture.
I still think that "The Bridge on the River Kwai" doesn't deserve being
the number 13 in the American Film Institute's list of the 100 greatest
American movies. And I think that "12 Angry Men", "Witness for the
Prosecution" and "Paths of Glory" would have been better choices for the
Oscar for the Best Picture of 1957.
But I can't deny the importance of "The Bridge on the River Kwai" -
cinematically and in its contents.
The film is set in Burma in 1943. A batallion of British soldiers in
Japanese war captivity is forced by the Japanese to build a
strategically momentous railway bridge over the River Kwai. But the
British commanding officer, Colonel Nicholson (Alec Guinness), insists -
corresponding to the Geneva Conventions - that his officers needn't work
as simple workmen. Struggling toughly, Col. Nicholson forces the
Japanese commandant, Col. Saito (Sessue Hayakawa), to give way in this
respect. Afterwards Col. Nicholson assiduously commits himself for the
building of the bridge. He considers it an opportunity to raise his
men's morale, and he wants to prove superior British capabilities to the
Japanese. But the British High Command sends a few soldiers who shall
destroy the bridge, among them the American Shears (William Holden) - an
escapee from the Japanese prison camp - and the British Major Warden
(Jack Hawkins) ...
A flaw of the picture is the clichéd characterization of the Japanese
people. They are presented as if they were intellectually inferior to
the British - as if the Japanese were incapable of building a bridge.
And the film doesn't consistently question the military spirit as
Kubrick does in "Paths of Glory". Lean seems rather fascinated by the
military hierarchies. This is also perceptible in the conversations
between Col. Nicholson and Col. Saito. In this regard it is symptomatic
that Shears, who doubts the military logic, is presented as a somehow
unpleasant person. The audience is supposed to applaud Col. Nicholson's
perseverance concerning the question if his officers shall work on the
bridge or not. The spectators are supposed to neglect the risks Col.
Nicholson takes for his men. (The plot by-passes these risks.)
That means, the picture isn't perfect. But it has a lot of virtues as
well.
"The Bridge on the River Kwai" shows the "madness" of war and what it
can produce in people's minds. It shows how Colonel Nicholson becomes
possessed by the idea of being a hero and that others (like Shears) get
cynics. And Lean's film is an interesting study of characters with
clashing interests. These points and the sometimes ironic dialogue make
this film an anti-war film (despite inconsistencies in the treatment of
this theme).
David Lean's direction is really effective and atmospherically perfect.
His film is highly suspenseful, especially in its dramatic (if not
wholly plausible) showdown. The film is also well-photographed and has
an apt score.
Alec Guinness does a magnificent job of bringing Col. Nicholson to life
and making him such an interesting character.  The other actors deliver
fine performances as well.
I like this extraordinary film despite its weaknesses.
(C) Karl Rackwitz (Klein Köris, Germany, 1999)

Title
Review for Daniel (1983)
Directed by Sidney Lumet; Written by E.L. Doctorow, based on his own
novel "The Book of Daniel"; With Timothy Hutton, Mandy Patinkin, Lindsay
Crouse, Amanda Plummer, Edward Asner, Ilan M. Mitchell-Smith, Ellen
Barkin, John Rubinstein, Maria Tucci, Joseph Leon, Tovah Feldshuh, Lee
Richardson, David Margulies, Carmen Matthews, Julie Bovasso, Jena Greco
Sidney Lumet's film "DANIEL" and E.L. Doctorow's novel "The Book of
Daniel", which it is based upon, are inspired by the controversial
historical case of Julius and Ethel Rosenberg.
At first some words about the complex story. Paul and Rochelle Isaacson
(Mandy Patinkin, Lindsay Crouse) were executed in the early 1950s for
alleged espionage. Their children Daniel and Susan can't get over this.
In the late 1960s, after an attempted suicide of his politically more
active sister Susan (played by Amanda Plummer), the rather unpolitical
Daniel (Timothy Hutton) tries to find out what exactly happened in the
past, tries to understand his parents' lives, tries to help his sister
and to get along with his own live ...
In the first place "DANIEL" is about the effects of parents' lives on
the lives of their children and about the wish of human beings to
understand their parents. Lumet said in a Village Voice interview: "To
me, 'DANIEL' is the story of a boy who buries himself with his parents,
and spends the rest of his life trying to climb out of the grave." But
the multi-layered film deals with other problems as well. Through a
complex flashback structure it illuminates from Daniel's view the
history of the American left from the 1930s to the late 1960s, including
the different left movements. In its criticism of death penalty and
McCarthyism, the film is also a political statement.
Sidney Lumet is one of the masters of the American cinema. He has given
us the masterpieces "12 ANGRY MEN", "LONG DAY'S JOURNEY INTO NIGHT",
"THE PAWNBROKER", "THE HILL", "SERPICO", "DOG DAY AFTERNOON", "NETWORK",
"PRINCE OF THE CITY", "THE VERDICT" and "RUNNING ON EMPTY". Lumet
himself is politically left-leaning, and "DANIEL" is probably one of his
most personal works. It was about seven years before he got the chance
to realize this project. Many people who worked on "DANIEL" helped him
by taking only the minimum salary set by the union. Timothy Hutton, for
instance, turned down a million-dollar offer on a film and worked on
"DANIEL" instead for about 25000 dollars.
And Lumet is right when he writes in his book "Making Movies": "Despite
its critical and financial failure, I think it's one of the best
pictures I've ever done." The film proves again Lumet's ability to tell
complex, emotionally absorbing, unsentimental stories. Everything works
in this uncompromising film. Doctorow provided an extraordinarily
multi-layered screenplay. Timothy Hutton (who later starred with Nick
Nolte and Armand Assante in Lumet's very good cop thriller "Q & A"),
Edward Asner, Lindsay Crouse, Mandy Patinkin, Ilan M. Mitchell-Smith
(who plays the young Daniel in the early 1950s) and Amanda Plummer stand
out in a good cast. The fine cinematography supports the flashback
structure by a careful use of color filters. The rich soundtrack, mainly
consisting of songs interpreted by Paul Robeson, perfectly fits and
illustrates the film's themes. The editing is excellent as well (a good
example is the brilliantly filmed end sequence).
An especially moving scene of the film, also showing Lumet's typically
great use of the city of New York, is a sequence in which young Daniel
and young Susan (played by Ilan M. Mitchell-Smith and Jena Greco) walk
through New York in search of their home.
"DANIEL" is a must-see. Of course, don't expect standard Hollywood
entertainment, but a serious work. See also Sidney Lumet's later drama
"RUNNING ON EMPTY" (starring River Phoenix, Christine Lahti and Judd
Hirsch), another masterful movie about similar themes.
(C) Karl Rackwitz (Klein Köris, Germany, 1999)

Title
Review for Second Best (1994)
Directed by Chris Menges; With William Hurt, Chris Cleary Miles, Keith
Allen, Jane Horrocks, Nathan Yapp, Alan Cumming
A wonderful little movie that is really interested in its characters and
in its theme.
The scene of "Second Best" is laid in Wales. James (Chris Cleary Miles)
is a 10-year-old boy who must live in a home because his father (Keith
Allen) is in prison and his mother committed suicide. James is a
mentally unbalanced child. He can't forget what happened in the past,
and he dreams of living a happy life with his beloved father. In the
home he feels sadly and lonely. One day, a social worker (Alan Cumming)
tells him of a person who wants to adopt him. This person is Graham Holt
(William Hurt). Graham manages a post office and shop in a village. He
is a single and hasn't any real friends. His mother is dead, and his
father is ill and will die. Graham feels that he has been a
disappointment to his parents. There has never been real love between
his parents and him. Graham's monotonous life would get a new sense if
he could adopt James. But Graham has not only to convince the
institutions, but must also win the love of James. James and Graham have
to open theirselves. They must get to know each other and learn to
understand and trust the other person. James and Graham aid each other
to cope with their problems. But will their relationship really have a
future?
"Second Best" is based on a novel by David Cook who also wrote the
screenplay. The film was directed by Chris Menges who had made his
directing debut with the very good anti-Apartheid drama "A World Apart"
(1987/88). And maybe, "Second Best" is even a greater picture.
This precise, richly detailed, sensitively and convincingly directed
study about a special adoption treats its theme with great seriousness.
The breathtakingly intense film shows the necessity of human contact and
communication. William Hurt delivers an outstanding performance as
Graham Holt. And Chris Cleary Miles is remarkably convincing in the role
of the boy. The supporting cast is also fine (especially Jane Horrocks
as Debbie, a social worker who is charged to examine Graham's living
circumstances).
"Second Best" is an underestimated masterpiece. It's a pity that films
like this one are made so seldom.
I eagerly await Menges' next directorial work, "The Lost Son", which
will star Daniel Auteuil.
