Authors
Stephen Rafferty
Number of Reviews
8

Title
Review for Crimson Tide (1995)
Directed by Tony Scott
Starring: Gene Hackman, Denzel Washington, George Dzundza, Vitto Mortensen.
Written by Michael Schiffer
     There is a much respected poem which is often used on graduation cards
which has an all important theme: that the journey's end is not as
important as the journeying itself.  This age old saying has never been
more true than with the new thriller CRIMSON TIDE.  Even though the end
may not have as an emotional impact as expected, it is not so bad as to
spoil the brilliance of what has come before it.
     The prologue to this story is simple, and one which causes concern due
to how believable a situation it creates.  A group of Russian rebels has
split from the regular army to follow an ultra right-wing leader who is
threatening the use of nuclear weapons.  Upon noticing this on television at
his daughter's birthday, chief naval officer Hunter (Washington) is called
away from home.  Washington interviews with the commander of the USS
Alabama, Capt. Ramsey (Hackman) to serve as XO (senior officer) of the sub.
 This si a tense but eventually successful interview for the XO.
     Once underway, CRIMSON TIDE becomes part submarine action thriller
and part character study.  Early on in the ships mission we are given a
sense of foreshadowing of what will become the films main conflict. 
Captain Ramsey, at dinner with his supervisors, asks the XO about his
beliefs regarding war.  Again, although calm on the surface, there is a
gripping sense of tension as Washington disagrees with Hackman.  Both
actors are 1st rate in their roles, especially Hackman who seems to shine
when playing villains these days.  His Captain Ramsey is methodical yet 
boisterous and ferocious in his grip of the ship.  He smokes his cigars
with the elegance of a statesman, but never loses the edge that he could
blow up in a split second.  Washinton's XO is cool and collected.  He sees
the men's moral and situation sink, pun intended, and tries to help with
humour and authority mixed.  
     After completing a trial run of the ships emergency weapons procedure
and some intense technical problems, the sub receives a message to eproceed
to Def Con 2: put the ships nuclear warheads on standby, ready to fire! 
Now the main problem ensues: the Captain wants to go ahead with the
launching of the weapons to beat the Russian rebels who are in the process
of fueling their nuclear weapons, and the XO wishes to find out what a
second emergency message sent which was cut off, means.  The two now are at
odds but the captain needs XO Hunter in order to properly launch the subs
missiles.  At this point, the already well paced action becomes breakneck
and tremendously engaging.  Captain Ramsey is arrested and the XO takes
charge, but a core group of officers find themselves at odds with the XO
and release the Captain and take over the ship once more.
     Director Tony Scott does a great job of never letting the pace slip
beyond a furious speed.  We are rushed along the ships galleys and up and
down it's stairs.  We are plunged into the different areas of the sub and
are quickly assimilated into their functions.  Cinematographer Doriusz
Wolski creates a memorable and stylish atmosphere with great shadow and
intense colour.  All the supporting cast are brilliant, especially Viggo
Mortensen who plays the ships weapons officer.  
     We know where this film is going, but getting there is what this story
is about.  The script is incredibly intelligent, and does not create such a
right and wrong that we loose touch with either of the main characters. 
The secondary characters are developed much better than in most films of
this nature, and are only helped as i said by really fine acting.
     Too much publicity around this film has compared it to THE HUNT
FOR RED OCTOBER.  Whether it is better or not I'm not sure, but on its
own it is a first rate thriller and one I recommend highly.

Title
Review for Rob Roy (1995)
Directed by Michael Caton-Jones
Starring Liam Neeson, Jessica Lange, Tim Roth, John Hurt, Brian Cox
     Based on the famous Scottish legend, Director Caton-Jones
(Scandal) gives this story top notch treatment.  Neeson stars as Rob
Roy McGregor, a highlander who is the leader of his clan, which with
himself work for the Marquis of Montrose (Hurt) and also owns his own
piece of land.  Making the decision to borrow money from the Marquis
and try to sell cattle he herds with the men of his clan, Roy steps on
the toes of a visitor of the Marquis played by Tim Roth, and the
Factor, Brian Cox.
     The story then unfolds as Roy must prove to the Marquis he did not
steal his money and also confront Roth, who is the most devilish
villain in quite some time.
     Being Scottish,  I was a little apprehensive about this film, but
Jones really has done a superb job.  There is great detail given to the
way of life and to every facet of Scottish civilization in this
period.  Neeson is the quintessential hero, and is overpowering in the
fight scenes. Lange (BLUE SKY) once again proves why she is one of the
hottest actresses around, giving a memorable performance and pulling
off quite a good accent.  The supporting cast is first rate as well.
Hurt (ALIEN) is perfect as the pompous, yet fleeting Marquis, and Cox
(HIDDEN AGENDA) is extremely well cast as the Marquis right hand man.
However, as has been said by almost all reviews so far, the film
belongs to Roth (PULP FICTION, RESERVOIR DOGS) who steals every scene
he is in.  With just the right amount of effeminate gesturing, his
ruthlessness is all the more disturbing.  Truly one of the best
villains in the past few years.
     Karl Walter Lindenlaub's cinematography is exquisite, showing the
simple beauty of Scotland.

Title
Review for Judge Dredd (1995)
Directed by Danny Cannon
Starring: Sylvester Stallone, Armand Assante, Rob Schneider, Max Von Sydow.
Written by Bill Wisher, Walon Green, John Fasano, Steven De Souza.
Cinematography by Adrian Biddle, BSC.
Edited by Alex Mackie
     Completely disappointing is the only way for myself to describe
JUDGE DREDD.  I've collected Dredd comics for close to ten years now,
and unfortunately this film is not a good depiction of the comic.
However, this is not for the obvious reasons an avid comic collector
might have.
     Stallone plays Dredd, a Judge in the 21st century who is the
complete package: Judge, Jury, and Executioner.  The Earth is split
into basic two parts: the Cursed Earth which is a barren wasteland
where savages exist, and a few Mega City's spread throughout the
world.  Mega City 1 where Dredd's beat is, is not a far cry from the
futuristic world of BLADE RUNNER, but a little bigger and a little
lighter.  Block wars, where a whole block of inhabitants of Mega-City
basically go on a rampage, are the norm.   Dredd is constantly quelling
these outbursts in his usual calm, unemotional manner.  He is the
quintessential steel nerved man; he Judges with no connection to the
humans involved.
     Basically the plot is this: bad old Judge comes back and tries to
take over Mega-City 1, he tries to kill his old brother Dredd, and
Dredd battles him until the slam-bam climax.  Guess who wins?
     My problem is that the script is just poorly written, and never
challenges the viewer once.  The plot follows the course you think it
will after you've seen the first twenty minutes.   The script being so
bad makes the film a let down because Stallone is actually good in the
lead, and the film does a great job of depicting Mega City 1 as it is
in the comic.  In fact, when I first saw the matte shot of Mega City at
the beginning of the film I was very impressed with it's almost perfect
version of the crime ridden metropolis.   He will have his detractors,
but Stallone is perfect for Dredd, who is really a man turned robot.
Even though he is unmasked unlike the comic, for most of the film he
keeps the stoic posture that is Dredd.  He Judges and executes without
remorse.  Stallone only fails when the character as written fails; when
too much emotion is involved.
     If Director Cannon, a self confessed Dredd fanatic, had stayed
truer to the comic's campy, satirical tone with a stone-faced hero,
he'd have made a much better film.

Title
Review for Braveheart (1995)
Directed by Mel Gibson
Starring: Mel Gibson. Sophie Morceau, Patrick MacGoohan, Catherine McCormack
Produced by Mel Gibson, Alan Ladd Jr., and Bruce Davey 
Written by Randall Wallace
Director of Photrography  John Toll
     There are times when art touches a personal chord, and for me the
viewing of Mel Gibson's BRAVEHEART was one of those times.  I was born
and raised not far from Stirling in Scotland where William Wallace's
monument stands and his first battle took place.  As you can imagine,
the stories of Wallace abound in that area, and it is of great joy to
review that Gibson has done those stories and legends proud.  As with
any historic film, Gibson has taken some liberties with fact, but
overall he has kept to the spirit of Wallace and that is extremely
important.  It is the best film to grace the screens so far this year.
     Set in 13th Century Scotland,  we find the Young William Wallace
ready and willing to go and fight with his father and brother against
Edward II who killed off the nearest threats to his throne in
Scotland.  William's father tells him something which will stay with
him throughout his life and throughout the film: "It's our wits that
make us men."  Wallaces father and brother are killed and the young
William is taken from his home by his uncle Argyle, played by the
brilliant Scottish character actor Brian Cox.
     After some years, Wallace returns to his village and meets up with
his old friends and an old flame from his father's funeral, Morren.
They two fall in love, wed secretly and seem happy in their intended
life together.  However, the local English lord thwarts these plans
when he kills Morren, and then waits for Wallace.  This is the start of
a life of battling for Scotlands independence for Wallace.
     Wallace gathers an army and fights of the English at Stirling, and
then continues to York where he takes over the Northern English
castle.  The battle scenes in the film are quite amazing, and the gore
and bloodshed only help the gritty, realistic feel Gibson has given
this film.  From the battle scenes to the romance sequences Gibson
really has done a superb job and has shown he can Direct action as well
as anyone at the moment.  I would go as far as to say the battle scenes
are as energetic, exciting and well done as the action scenes in
SPARTACUS and BEN HUR.  But above all this, Gibson has a good grasp in
this film of the spirit and romance we surround with the time.  He is
not afraid to let images and little dialogue tell the story, which is
too often a mistake made by young directors.  Two scenes early in the
film prove this.  At his father and brother's funeral, William is given
a thistle by a young Morren and this is done with such beautiful and
simple imagery it is quite breathtaking.  Also, shortly after William
stands outside at night with his uncle Argyle and sees people up by
the graves with a piper, he asks what is going on.  Argyle replies,
"They're saying goodbye in their own way.  Playing outlawed tunes on
outlawed pipes."  Gibson doesn't ram down your throat the fact that
the King banned Pipes, but he uses it in a subtle way to show that the
Scots are a proud race, and not beyond taking risk for their culture.
Beautiful!!
     Scenes like these are all the way through BRAVEHEART, and never
let you realize the film is three hours long.  The acting is very good
throughout, and many of the supporting cast are as well written as
primary characters in most other films.  Gibson makes great use of
slow-motion, and also keeps a great sense of humour in the film.  I
would be surprised if John Toll, last years Academy Award winner for
Cinematography, is not up for the honors again this year.  His work
here is really gorgeous.
     This film I highly recommend, and do not worry about the graphic
violence, it is all in proper context.

Title
Review for Bridges of Madison County, The (1995)
Directed by Clint Eastwood
Starring: Clint Eastwood and Meryl Streep
Produced by Kathleen Kennedy and Steven Spielberg
Cinematography by Jack N. Green
     When it was announced that Clint Eastwood would make THE BRIDGES OF
MADISON COUNTY, many fans of the harlequin romance novel went up in
arms.  "How could he, he's Dirty Harry?".  Many thought Eastwood didn't
have the subtle touch that a Director needs when making a romance.  I'm
here to tell you Eastwood has proven all those who doubted him wrong.
He has crafted an instant classic, and probably the best American
romance in the last ten or so years.
     THE BRIDGES OF MADISON COUNTY is told in a story in story
fashion.  The children of Meryl Streep's character congregate back in
Iowa for their Mother's funeral, and in reading her diary finds out
about an affair she had much earlier in life.  Streep, in probably her
best performance since SOPHIE'S CHOICE, plays an Italian immigrant
Francesca Johnson.  Obviously repressed, she is married to an Iowa
farmer and is seemingly set in her role as housewife.  Francesca's
family leaves for four days to go the Illinois State fair, leaving
Francesca for what would normally be a few days of work around the
house. Enter Eastwood.  Playing National Geographic photographer Robert
Kincaid, Eastwood drives into this small Iowa town and right into
Francesca's life.  What starts as simply a request of where the local
covered bridges are, turns into a four-day passionate romance filled
with beautiful nuances and gentle expression.  Fighting it at first,
Francesca eventually follows her obvious attraction for Kincaid and is
rewarded with the love she only dreamed of.  Along with Francesca, we
are all rewarded with many memorable scenes of passion and warmth.
Along with these many scenes are some captivating moments of dialogue
between the characters.  Francesca and Robert connect like no other
couple I've seen on screen in a long time.  We are seeing people, and
because of that their story is far more moving.  Eventually Francesca
must decide between her family and security, and her passion for
Robert.
     Simply, the most outstanding part of this film is Streep's
performance.  I think she is probably the best Actor/Actress working
today!  Her mastery of an Italian accent here is quite astonishing, as
is her ability to communicate with a simple look or smirk.  She was so
good that I not only wanted to find out what would happen with her
affair, but also just to follow her character and any path she took.
Eastwood is extremely good also.  He is very convincing in his
sensitive role and beams on screen when he is in the presence of
Streep.  His ruggedness is a good counterpart to Streep's timid
countenance.
     As he did two years ago with UNFORGIVEN, Eastwood proves he is
becoming one of the best Directors in America.   With a deft touch, he
portrays a passion filled yet gentle affair.  Again Eastwood's long
time collaborator Jack Green fills the screen with gorgeous images
also.  Whether the film stays faithful to the book or not is not
important, this film is moving and a joy to view.

Title
Review for Village of the Damned (1995)
Directed by John Carpenter
Starring: Christover Reeve, Kirstie Alley.
     Based on the 1960 screenplay of the original of this sci-fi
horror, which is based on John Wyndham's book THE MIDWICH CUCKOOS, this
is a disappointing film for Carpenter.  Although possessing a fleetish
B-movie feel, which works partly, Carpenter does not create the mood of
a town in havoc which we so expect from him.  Carpenter (HALLOWEEN, THE
THING) has been most successful when he sticks to the aura of horror as
opposed to the physicality of it. Unfortunately he failed for the most
part here.  Reeve (SUPERMAN) plays the village Doctor in a small town
which is suddenly hit by an unexplainable blackout.  Following this
blackout, all the women of child-bearing age become pregnant (including
a virgin) and give birth to strange children who possess the same
characteristics, one of which is the ability to make humans
self-destruct.
     As you would expect, the children go on a mad killing rampage, and
Reeve tries to stop them.  One of the most disjointed parts of the film
is government Doctor Alley (LOOK WHO'S TALKING XXXVII) who one can never
determine whether she is just an evil representative of Big Brother,
being controlled by the children, or just plain mischievous and dull!  Of
course, we are set up with an ending battle between good and evil, and
guess who wins!
     There is some nifty photography and the SFX in the children's eyes
is well done, but not enough to take this  film into the enjoyable
arena.
     Carpenter needs to get his act together and start looking at his
older films, especially HALLOWEEN and THE THING to re-learn how to
direct suspenseful horror.

Title
Review for Die Hard: With a Vengeance (1995)
Directed by John McTiernan
Starring Bruce Willis, Samuel L. Jackson, Jeremy Irons.
Screenplay by Jonathan Hensleigh
     At it's best, the third installment of the "Die Hard" series is a
hair-raising, non-stop ride.  At worst, it is a terribly cliched action
flick, with a horrible villain.  Luckily, the film seems to stay on the
first course, but is brought down every so often by the latter.
     Bruce Willis returns as John McClane, the New York cop who we've
seen defend the Nakatomi building in LA, and an airport in the
mid-west.  Now he is back in NYC and is on suspension, when a bomb goes
off in downtown Manhattan.  A mysterious bomber called Simon, (Jeremy
Irons with a horrendous German accent) saying he wants to play a game
with John McClane or he'll set off more bombs.  It turns out that Simon
is the brother of the the terrorist that McClane threw off the Nakatomi
building in DIE HARD 1.  Thus starts a goose chase which pits McClane's
wits against Simon's.  At the first installment, McClane runs into a
shop owner in Harlem called Zeus, played by Samuel Jackson.  Zeus saves
McClane's life and is thrust into the game with him.  The pair are asked
to work out mathematical and word riddles in order to keep Simon from
blowing up more buildings.
     Eventually we find out Simon is not motivated by the cause we
thought, and is simply trying to steal from the Federal Reserve.  Of
course, McClane figures this out quickly and works to subvert the
ex-army leader Simon.  The action culminates in a confrontation outside
a motel in Canada.
     This film has some of the best car chase scenes I've ever seen,
including a wild short-cut through Central Park.  Willis is again adept
as the constantly mischievious cop, and he performs physically even
better than in the original film.  Late in the film he is covered with
blood and grease, and it is so vivid that one can almost smell and feel
it's sticky, engulfing aaaggghhh!  Willis and Jackson are paired well
together here, with a lot of chemistry on screen.  Willis shines
brightest when he is playing off Jackson, and Jackson is so on top of
his craft right now he needs no-one, he's just plain good!  However,
that can not be said for Jeremy Irons, who is easily the worst part of
this film.  He can't pull off a believable German accent, and postures
so theatrically he looks like a statue.  For a man who so often dazzles
us with fine acting, I have to wonder what happened to Irons here?
Could John McTiernan just not handle him, or did he want such a cheesy
performance?  Regardless, it does not work, and Irons really brings the
film down a notch
     It's not the best of the series, but I do recommend DIE HARD WITH A
VENGEANCE for anyone who wants to see some great action, and some nice
work between Willis and Jackson.

Title
Review for Batman Forever (1995)
Produced by Tim Burton & Peter MacGregor-Scott
Written by  Lee Batchler, Janet Scott Batchler, and Akiva Goldsman
Cinematography by Stephen Goldblatt
     Yes, the third installment of the caped crusader series is more
colorful and has probably more action than the other two.  It has two
red hot actors in Jim Carrey and Tommy Lee Jones.  It has a new,
younger, more popular hero in Val Kilmer. Above all this it even has
another red hot young actor portraying Batman's lovable side-kick
Robin; Chris O'Donnell, and a new love interest in Nicole Kidman's
shrink Chase Meridian.  However, what the film doesn't have is a strong
central character, any decent dialogue, or much of a reason to care
about any of the aforementioned characters.
     Val Kilmer, in surprisingly stiff portrayal, plays Bruce Wayne and
his alter-ego Batman.  Again we are involved in depiction's of Wayne's
unfortunate childhood experience and his reason for donning the the
black, rubber suit.  Without any back story at all, we are plunged into
Batman's personal and on-going struggle with former District Attorney
Harvey Dent, now known as "Two-Face."  Jones, simply copying his
character from NATURAL BORN KILLERS, sleeps his way through this film.
>From the first second we see him to the last, he maintains a one note
performance with nothing memorable to mention.  Kilmer, who we first
see as Wayne, is shockingly dry and bland.  When Kilmer was announced
as the new Batman many thought he would bring a flare to the character
that he has to many other performances.  Unfortunately, I am here to
say he doesn't.  In fact, he made Michael Keaton look like a virtual
glowing barrel of fun in comparison.  Batman has still not entered the
building.
     The rest of the film takes on the cliched by now Batman theme:
someone feels burned by our hero and then decides to seek revenge.
Along with Two-Face now is the Riddler played by Carrey.  At the start
of the film he is simply an electronics geek working at Wayne's
factory, but after his idea is shot down by Wayne, he is now a madman
who is after his old boss.  Teaming up with Two-Face, Carrey's Riddler
wreaks havoc on Batman with his new mind probing invention along with
hypnotizing the entire city.  On top of this of-course is Batman's love
interest, this time played by  Nicole Kidman as Dr. Chase Meridian.  A
shrink who seems less interested in Batman's psyche than his cod-piece,
Kidman's character is less than a card-board cut out.  Kidman does okay,
but with what she was given I doubt many actresses could ignite a match
let alone the screen.  The only twist to this second sequel is the
addition of Dick Grayson played by O'Donnell.  Grayson's family are
taken care of by Two-Face and leaves Dick with a burning desire to
himself achieve revenge.  Grayson therefore becomes Robin, Batman's
trusted side-kick.  In all of this, someone forgot to write a good
character.  Carrey plays the same schtick he's been doing for years,
and O'Donnell like Kidman simply is given very little to mold.  He is
out for revenge and a young acrobatic kid- that's it!  Flashy and more
colorful than anything in all three films, the climax somehow leaves
you wondering when something is going to happen that will make you
really care about anyone.  Too late, the final credits are rolling!
     Technically there are some nice moments in the film, with great
visuals.  Stephen Goldblatt's cinematography is very eye catching, and
in obvious contrast to the other two films makes great use of color.
     What is most disappointing about this film is it again is written
for the villain, and not the hero.  Sure the first BATMAN was great in
that respect, but that was because of intelligent writing and well,
Jack Nicholson.  But here, as with the abominable first sequel, the
nemeses are so bland and repetitive that we have no emotion involved
with them.  If the Riddler decides to kill everyone or become a bank
teller, you don't really care.   When will someone write a film for
Batman!  The character is full of so many possibilities, to waste on
"I'll get drive-thru" is absurd and simply a let down.  Along with some
juicier writing, is going to have to be a director who can make Batman
come alive.  I don't mean he has to be a goof-ball, but a director who
can tell the difference between the lighter moments and the darker
ones.  Kilmer may be able to do it with a better director, but if this
film is anything to go by, we'll be waiting a long time.
