Authors
Jonathan Curiel
Number of Reviews
5

Title
Review for Himalaya - l'enfance d'un chef (1999)
Six good reasons to rush out and see Himalaya, a film that director Eric
Valli describes as a "Tibetan Western":
1) No Brad Pitt.  Valli worked on the Brad Pitt film Seven Years in
Tibet, which showcased Pitt and his pathetic German accent trekking the
Himalayas and befriending the Dalai Lama.  Instead of the overpaid,
perfect-toothed Pitt, we get real people from Nepal portraying
themselves, in roles that demand good acting and a credible screen
presence.
2) Unspoiled Tibetan culture.  While Tibet has been occupied by China
since 1950, Nepal has maintained the integrity of its borders,
especially in the remote northwest region of Dolpo, where Tibetan
Buddhism has thrived side-by-side with Indian Hinduism and other
non-Western influences.  Refugees from Tibet are prominent in Himalaya,
as are a bona fide monk and other Dolpo men, women and children with
tangible ties to an ancient homeland.
3) Biblical-looking peaks covered in snow.  Spending $8.50 to see
Himalaya is cheaper (and less exhausting) than flying to Katmandu and
bussing it to the base of the highest mountains in the world.  Climbing
those majestic peaks would take weeks.  With Himalaya, we are
transported there via celluloid for 104 minutes and treated to vistas
that have inspired generations of people around the world.
4) Yaks.  Lots and lots of yaks.  Himalaya is what you might call a yak
movie -- indeed, it's a Tibetan Western of sorts.  Dolpo's annual yak
caravan is the center of the film, showing off the herd of animals that
transport pounds and pounds of white salt to the lowlands.  The grueling
downward trek is vital to the Dolpopas' existence, letting them exchange
the salt for grain and other necessities.
5) Gripping storyline.  Though the film is closely based on reality
(Valli lived in Dolpo for years), Himalaya isn't a documentary -- it's a
fictionalized account of life among the Dolpopas, which means the movie
has death, romance, revenge, chaos, and emotional contours.  The
characters named Tinle and Karma dominate the film, giving it a friction
that sustains Himalaya for the full 104 minutes.  Tinle (Thinlen
Lhondup) is an old chief who blames Karma (Gurgyon Kyap) for his son's
death.  When Karma wants to embark on an early caravan, ignoring the
date set by ancient ritual, Tinle turns him down.  Karma takes his herd
anyway, followed four days later by Tinle and his entourage.  Dueling
caravans create powerful drama on Nepal's stormy mountaintops.
6) Viscerally moving soundtrack.  The songs that accompany Himalaya
(original work by Bruno Coulais) feature Tuva-like throat singing,
fragments of whispers, chants and shouts, orchestral chimes and strings,
and dreamy melodies that -- by themselves -- are worth the price of
admission.
The bottom line: Seeing Himalaya is to bear witness to a proud and rich
people.  Valli, who divides his time among Katmandu, Paris, and Los
Angeles, is a longtime National Geographic photographer who made several
documentaries before tackling this full-length feature film.  Here he
has made the type of movie that could -- and should -- be made more
often by the studios.  Applaud him.
Director: Eric Valli
Producers: Jacques Perrin, Christophe Barratier
Writers: Olivier Dazat, Jean-Claude Guillebaud, Louis Gardel, Nathalie
Azoulai, Jacques Perrin
Starring: Thinlen Lhondup, Karma Wangiel, Lhapka Tsamchoe, Karma Tenzing
Nyima Lama, Gurgon Kyap
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com

Title
Review for Gohatto (1999)
It's been 25 years since Japanese director Nagisa Oshima shocked
international audiences with In the Realm of the Senses, his lurid look
at a sadomasochistic couple that loses all abandon and commits a carnal
act never before captured on the big screen: one lover cuts off the
other's penis.
New Yorker Films is hyping the similarity between Senses and Oshima's
latest work, Taboo, saying the new film, "like... Senses, deals with the
anti-authoritarian sway of sexuality, a nearly taboo subject in Japan."
Don't believe the hype.  In many ways, Taboo is the antithesis of Senses
-- from its lack of sexual explicitness to its historic setting in 19th
century Kyoto.  Where Senses captures the hedonistic life of a
heterosexual couple, Taboo showers us with androgyny, same-sex
yearnings, and macho sword fights, all in a samurai setting that tests
the characters' moral and physical strength.
In the enclave of an all-male militia designed to protect the Shogun,
does it matter that some of the men sleep with each other?  "Don't ask,
don't tell" takes on new meaning with Taboo, a movie that works so well
because it's filled with characters like Toshizo Hijikata, an agonized
samurai captain played with aplomb by Beat Takeshi.  Takeshi, a director
in his own right and a comedic TV star in Japan, is the heart and soul
of Taboo (and gets top billing).  Takeshi's aging captain struggles to
accept the fact that a newly recruited teenage samurai is fooling around
with a fellow recruit, and that many of the other samurai are in love
with the teen.
>From the opening scene, that teen withstands his new profession's
vicissitudes, which require him to execute dishonored militia and kill
those who would kill him.  The young samurai (newcomer Ryuhei Matsuda)
has banged hair, pale skin, feminine lips -- and biceps big enough to
handle the swords and knives he needs to defend himself in bed and on
the streets of Kyoto, where dangerous thugs walk around.  His reason for
joining the samurai is clear: "To have the right to kill," he tells an
inquisitor in the samurai headquarters.
Phalli are never shown in Taboo, and why should they be? Taboo isn't a
film about sex -- it's a film about Japan's last samurai and the way one
person can have a dramatic effect on those around him.  With a film
score by Ryuichi Sakamoto (best known for his Oscar-winning work on The
Last Emperor), and outfits and backdrops that show off the beauty of
pre-modern Japan, Taboo is another new film from Asia that deserves
considerable attention.  It may not feature the stunning martial arts
scenes or operatic storyline of Crouching Tiger, Hidden Dragon, and it
may not have the happy ending of Chunhyang, but like those two period
pieces, Taboo is a visual marvel from start to finish.
Moviegoers are lucky that the 68-year-old Oshima is still around to make
films like Taboo, which was honored at last year's Cannes Film Festival
and is now being released theatrically.  Oshima suffered a serious
stroke in 1996, forcing him to take a three-year sabbatical.  But he has
re-emerged with new vigor to complete Taboo, his 26th film, telling one
interviewer, "I've spent all my life breaking taboos."
Director: Nagisa Oshima
Producers: Nobuyoshi Otani, Jean Labadie, Jeremy Thomas
Writers: Nagisa Oshima
Starring: Beat Takeshi, Ryuhei Matsuda, Shinji Takeda, Tadanobu Asano,
Yoichi Sai, Koji Matoba, Jiro Sakagami
http://www.newyorkerfilms.com/t_elements/taboo/taboo1_t.htm
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com

Title
Review for Pollock (2000)
Please, please, please, please, please read the book that formed the
basis of the movie Pollock.  Jackson Pollock: An American Saga won the
Pulitzer Prize for a good reason: It's a 934-page masterpiece that gets
into the guts of the artist now being celebrated on celluloid by Ed
Harris.  Published in 1989 and written by Steven Naifeh and Gregory
White Smith, the tome contains everything about Pollock that was left
out of Harris' up-and-down movie -- and, unfortunately, that means 99
percent of the demons, doubters, friends, and forces that inspired
Pollock to drink, paint, drink, and paint again.
A good example: Pollock was suicidal, maniacal and violent throughout
his 44-year life.  The first sentence of Naifeh's and Smith's book --
the very first sentence -- is this quote from Pollock: "I'm going to
kill myself."  Explains a lot, but for some odd reason, Harris only
hints at Pollock's suicidal tendencies in his long-anticipated film.
What Harris does best is show us Pollock painting.  Over and over, we
see Harris dripping paint on large canvases and throwing around the oils
like they were enemies that need to be splattered dead.  Reds, yellows,
blues, and grays come alive in Pollock, letting viewers exhilarate in
the glory of creating great abstract art.  For people not familiar with
Pollock's paintings, Harris' movie will be a revelation.  Much of the
movie was filmed on Pollock's former Long Island estate, where he did
his most celebrated work.  Harris, who directed himself, deserves praise
for effectively recreating Pollock's last years and for learning to
actually paint like Pollock.  Harris isn't faking it when he hunches
over a blank canvas and splashes paint everywhere.
Harris is also good at capturing some of Pollock's notorious rages. 
It's chilling when Harris starts yelling at a pushy filmmaker and
practically stalks him to the family dinner table, telling him, "I'm not
the phony!  You're the phony!  I'm not the phony!  You're the phony!" 
There is genuine fear in that scene, and it was fear that followed
Pollock from his birth in 1912 to his death in 1956.
In the role of Lee Krasner, Pollock's wife, Marcia Gay Harden is
perfect.  With her thick, New York accent and controlling tendencies,
Harden's Krasner helps drive Pollock's artistic career at a crucial
period.  Unfortunately, there is no context.  Krasner wasn't the only
one who propped up Pollock.  Though patron Peggy Guggenheim, brother
Sande Pollock, and art critic Clement Greenberg are portrayed in
Pollock, missing are the long line of backers that date back to
Pollock's early years.  Where are artists Thomas Hart Benton and John
Graham, whose influence on Pollock is well-chronicled in Naifeh's and
Smith's book?  And where are the legions of therapists and doctors who
worked with Pollock for so many years -- therapists and doctors who
tried getting Pollock to open up about his sexual confusion, his
love-hate relationship with his mother and his lifelong abuse of
alcohol?
None of that is in the movie, which begins in 1941, when Pollock is 29
and starting to make a name for himself.  Pollock ends with a written
note about Pollock's and Krasner's life, but -- at the very least -- the
film should have started with a written note about Pollock's early
years, when his dysfunctional family formed his sense of self.  Too
bad.  Harris had a good chance to flush out the real Jackson Pollock. 
Instead, we get an interesting glimpse of the man who became "America's
first art star."
A final note: Over the years, many people apparently told Harris that he
looks like Pollock, and he does.  The physical resemblance may be one
reason Harris was so devoted to making this film.  (It took 10 years to
bring Pollock's life to the big screen.)  So obsessed was Harris that he
put on 30 pounds to accurately portray Pollock's heavyset last year of
life.  Like Elvis and other artists, Pollock's weight gain was a portent
of a greater physical breakdown.
Director: Ed Harris
Producers: Fred Berner, Ed Harris, Jon Kilik
Writers: Barbara Turner, Susan J. Emshwiller
Starring: Ed Harris, Marcia Gay Harden, Amy Madigan, Jeffrey Tambor,
Robert Knott, John Heard, Bud Cort, Val Kilmer
http://www.sonyclassics.com/pollock
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com

Title
Review for Yi yi (2000)
     It wasn't fair.  For more than 10 years, Taiwanese director Edward
Yang made movies that were runaway hits in Asia and at festivals around
the world, but the films weren't released commercially in the United
States.  With Yi Yi, that's all changed, and the only question now is,
"What took so long?"
     Nearly everything about Yi Yi is odd and wonderful.  The movie
revolves around a middle-class family in Taipei struggling with everyday
life.  The main character is an uptight businessman named NJ whose
company faces bankruptcy.  His wife is a delicate woman who breaks down
when her mother suffers a stroke.  The family's youngest member, a
precocious 10-year-old boy, is preoccupied with photographing the backs
of people's heads. And the boy's sister is a student musician who falls
for the wrong guy.
        What makes Yi Yi special are its small details and absurd plot twists. 
At his brother-in-law's wedding, NJ (played with understated brilliance
by Wu Nienjen) runs into a former girlfriend, who yells at him for
deserting their relationship 20 years earlier.  NJ wants to reconcile
with his beautiful ex, but she is married, and he is a family man. 
Guilt-ridden and stressed by work, NJ finds refuge in the music of Bob
Dylan and other artists, listening to their songs on headphones while
figuring out what to do next.  After spending one night in a karaoke
bar, he gets the courage to call his old flame (aided by alcohol and the
advice of a wise Japanese game designer) and is soon flying to Tokyo to
get his "second chance" at love.
Yi Yi, which opens with a wedding and ends with a death, isn't for
everyone.  For moviegoers who need Hollywood stars, car chases,
shootings, and dramatic sexual posturing to stir their cinematic pulse,
the movie will seem like a long, boring waste of time.  Can you name
another film that lingers forever on a cloudy sky and the sound of
wind?  And what other recent film outside the oeuvre of Jim Carrey has
used urination as a transition device?  Yi Yi is poetic and crude,
literary and streetwise, serious and funny.  It is an international hit
in the best sense of the term, winning Yang the best director prize at
Cannes and the top honor from the National Society of Film Critics in
New York.  (Yi Yi beat out Traffic for this recent U.S. award.)
Music is a fundamental part of Yi Yi.  For the English translation of
the movie's title, Yang chose A One and a Two as a nod to the saying
uttered by jazz musicians. "(It's) to signify that what's following the
title is not something tense, or heavy or stressful," Yang told an
interviewer.  "Life should be like a jazzy tune."
If I had qualms with Yi Yi, it was with the film's first half-hour, when
so many characters were introduced at such a dizzying pace, it was hard
to keep track of developments and who was with whom.  Schmaltzy opening
music also detracted from the film, but in the big picture, these are
just quibbles.
Yang, whose best-known previous work is A Brighter Summer Day, is 53
years old.  With the critical success of Yi Yi, he has received more
offers to make films in the United States.  Perhaps he'll follow in the
footsteps of Ang Lee (Crouching Tiger, Hidden Dragon), Taiwan's most
successful director, who has already made the transition from China to
the West.  Yang himself is no stranger to America.  Born in Shanghai and
raised in Taipei, he studied in Los Angeles at USC film school, dropping
out after one semester to work as a computer and systems designer in
Seattle.  Yi Yi is full of references to U.S. culture.  The film's mix
of East and West and its urban setting are two more reasons Yi Yi may
seem relatively familiar to new audiences in North America.
Wherever you live, the film is worth seeking out.
Director: Edward Yang 
Producers: Kawai Shinya, Tsukeda Naoko 
Writer: Edward Yang
Starring: Wu Nienjen, Issey Ogata, Elaine Jin, Kelly Lee, Jonathan
Chang, Adrian Lin, Chen Xisheng, Ke Suyun, Michael Tao
http://www.yiyithemovie.com/
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com

Title
Review for Pledge, The (2001)
An early note to parents with young, blonde daughters: Think twice about
seeing The Pledge, and if you must go -- if you're eager to see Jack
Nicholson give one of his best cinematic performances ever -- then take
a Valium before entering the theater and practice saying, "This won't
happen to my family!  This won't happen to my family!"
>From the opening shot, where we see the top of Nicholson's half-bald,
hair-transplanted head, The Pledge is an exercise in stomaching an ugly
truth.  Body parts, pony-tailed girls splotched with blood and bruises
-- this isn't a film about happy endings and human triumph.  Suspected
sex perverts lurk down every road in The Pledge, causing Nicholson's
character, a retired homicide detective, so much angst that he becomes
his own worst enemy.
Sean Penn has directed a dark thriller that encrusts Jerry Black
(Nicholson) with a Sisyphean task: Find the person who savaged a child
in the snow near Reno, Nevada.  Bloated and baggy-eyed, Black enters the
case on the night of his retirement party, then volunteers to work on it
for the next year and a half, after pledging to the dead girl's mother
that he'll bring the killer to justice.  (Hence the movie's title.)
Trailers for The Pledge have played up the intensity of Nicholson's
character, but those expecting a bigger-than-life caricature a la A Few
Good Men or The Shining (or any number of other Nicholson vehicles) will
be disappointed.  Nicholson, whose character looks like he'd be
perfectly at home in a bowling alley, is relatively understated in The
Pledge, and that's what makes it so riveting and believable.  There are
no over-the-top moments that call for lines like "You can't handle the
truth!"  Instead of yelling his way past obstacles, Jerry Black
navigates through clues like an old, frustrated man.  Nicholson told a
Hollywood reporter that he was "more of myself" in The Pledge, and
moviegoers have Penn to thank for this real-life performance.  Penn and
Nicholson are good friends and apparently share a love of storytelling
that doesn't rely on gimmicks or pyrotechnics.  In fact, Penn based The
Pledge on a 1958 novel by Swiss writer Friedrich Durrenmatt: "A German
existentialist," according to a man at the screening I attended.
Existential terror is just one of the many layers that give The Pledge a
sheen that is sickening and yet satisfying to watch.  There is beauty in
The Pledge, represented by the snowy, green outdoors and the face of the
young girl who Jerry Black strongly believes could be the next victim. 
An ensemble cast of veteran actors and actresses (led by Helen Mirren,
who plays a psychologist) lets Penn add scenes that flush out the edges
of Nicholson's memorable character.
My biggest complaint: Why did Penn have to give his wife, Robin Wright
Penn, such a big role?  Wright Penn has improved her acting since She's
So Lovely, the 1997 flick that showcased her, her husband, and John
Travolta, but that's like saying Monica Lewinsky has gotten smarter and
more articulate since first emerging into the international spotlight
from the shadows of the White House.  Wright Penn is a blight on the
Penn name.  For her to appear in the same movie as Nicholson, let alone
kiss him on screen and consort with him, is a testament to the credo,
"Anything is possible in America."
And anything is.  The Pledge is a reminder that evil is alive and well
on this planet.  Getting rid of it is harder than it looks.
Director: Sean Penn
Producers: Sean Penn, Elie Samaha, Michael Fitzgerald
Writers: Jerzy Kromolowski, Mary Olson-Kromolowski
Starring: Jack Nicholson, Robin Penn Wright, Sam Shepard, Aaron Eckhart,
Benicio Del Toro, Venessa Redgrave, Michael O'Keefe, Helen Mirren,
Mickey Rourke, Harry Dean Stanton, Lois Smith
http://movies.warnerbros.com/thepledge/
---
Jonathan Curiel - curiel@filmcritic.com - http://www.filmcritic.com
