Authors
Jon A Webb
Number of Reviews
21

Title
Review for Pelican Brief, The (1993)
     THE PELICAN BRIEF has Julia Roberts and Denzel Washington running
around together, being pursued by semi-government types in an obvious
political thriller.  The movie seems to be more about how beautiful
Roberts and Washington are, and what nice clothes they wear, than
anything else.  If you accept these terms, the movie is fun and
enjoyable to watch.  (Roberts is more beautiful than ever.)  But don't
go expecting thrills or suspense, or much of an acting stretch by
Roberts or Washington.
     Roberts plays a law student who somehow uncovers the truth behind
the recent assassinations of two Supreme Court justices.  She writes up
her theory, calling it "The Pelican Brief," and it gets into the hands
of the people who did the assassination.  Naturally, she becomes a
target.  In her effort to get the truth out and save her own life, she
teams up with Washington, a reporter who seems to have remarkably close
ties to the government.
     There are two odd things about this movie.  One is that no attempt
is made to achieve any verisimilitude in the pursuit of Roberts and
Washington.  She goes into hiding, with an apparently huge amount of
money "from her father," then shows up in new outfits each day.
Washington also is always nicely dressed; everything is beautifully
pressed.  Now, this makes these two handsome people even more handsome,
but it just doesn't make any sense.
     Another point: Roberts always stays in the best hotels, which of
course require a credit card check on checking in, even if you pay with
cash.  Wouldn't this make it awfully easy for the shadowy, presumably
well-connected forces searching for her?  Movies like this stand or fall
on the consistency of details; it's supposed to be a pleasure to see
how carefully the screenwriters have crafted a story that is consistent
with everyday reality.  Sloppiness is laughable.
     The other odd thing is that Roberts and Washington never
experience passionate love for each other.  I don't know how long it is
since I've seen a movie where two attractive people spend time
together, staying in hotel rooms and being pursued by the bad guys, and
don't fall in love and have sex.  It's part of the standard story.
Instead, Roberts and Washington seem to develop a deep repect for each
other, and have a Platonic relationship.  Could it be that Hollywood
has finally realized that two sexually compatible people don't need to
experience sexual ecstasy to confirm their friendship?  (Ha.)  Or is it
possible that a sexual relationship was ruled out because it would
cross a color line?  I think this is the case, and find this sort of
subtle racist assumption very disturbing (in a way, more disturbing
than explicit racism.)
     The direction is leaden and unconvincing, especially towards the
end.  About thirty minutes into the movie, you know everything that's
going to happen, and only details need to be filled in.  There is
little suspense even in the most thrillingly staged scenes, because you
know that a movie like this is not going to sacrifice its two
leads--this is no PSYCHO.  At the end, when they were wrapping up the
details, it was as though they were slogging through mud, trying to
reach the end of the trail before the last reel ran out.
     It is interesting to compare this film with THE FIRM, which was
also based on a John Grisham novel.  THE FIRM is much better, I think
because it took more liberties with the novel (I'm guessing at this,
because I haven't read either book), and because of the good direction
and fine acting (particularly by Cruise and Hunter.)  I especially
liked the scene towards the end, where Cruise is confronted at the law
firm and he can't think of anything else to do, so he just runs away.
It was a brilliant moment, coming quite close to the edge of comedy,
which made perfect sense.  There is nothing like that in this film, and
no loony comment delivered perfectly like Holly Hunter's comment about
the coffee pot, either.

Title
Review for Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs (1937)
     This is a re-release of the classic film, which I believe was the
first full-length cartoon film ever made.  The image has been restored
via computer processing, so this is the first chance modern audiences
have had to see the film as it was first released.
     First, on the imagery: it is impressive, but I wouldn't go to see
it just for that reason.  This is a restoration.  The colors are
brighter than I remember, the edges sharper, but that is all. (In fact,
it's nice that Disney showed respect for the original and didn't try to
"enhance" it a la Ted Turner colorizing.)
     Second, on the movie itself.  It this era when attitudes toward
women have changed so much and are still in a state of flux, it is a
little offensive to see women portrayed as they are here (as Ellen
Goodman pointed out in a recent column).  There are two women in the
film: one is evil and vain, the other is childish, good, hard-working
(she cooks and cleans), and unable to fend for herself without a man's
support (or at least seven dwarves).  She is Nora of "A Doll's House":
she moves from the castle to the dwarves' home to her prince with
nothing in between, except for her prolonged sleep of death.
     I can't get over how childish Snow White is.  Her face is drawn
with the shape of a girl of about eight to ten.  Her voice is also
about that old.  Her attitudes towards the world correspond.  But
still, she is given to her prince in the end.
     At least Disney has moved to older girls over the years.  Ariel is
a prepubescent teenager, and she shows a little independence.
     I took my daughter to see this because I want her to know about
classic films.  I'm not sorry I did it, because she is exposed to all
sorts of role models.  But I do agree with Ellen Goodman; this film
would have a negative impact if it was taken seriously.  Better make
sure you also show your daughter women working and fiction like THE
WIZARD OF OZ, PIPPI LONGSTOCKINGS, and ELOISE.

Title
Review for Much Ado About Nothing (1993)
     Kenneth Branagh's adaptation of Shakespeare's play was filmed in
the villa where the woman who posed for "Mona Lisa" lived, and the film
is filled with the influence of the lush sensuality of the location.  I
was struck especially by the presence of water in the film, as water
also figures prominently in the background to "Mona Lisa" (da Vinci was
concerned at the time about the many mechanisms for moving water from
place to place).  I wonder if the painting influenced the movie, or the
villa influenced them both, or if da Vinci's engineering work influenced
the villa and then the movie.
     Branagh does a great job of opening up the play.  Often stage
plays seem stiff and awkward as movies, which depend so much more on
imagery and less on words.  Branagh takes moments from the play and
expands them into effective scenes.  For example, the arrival of the
Prince turns into a sequence of his men arriving on horses, the hurried
washing of the men and women in the ubiquitous water, ending in their
meeting as two opposing military forces might meet during a cease
fire.
     I wasn't as happy with the play itself.  Kenneth Branagh and his
wife Emma Thompson play the principals, and are a lot of fun to watch
(exchanging witty barbs) until they fall in love, and they have little
reason to continue being in the play.  At that point, the story turns
into a ridiculous farce.  Part of the problem here is that the story is
based on the actions of the two young lovers, the man played by Robert
Sean Leonard and the woman whose name I don't recall.  Since it's
pretty obvious what is going to happen, and the characters don't have
very much interesting to say, the movie drags a little.
     Michael Keaton rescues the film at this point, though.  He plays
one of Shakespeare's comic relief roles, and does it so well I think
that that Shakespeare himself would have been proud to see it.  He was
hilarious.  He really showed how a great actor can turn a minor role
into something memorable.
     I thought Denzel Washington was appropriately regal as the
Prince.  He is always fun to watch.  Keanu Reeves was okay as the
villainous Prince's half-brother.
     The ending of the film, with its widening circles of joyful
dancing, makes the audience feel part of the action and inspires one to
applause.

Title
Review for Fugitive, The (1993)
     This is based on the TV series of the same name, with Harrison
Ford playing the on-the-run doctor, and Tommy Lee Jones as his pursuer.
Briefly, Ford's character is accused and convicted of the brutal murder
of his wife, and escapes while on his way to Death Row to hunt down the
one-armed man who he knows is the real criminal.
     Academy Award nominations all around: for Best Picture, Best
Director, Best Actor, and Best Supporting Actor (there are no
significant women's parts).
     The first half of the movie is a thrilling chase, with great
special effects that really put me on the edge of my seat (in
particular, the train crash beats anything from the Indiana Jones
series). But it is Ford's bewildered intensity and Tommy Lee Jones's
no-nonsence confidence that make this a great film, coupled with the
direction. I loved that moment when Jones catches up with Ford early
on, and you know what Ford's going to do (at least if you've seen the
preview), and he knows it too, and he can't quite believe he's going to
do it but does it anyway.  Or later, when Jones has Ford in his sights
and you just know it's over, but it isn't and at first you (and Ford)
can't believe it, and then it makes so much sense.  This is truly great
cinema, what American films are all about.
     The movie drags towards the end, when a poorly-written script
catches up with the director and forces him to spend time explaining
why the one-armed man did what he did, and to show us two middle-aged
men fighting.  I mean, who cares?  At that point, everything that
matters has been resolved; it would have been better if there had been
one more near encounter earlier on or something, if the movie had to
last a certain length.

Title
Review for Fearless (1993)
     Jeff Bridges survives a plane accident and saves a bunch of
people's lives; in the process, he discovers he does not fear death.
He becomes transfigured, spiritual, angel-like.  He continues on this
path for a while, but eventually reality begins to intrude.
     This is an interesting film from a psychological point of view.  I
found it compelling and engaging for about the first two-thirds, but
the ending is a little too pat and down to earth for my taste.  This
film, directed by Peter Weir, sells itself out to conventional mores in
the end, like WITNESS.  Just as we shouldn't expect an Amish woman to
abandon herself to Harrison Ford in WITNESS we should not expect Jeff
Bridges to find such a neat path out of the maze he has constructed in
his mind here.
     I really liked the spiritual theme in the beginning of the film.
You really don't know if Bridges is crazy, or anointed.  Bridges's
natural devil-may-care style meshes well with this role.
     This film has some remarkably good points.  The plane crash scene
is incredible, perfectly believable; it looks just like all those
pictures we've seen on the news.  Rosie Perez is great as the spiritual
partner to Jeff Bridges. There is a scene or two where just her
expression tells a complete story (I have in mind the scene with
Isabella Rosselini). Jeff Bridges is also good, but not as good, I
thought, as Perez. Isabella Rosselini is acceptable, but she clearly
does not have her mother's presence, or ability to project her beauty
into a role and thus add depth to a movie.
     I found the script a little weak.  There is this obvious ploy
concerning strawberries that is just a little too obvious.  As I said,
the pat return to hearth and home at the end is a little too neat and
Hollywood-esque.  And an early scene where Bridges encounters an old
lover seems pointless.

Title
Review for So I Married an Axe Murderer (1993)
     As the title suggests, this is a B-movie-style romantic comedy. It
is a vehicle for Michael Myers, who gets to do several different
characters:  beat poet, Scottish father, romantic guy. Nancy Travis
stars, but does not distinguish herself, as the potential axe
murderess.
     I thought the movie worked fairly well as a vehicle for Myers.  I
liked him both as a beat poet and as his own Scottish father (who sings
sentimental favorites from the House of Stewart -- that is, Rod).
     In terms of plot, though, forget it. The film makes no pretense of
caring about coherence or much else. What does Myers's character do for
a living?  Why do the police know so little about "Mrs. X"?  Why were
none of the disappearances reported?  Etc. If this were a complete
fantasy I could see the these details as unimportant, but the film is
not constructed that way.
     There are a few fine comic actors in small but fun roles.  Alan
Arkin plays the police sergeant, Charles Grodin is the commandeered
motorist, and Phil Hartman plays a guard at Alcatraz.
     The fine actress Brenda Fricker, who is unfortunately (for her
career) no longer young, is wasted in a humiliating role.  Remarkable,
isn't it, how men can mature into interesting characters who get great
parts (De Niro, Nicholson), while fine actresses disappear after a
certain age (e.g., Streep).
     This is a fun movie if you like Michael Myers.  It is a reasonable
date movie. But its quality puts it more in the VCR rental arena.

Title
Review for In the Line of Fire (1993)
     This film is a series of cliches, strung together with great
talent and enough originality to give you the feeling that you're
watching real cinematic art, which in fact you are.
     The plot is familiar (legend of the Fisher King): discredited cop
gets a chance to redeem himself but must first overcome the demons of
his past.  The scenes are familiar: cop comes home to his empty
apartment, pours himself a drink, and gets The Phone Call.  Cop finally
looks like he's going to lay his object of desire, is interrupted (he
must of course stay pure, as the knights did in the antecedent of this
story).  Etc.
     Three people make this an interesting film: Wolfgang Petersen, the
director, who twists each scene and gives it a resonance informed by,
but not parodying, all the previous films that tell the same story;
Clint Eastwood, who (as in UNFORGIVEN) reflects on growing older and
how this affects his macho image; and John Malkovich, who explores his
character's psychosis with freshness and humor.
     For example, under Petersen's direction the scene where the cop
finally seems about to get laid becomes funny as weapons and hardware
fall to the floor (and Eastwood's comment later in the scene makes it
hilarious).
     Petersen understands the medium, he knows what kind of story he's
telling, and he doesn't waste time building up suspense when you know
exactly how a scene is going to end.  He just lets it happen, and then
gets back to the interesting stuff, which is what happens in between
the obvious stuff.
     Eastwood is getting old, and is more and more willing to expose
himself and let the camera do its worst. Here he's still holding on to
the idea of the macho cop who can lay any woman but you can see how
earnestly he needs to get that fix, the pretty lady who falls to his
charms, and how he's not willing to go all the way and give (as opposed
to risk) his life to get the bad guy.
     John Malkovich adds little touches to his portrayal of the psycho
who's out to kill the President.  The way he tilts his head after he
shoots a couple of people who present themselves as convenient targets,
the way he goads Eastwood to shoot him, this is great stuff.

Title
Review for Firm, The (1993)
     Tom Cruise plays a poor young man who has just graduated with the
highest honors from Harvard Law School. He is recruited by a Southern
law firm that gives him a high salary, a new house and car, etc. It
turns out that they are corrupt, and he has to find a way out.  He
can't just resign, since the last four people who tried that are dead.
     I thought the direction in this film was unfocussed.  E.g., the
scenes between Gene Hackman and Cruise's wife (whose name I can't
remember) are supposed to establish his sexual interest in her, but
don't.  Similarly the first scene between Cruise and David Strathairn
are supposed to convey Strathairn's desperation, but don't.  It's this
limpness of direction that makes "The Firm" boring at times and
generally mediocre.  For much of the movie, it is far easier to think
of funny endings for scenes or the movie in general (e.g., "It's the
right thing to do") than to concentrate on the somewhat convoluted
plot.
     Tom Cruise's acting, though, really brings the film along.  I
liked in particular his scene with the Mafia guys at the end.  It's
quite striking how he can take a part like this, which is not
demanding, really not much more than a cartoon-character young
ambitious lawyer, and make it really fun.
     The movie has several actors playing small but interesting roles.
Holly Hunter has been mentioned in other reviews as making her minor
part into something that will revive her career. I liked her very much
in her first scene, where she delivers a line that at simultaneously
establishes her stupidity and weirdness with deadpan seriousness. She's
also bouncing slightly through the whole film -- you get the feeling
that there's a lot more going on there than she's allowed to depict in
this film.
     David Strathairn also has a fine small part.  As always, it is a
thrill to watch him.  Gary Busey is also good in a small part.

Title
Review for Manhattan Murder Mystery (1993)
     This is a solid Woody Allen film, not unlike some of his earlier
comedies (ANNIE HALL and PLAY IT AGAIN, SAM come to mind, though this
is more realistic).  Woody and Diane Keaton are a bored middle-aged
couple, drifting towards divorce, when Keaton gets interested in
the--to her--strange actions of a neighbor.  She decides that a murder
has occurred, and that she will solve it.  Woody, of course,
disbelieves everything and worries incessantly.
     Angelica Huston and Alan Alda also play significant roles, and do
it well.  Given Allen's recent problems, it's apparent that his friends
rallied to help him make this film, which must have been a relief from
the trial and the accusations in the press.
     You can really see Allen reaching to reconnect with his
traditional audience her.  He does his nervous variations on
Chaplin-esque moves, like constantly rearranging his cards while
playing poker.  The scene in the elevator is a classic.
     The movie includes the jerky hand-held camera style he explored in
HUSBANDS AND WIVES but it is not so annoying here.  There's only one
scene where the effect is really noticeable, and even there it is not
so bad as to make one dizzy, as in his last film.

Title
Review for Last Action Hero (1993)
     I'd heard this film was "Goddard-esque" -- a commentary of
film-making.  But I found it to be a mess.  It is neither a parody of
action films nor an action film itself; it is something in between, and
it fails at making you care about any of the characters, hence making
the movie itself of little interest.
     Schwarzenegger plays a movie character who is idolized by a young
boy.  The boy magically gets transported into the action film itself,
which is a parody of action films with ridiculous coincidences and
cardboard characters.
     The thing is, you're supposed to be laughing at the obviousness of
the action film inside the film while still caring about the
relationship between Schwarzenegger and the young boy.  But you can't
do both.
     The movie also contains a lot of references to other films,
including brief cameos by people from other cop films set in L.A.  (for
example, Sharon Stone), an outrageous L.A. police station with women in
S&M outfits, inside jokes (like having Joan Plowright introduce
Laurence Olivier's HAMLET), and self-directed humor like
Schwarzenegger appear in the film as himself promoting some store he
has a business interest in.

Title
Review for Searching for Bobby Fischer (1993)
     This is the story of the discovery of a ten-year old chess genius,
and the conflicts between the intense study and concentration needed to
reach the highest ranks of chess and the more prosaic pursuits of a
young boy.
     I thought the tension between chess and normal family life was a
little overplayed.  After all, this movie would not have been made if
the father or teacher had been successful in pushing the boy to be
obsessed about chess only, so why create a dramatic conflict over
whether they will be able to do this?  The conflict over the boy's
playing speed chess in the park seems a little silly, too.  But it's
interesting how it all gets turned into chess, to the boy "bringing his
queen out too early".  And the fight between our hero and the "evil
chess robot child" is not believable or interesting.
     But the movie is rescued by the sweet and compelling performance
of Max Pomeranc, as the young Josh Fisher.  He's such a nice boy, you
want to see him succeed.
     There's a level of chess that was alluded to in interviews I've
seen about this film, which is based on a true story: the level at
which chess is a complete psychological conflict. I suppose this is the
heart of this film, but it doesn't really come across, though perhaps
it could not, in a film based on child actors.
     Joe Manetegna plays the father: I wish he'd stick to roles where
he can show more anguish. Browbeating ten-year olds just doesn't make
it. Ben Kingsley is the teacher, and he is adequate if a little too
Gandhi-esque to be believably pushy. Laurence Fishburn is the
speed-chess playing counterweight to Kingsley; I liked his
performance.

Title
Review for Striking Distance (1993)
     This is the film whose working title was THREE RIVERS when it was
made in Pittsburgh some months ago.  I remember that the city offered
extremely good cooperation during the making of this film; they
willingly shut down streets, closed tunnels and bridges, at the
convenience of the filmmakers.
     All the cooperation paid off.  The film is like an advertisement
for Pittsburgh; it conveys a wholly different image from the
conventional one of a worn-out steel town.  Pittsburgh is clean, a city
of rivers.  We should be able to use this film to recruit new faculty
and students.
     The orientation of the film, toward's Pittsburgh's rivers, is
strong enough to make one think of Pittsburgh differently.  It seems
like we all should have boats, to give the impressive Pittsburgh Rescue
Force something to do.
     The plot is the obvious cop-movie plot.  A policeman has suffered
damage in the past as a result of his encounter with evil.  He has been
weakened to his very soul.  He must confront the evil again; will he
triumph.
     There's very little surprise in the film, though I suppose the
ending qualifies.  A few scenes were oddly filmed, and for that reason
striking:  for example, the shot of the three people tied to chairs,
and the drowning scene at the end.  It's something of a fresh view.
     But basically, this is a Bruce Willis film, with Bruce using
brutality softened by sarcastic quips to get his way, which is always
right.

Title
Review for Sleepless in Seattle (1993)
     Meg Ryan and Tom Hanks are destined for each other, though they
haven't met.  Meg becomes aware of Tom when he discusses his former
marriage on a call-in radio show and becomes known as "Sleepless in
Seattle".
     This movie is much like MADE IN HEAVEN in the view it presents of
love: that it is perfect, unchangeable, and that for every man there is
exactly one woman, and vice versa.  An oddly constant view (with no
basis in reality, that I can think of) from Hollywood, by the way: I
can think of dozens of films that present the same idea, from DAMAGE
to A STRANGER AMONG US.
     SLEEPLESS IN SEATTLE is filled with Nora Ephron's own pleasant
sense of humor, e.g., the running joke on AN AFFAIR TO REMEMBER being
deeply loved by women but not understood by men.  It's a cute movie,
somewhat thin on plot--after all, everything that happens is designed
to bring Ryan and Hanks together at the end of the film, so nothing
else matters.
     I would say that the final meeting is flubbed from a directorial
point of view.  It should be a soaring moment, comparable to the great
uplifting moments from old romantic movies, but instead it is only a
little sweet.
     Tom Hanks and Meg Ryan play their stereotyped characters, Ryan a
little more obviously than Hanks.  She's fun to watch, but I wonder if
she can do anything other than act loopy (PRELUDE TO A KISS wasn't
encouraging).
     What I think this movie lacks most is some sort of hard edge.  It
should have some believable tension; Ryan's fiancee is never a credible
threat.

Title
Review for Dazed and Confused (1993)
     DAZED AND CONFUSED is the story of the last day of school in 1976
for a collection of Austin, TX teenagers.  It's Richard Linklater, who
also made SLACKER, which has much the same style though DAZED AND
CONFUSED is more coherent and has a plot.
     This film does not evoke Austin's atmosphere as much as SLACKER.
There are few references to special features of Austin, except for the
Moonlight Tower.  These could be students at almost any high school in
the country.
     The point of this film is to evoke the feelings and atmosphere of
1976; it is Yuppie nostalgia.  It works petty well on this level.
There are some minor anachronisms: I don't think the drug culture was
still that strong in 1976, some of the clothing styles are wrong
(bell-bottoms were out, straight legs were in), music was beginning to
have a disco influence, and the reference to urine tests is, of course,
wrong.  But I think most people of age thirty or older will see this
movie as fairly accurate.  People younger than that will be surprised
to see how playful and unthreatening the drug culture was then.
     If this film has a political point, it is that there are other,
better ways of handling drugs and teenage rebellion than our current
approach.  The recent discussion of drug legalization at various levels
of the government make this message timely.
     The plot is coming-of-age; there are many good performance, but
the best is the central character of the film, a junior-high school
student who is initiated into the traditions of high school.  He really
takes control of the film; it's remarkable how someone so young can
display such depth.
     I was mainly struck by the wide range of good performances from
unknown actors.  Linklater has a special talent for creating a whole
raft of believable characters from material that in another director's
hands would look amateur and second-rate.  Undoubtedly his next film
will be a big-budget production, with real actors; I hope he survives
the transition.

Title
Review for Flintstones, The (1994)
     THE FLINTSTONES is Spielberg's trompe l'oeil production of the
Hanna-Barbara cartoon series, and it is much better than the original.
The artistic trick here is to combine the technical wizardry of
JURASSIC PARK with a serious attempt to match the style of the cartoon
series as much as possible.  Thus we have John Goodman looking
remarkably like Fred, Rosie O'Donnell giggling just like Betty, and
live-action versions of all the familiar opening and closing scenes
from the cartoon.  You're probably aware of this if you've watched any
media in the last few weeks, because of all the commercial tie-ins.
     Comparing this film with, say, THE ADDAMS FAMILY, the latter is
much the superior work.  It had a core point (acceptance of weirdness)
that just isn't present here. Arguable, the Addams family film had more
to work with, but a lot of what was in the film was an elaboration of
the core philosophy from the television series.  The difference is,
here only the style of the series has been elaborated, and the core
meaning of the work is still empty and shallow.  In the Addams family
films, particularly the sequel, the ideas take off in the more rich
environment of film, and say something new.
     I think that I must be getting a little tired of Spielberg's
production values, since they seem to be so perfectly respected here,
with every possible joke about the mixture of modern and prehistoric
times made, and made well, and I still found the film a little dull.
The film just never seems to take off.  Of course, neither did the
cartoon series--it was definitely second-rate stuff--but here you
also have the certain knowledge that every possible commercial angle of
this artistic work will be explored.
     The style of the film, as I implied above, is very consistent, and
a great elaboration of the cartoon series. The art direction and script
are great, and full of all sorts of jokes about prehistoric suburban
life.  The direction is great in reconstructing the style and feeling
of the original as much as possible.
     Goodman is great as Fred, and Rosie O'Donnell is a standout as
Betty.  She brings a kind of nervous, luscious sensuality to the role.
I thought Rick Moranis delivered a little less than he should have as
Barney, and Elizabeth Perkins just disappeared into her roles as Wilma:
she wasn't asked to do much, but she didn't do anything extra either.
I found Kyle MacLachlan's performance as the evil Yuppie a
disappointment; I'd like to see him really connect with a role as he
did with Lynch, but this isn't it.

Title
Review for Secret Garden, The (1993)
     Although I have not read it, I understand the children's book THE
SECRET GARDEN to be a cloying, precious story of a young girl's
restoring herself and her crippled cousin through a secret, magical
garden she restores.  I expected this film to be a particularly
effective adaptation of this book to the screen, because of its
direction (by Agnieszka Holland, who did EUROPA, EUROPA and OLIVIER,
OLIVIER) and its production (from Francis Ford Coppola's studios,
Zoetrope)--as well as because of the preview, which presents the film
from this point of view.
     But instead, this film is the sort that comes along every only
every ten years or so; true, competent, professional cinematic art.
Uniquely, to my knowledge, Holland has achieved this level of art in a
movie that can be appreciated by anyone, from a child to an adult.  It
is a remarkable accomplishment, which I think puts Holland on the level
as the finest directors.
     She does this by interpreting the novel in a very realistic and
child-oriented way. Children see the world very differently from
adults, and not at all in the sweet and precious way we like to think;
they believe in magic, not always the good kind (e.g., LORD OF THE
FLIES), and for them young animals are not only cute, but also models
and symbols of growth and fecundity.
     Holland incorporates many references to the young girl's emerging
sexuality without ever seeming heavy-handed or obvious about it. It is
not accidental that the accident that sends her back to England occurs
just after she has physically expressed her anger towards her parents,
seen them kissing, and hidden under the bed. But from the girl's point
of view these are real events, not symbols, and that is how Holland
presents them to us.
     Most of all, this is a really good movie. You will want to meet
these people, to see the garden.
     I don't remember the names of any of the actors or actresses,
except for Maggie Smith, who plays the evil governess of the
household.  But I especially liked the girl's maid, the girl, and the
young boy who helped her with the garden.  The maid, in particular,
stands out; I hope to see her again soon.

Title
Review for Piano, The (1993)
     THE PIANO is one of perhaps two films I've seen lately (the other
being THE SECRET GARDEN) which are really original, and which show
something deep and interesting about human nature.
     THE PIANO has Holly Hunter as an unmarried Scottish mother who is
married by contract to a New Zealand settler, played by Sam Neill.
Hunter is mute, and achieves self-expression through her piano, which
she takes on the voyage.
     Hunter is incredibly strong-willed; even she cannot understand
where her will comes from.  She is tamed, gradually, by Harvey Keitel,
a wild man associate of Neill's who has adopted some of the Maori
ways.
     It is the romance of Hunter and Keitel that forms the basis of the
film, and also serves as the rock on which the film's sexual commentary
stands.  This movie is mainly about sex, in the sense that it is sex
that stands between men and women, and draws them together, and sex
that divides us as individuals, and draws us together.
     This is the only film I can remember seeing which has sexual
relations as a main theme, and which is not also boring (e.g., HENRY
AND JUNE, THE UNBEARABLE LIGHTNESS OF BEING.)
     All of the acting in the movie is good, including the little girl
who plays Hunter's daughter, but Holly Hunter's performance is one of
the most remarkable I have ever seen.  She never says a word, except in
voiceovers, and yet she manages to convey a character as clearly as any
actress has.  She is really remarkable.  She should certainly be
nominated for an Academy Award on the basis of this performance.
     Susan Campion's direction is also excellent.  Watching these
people, one is struck over and over with recognition of similar events
in one's own life.  Campion keeps any one of these characters from
being stereotyped (I especially appreciated this with Neill's
character, who could easily have been cast as a greedy, insensitive
lout).
     The screenplay is filled with remarkable images.  For example, the
hoop skirt tent, Hunter being carried in through the surf, the wedding
photograph, Neill's ambiguous viewing of Keitel and Hunter.

Title
Review for Age of Innocence, The (1993)
     Daniel Day-Lewis plays the favored son of a prominent New York
family, who is engaged to marry the favored daughter of another family,
played by Winona Ryder.  Michelle Pfeiffer plays the black sheep cousin
of Winona, who has disgraced the family by marrying a European cad,
then leaving him and returning to New York.  Naturally, Day-Lewis's
character falls in love with her.
     So far, a standard and obvious story.  But this all takes place in
a very strange time for America.  Apparently, at this time in New York,
manners were as important as, say, in Japan at the time of
Sei-Shonagon.  I.e., form was all, a precise set of signs were used to
signal any unpleasant statement, and certain things were simply
impossible; for example, Pfeiffer's character cannot get divorced.
     So you have the passion between Day-Lewis and Pfeiffer, which has
to be played out in an extremely careful and mannered way.  Even in
private, they cannot signal to each other how they really feel, but
only give the most obscure signs (except in one or two scenes).  This
tension is the driving force behind the film; it seems almost as if the
film stock would tear itself apart, with the tremendous contradiction
between the way the characters feel and the way they act.
     I thought the direction of Pfeiffer and Ryder to be, perhaps, a
little too subtle.  Pfeiffer is filled with this passion, but not
allowed to express it; Ryder plays a superficial airhead, who acts
completely automatically in the correct mannered way.  They are total
opposites underneath, but Scorsese forces them to act almost
identically, on the surface.  But as a result, both seem very remote
and it is hard to appreciate the emotions underneath.  I think to
properly appreciate this, you have to see the movie more than once; it
seems worth it.
     Day-Lewis does not seem as torn.  The movie is told from his point
of view, and he seems to be feeling the tensions we would all feel at
being trapped in such a society.  He protests against it, weakly, but
allows things to happen to him, which mostly lead to his benefit,
though not of course to the fulfillment of the passion driving the
film.  I thought Day-Lewis was given his head a little too much in this
film; he should have been subjected a little bit to the same tensions
driving Ryder and Pfeiffer.
     There are some delicious small parts in this film.  Miriam
Margolyes plays Ryder and Pfeiffer's grandmother, and provides comic
relief as well as a sense of stability.  Michael Gough is fun as the
sort of judge of this society.  Richard E. Grant is great as a devious
schemer.
     The film is strikingly beautiful.  Every scene, even the largest,
seems to be set up with incredible precision.  Certain scenes linger in
the mind:  the conservatory, the external view of the grandmother's
house before New York was New York, the scene where Ryder traps
Day-Lewis, with her dress arrayed like a spider's web behind her.

Title
Review for Boxing Helena (1993)
     A while ago I saw a movie called something like LADY IN THE
WINDOW, which was filmed here in Pittsburgh.  It was about a
department store window designer and the man who was sexually obsessed
with her.  She eventually defeated him by incorporating him in her
window design, or something.  I remember Horne's department store
figured prominently.
     BOXING HELENA makes me think of this movie for two reasons.
First, like LADY IN THE WINDOW, it is about sexual obsession.  Second,
LADY IN THE WINDOW is the only movie I can remember that is actually
worse than BOXING HELENA.  (To be fair, I'm sure there have been five
or so more; I just can't think of them right now.)
     BOXING HELENA has the raw, gritty feel of a junior high-school
drama production.  People spit out ridiculous lines with no conviction
whatsoever.  More than anything else, it shows how important good
direction is to a film, and how badly things can go wrong when the
director has no idea whatsoever what she is doing.
     Jennifer Lynch, who directed this amazing bomb, should have worked
for a while as assistant director, or something like that, on other
films.  She might have picked up a few pointers on motivating people,
and learned how to pace a film.  As it is, her creation of this stinker
is a strong argument for the passage of anti-nepotism laws in
Hollywood.  Who knows -- this movie could ultimately have the impact
JFK did, and lead to national legislation. (And probably also to a
movement to make sure film stock is recyclable; it is the only way some
good will come of the print.)
     The actors are real professionals: Sherlyn Fenn, Julian Sands, Art
Garfunkel.  They have all been in reasonable films.  Sherilyn Fenn even
achieves a kind of effective performance here; there's something about
the way she holds herself in the quadraplegic scenes that is moving, a
little.
     One thing that is sad about this movie is that Lynch seems to have
had some interesting ideas.  Besides the plot itself, which is at least
original, there's one scene where Fenn teaches Sands how to make love
to a woman, that is fun.  There are also Sands's nervous habits, like
changing his shirt all the time and putting some sort of ear drops in
his ear, neither of which is explained, that are intriguing in a
Lynch-esque way.
     *No one* should see this film.  Even if you are thinking about it
because it sounds strange and interesting, don't go.  You will live a
happier life if you don't have to carry the memory of this dreck around
with you.

Title
Review for Real McCoy, The (1993)
     I decided Kim Basinger must be taken more seriously as an actress
if she's smart enough to turn down BOXING HELENA, at the risk of her
personal fortune, so I went to see THE REAL MCCOY.  I hoped it would
be a ripoff of POINT OF NO RETURN.
     But it is not.  The problem is that it is not an action film, and
only vaguely a conventional film about a female cat burglar bank
robber.  Instead, the story revolves around Basinger's relationship
with her son -- it seems even famous bank robbers have sons, if they
are women.
     Sigh.  How I wish Hollywood would get out of this mold of having to
mix a little of conventional women's roles into every film they make
with a woman star.  POINT OF NO RETURN would have been better if
Bridget Fonda hadn't felt the draw of conventional relationships quite
so strongly (why couldn't she end up sophisticated and happy like James
Bond?), and this movie would have been better if the role Basinger's
son would play hadn't been so obvious. (Hint: She gets out of jail, and
wants to go straight.  Some bad guys want her to rob another bank.  She
loves her son.  So what do the bad guys do?)
     I thought the role for Basinger was actually pretty good,
though.  She gets to play a more three-dimensional character than she
has in any other recent film.  She reminds you of why she has become
famous; she really can act, though between this film and BOXING
HELENA, she's not getting offered roles that will take her any place.

Title
Review for Little Buddha (1993)
     LITTLE BUDDHA combines the legend of the life of Siddhartha with a
modern story of an American boy who is thought to be the reincarnation
of a Tibetan Lama.  It is an effective and touching introduction to
Buddhism and an illustration of how the teachings of Buddha can have
relevance in the modern world.
     I found myself deeply moved by his film, though it has a number of
flaws.  Bertolucci unnecessarily prolongs the story by tripling the
reincarnation candidates. His casting of Keanu Reeves as Siddhartha is
questionable, for although Reeves is remarkably good here, he has
established such a strong screen presence as a idiotic teenager it is
difficult to accept him as the Enlightened One.  (Although his
performance is easily the strongest in the film.)  I think Reeves is a
talented actor who will eventually overcome this limitation,
particularly if he continues to stretch himself by working with
talented and distinguished directors like Bertolucci, van Sant, and
Coppola.
     I also thought the casting of Chris Isaak as the father was
suspect; he simply doesn't have the technical ability to carry off this
role.  And Bridget Fonda was wasted as the mother.  The film would have
worked better if Fonda had traveled with her son, though I suppose the
parallel to the life of Siddhartha made the role assignment
inevitable.
     In spite of its flaws, this film works.  It is clear that
Bertolucci has a deep affection for the ideas of Buddhism, and he has
managed to integrate the legend seamlessly with the modern plot--so
much so that at the end one leaves with the image of Buddha still
meditating under the banyan tree, as one is meant to.
     The Tibetan priests are well cast; they are exactly as they should
be, particularly the round, jolly one. The young boy also performs
well, particularly at the end.
     By the way, this film is suitable for children in the same way
that THE SECRET GARDEN (to which it refers) was suitable for adults.
It contains no explicit violent or sexual imagery that would be
offensive, and tells the story on a level that children of say six or
more can understand.
