Authors
Ann Hodgins
Number of Reviews
5

Title
Review for Postcards from the Edge (1990)
     I once dreamed that I was a Kung Fu fighter fending off several
thugs at once on the edge of a precipice.  I thought then in the morning
how unusual that dream was for a girl to have and I think now what a
perfect analogy it is for POSTCARDS FROM THE EDGE.
     This movie is not the comedy I took it to be from it promotion
although it is consistently light and subtly witty.  And the promotion
also led me to hope for some hot scenes with Dennis Quaid a la THE BIG
EASY.  No such luck.
     But on the positive side, it was not the heavy 'message' movie I 
feared it would be either, despite its anti-drug theme.  There are no
heavy themes of life vs. death or good vs. evil.  What messages there
are to be found in this film are indeed like postcards: short, friendly
and to the point.  
     And rather disjointed.  There is no central theme in this movie  so
it does not build to a grand finale like a Great Work of Art.  It is
simply a woman struggling through a difficult point in her life against
several different but related problems, like my Kung Fu fighter dealing
with several thugs at once.  And like Robin Hood or Zorro the hero's
motto is: be light-hearted, be gallant, don't hurt any one, and laugh
in the face of death.
     In the movie she fights her problems as they come.  Sometimes she
seems to fall back and is pushed to the edge, then comes back strong.
Sometimes she grabs on to weapon that breaks in her hands.  But she is
always a fighter.  Her habits may be self-destructive but she is
determined to win.  
     The heroine's self image as a *woman* is, I think, the real theme
of this movie.  It is as though she did not quite pass puberty, but
failed it.    
     She has remained like a pre-pubescent poised to become a woman but
blocked from passing over the edge of childhood into womanhood, and the
block in her *Mother*.  To grow up would be to compete with her
overwhelming mother at Her own game.
     There is a theory, post-Freudian I think, that a young girl's first
love is her mother and to grow up she must instead learn to identify
with and to be like her mother.  There are scenes, especially the first
singing scene, when this dynamic seems clearly to be the heroine's
central problem.  
     But whether or not you find this theme intriguing you will probably
enjoy POSTCARDS FROM THE EDGE.  It is light, interesting and amusing.
It has many unexpected twists and surprise: the singing is wonderful!

Title
Review for Doors, The (1991)
     I wrote this title after seeing THE DOORS IN EUROPE, a documentary
of the original Doors' performances.  That movie made a worshipper out
of me.  Then I was brought down hard by NO ONE HERE GETS OUT ALIVE, the
biography: Jim made so many deadly errors it's a wonder he didn't die
sooner.   But although the book killed my hero worship it did not kill
my love for the guy.  But what difference does it make.  No woman could
have broken through to Jim.  All my love's in vain.  Total failure.  No
blame.  Jim talked of women as "meager food for souls for God."  What
woman could win out in the face of such a total negation?  
     So I was prepared to find Oliver Stone's DOORS a grueling
experience.  As a great admirer of Stone's artistry I was afraid that he
would successfully revive the past, the feeling and meaning of it.  I
was 17 in 68, and if he was successful Stone could make me relive my
feelings.  I was prepared for that but it didn't happen.  Instead I was
able to compose this review in my head during most of the movie.  The
music was there, and the fashions and all, but nothing touched me as it
should have.
     Perhaps the problem was that Jim Morrison was not just a guy in the
crowd that a mere camera could capture.  Jim was a soul who was doomed
to be the spirit of his times.  He was racked on the extremes of those
times.  He was born into a proto-typical American family -- his mother a
neglected nag and his father Mr. Megadeath, a nuclear war expert in the
army.  He appeared to be normal and conforming, like every other boy
did.  But he caught a spirit from those Indians.  He passed puberty just
as Rock and Roll was being born.  He came of drafting age during the War
in Vietnam.  He came to consciousness just as LSD was invented.  He
discovered love during the Summer of Love.  He briefly became a father
when the red tide of abortion reached its peak.
     In himself he was the times and he did his best to work out those
terrible internal/external conflicts and make something positive emerge
from the struggle into his poetry and to give that good thing to others.
That's why I love his soul, because he was the anti-Hitler.  He fought
harder than his father who was the youngest general in the navy.  Jim's
personal struggle took him farther faster.  
     "Don't underestimate the audience," Jim said.  "They want the
sacred."  Stone's movie fails to deliver.  One can hardly blame Stone
for that.  Maybe Jim's soul was just too big to capture.  Or maybe I
just expected too much after viewing THE DOORS IN EUROPE.  Or maybe it
was because I'm a woman looking back at a time of life and a time in
history when men and women just didn't see the same things.  I can find
myself in the movie only as a rag of Indian silk, a boney body and a
hank of hair.  My experience is locked on the wrong side of those
heavily made-up eyes.
     Maybe I should not have expected Stone to revive those times for
me, but actually I think that the movie missed all the points.  Things
didn't ring true or have the impact they should have had.  For instance,
in the scene where Jim tells his wife to kill their baby, I can't
believe that Patricia replied to that by criticizing Jim's recent weight
gain!  That is not how the scene could have been or how it is described
in NO ONE HERE GETS OUT ALIVE.
     Everything in the movie was like that for me -- just not right.  So
I left the theatre competely unmoved and unable to write the review I
wanted to write.  I suggest seeing the documentary and reading the
poetry.

Title
Review for Predator 2 (1990)
Species A: probably a reptile, lays eggs
Species B: a mammal, completely dependent on its mother for years
Species A: thick scaly hide, like armour
Species B: thin soft skin, filled with nerve endings
Species A: eats an ox raw every 3 days
Species B: likes a steak rare with baked potatoes and sour cream
Species A: special features - claws and teeth for ripping flesh 
Species B: special features - large genitals and forebrain, ideal
                for [censored] and computer games.
Species A: heavily muscled but graceless hands good only for striking blows
Species B: agile, sensitive hands ideal for knitting 
Species A: long, sharp heavy claws
Species B: delicate nails for scratching puppies behind the ears
Species A: features of face mainly teeth grinding in every direction
Species B: big fringed eyes, delicately sculpted features, sensitive lips
        Imagine pitting species A against species B.  It should make a short movie.
Bambi meets Godzilla.  
        The crazy thing is, we are supposed to believe that Species B wins!
Armed with a strong sense of personal responsibility and love of
comrades, one member of Species B alone triumphs.  Impossible.  And
yet...  the moral is a good one.  

Title
Review for Queens Logic (1991)
     It has been compared to DINER and THE BIG CHILL, and there is some
truth in that claim.  Like DINER, it is about boys becoming men, but in
QUEEN'S LOGIC the women and less oppressed, stronger and more supportive
of each other.  Like THE BIG CHILL, it is about a get-together --
occasioned by a wedding in this case, not a funeral - that decisively
changes the lives of the participants.  But QUEENS LOGIC is funkier
than BC and concerns itself with a different class and type of people.
     I appreciated QUEENS LOGIC more than either of the other two
movies.   I enjoyed the performances more and somehow warmed to the
characters more.  I particularly delighted in Tom Waits as a gorgeously
dressed, switchblade-wielding aesthete, and John Malkovich as a gay man
who never met another gay man he could like.
     Most of all I enjoyed the party scenes in QUEENS LOGIC.  Earlier
in the movie, a character announces enigmatically: "An event is about
to take place that may or may not result in a wedding."  During the
party, this prophesy is strangely and wonderfully fulfilled.
     I found the plot of QUEENS LOGIC unpredictable and the characters
original.  I enjoyed it and I recommend it to people who like movies
about people and their relationships.

Title
Review for Sarah, Plain and Tall (1991) (TV)
     This is a made-for-television movie but deserves notice for its
excellent writing and performances.  You've probably missed it this time
around, but it will be shown again and again, I'm sure.  
     My first response was to consider the stars.  It stars Glenn Close
in a sympathetic role, something she badly needs.  She has not played
along with her charming natural beauty since THE BIG CHILL.  Since then
she has played against type in FATAL ATTRACTION, HAMLET and DANGEROUS
LIAISONS.  Clearly, she is determined to avoid being trapped into
performing only one type of character.  And in SARAH: PLAIN AND TALL she
is perfectly believable as a simple, honest and good woman.
     Her co-star's name slips my mind, which is significant since he is
one of my favourites from a few years back who has not appeared in a hit
show recently.  He was the star of DEAD ZONE (is it Christopher Walken?)
[yes --Moderator] and THE DEER HUNTER and was very memorable in NEXT
STOP GREENWICH VILLAGE.  He has perhaps been the victim of typecasting
as an intellectual.  He has always played delicate, rather effete
characters but in SARAH: PLAIN AND TALL, he is extremely effective and
believable as a simple man who makes his living with the strength of his
body, not his mind.
     Watching this movie I quickly came to believe totally in the
characters and to care about their situation.  By the end, I found that
I could not go back to regular modern shows.  They seemed too plastic
and shallow.  I was completely gone into Sarah's world.
     The movie is based on a book and perhaps it is a true story.  It
feels true.  The feelings are very and real and gentle.  It is similar
to WITNESS but without the contrived cop-drama element.  The concern is
with family, home, and work, not big city crime and murder.
     If you are looking for something different, something more
realistic and also more delicate than most dramas, catch SARAH: PLAIN
AND TALL.
