Authors
Rachel Gordon
Number of Reviews
25

Title
Review for Hedwig and the Angry Inch (2000)
Following the success of Hedwig and the Angry Inch Off-Broadway and in
other major cities comes this colorfully energetic filmed adaptation. 
Written, directed by, and starring the original, ever-talented John
Cameron Mitchell, Hedwig delivers the guilty pleasure of entertainment
through another's pain.
The brassy title derives from the fact that Hedwig, born Hansel,
underwent an unsuccessful sex change operation when marrying an officer
to flee an oppressive, still-halved Berlin.  His childhood isn't a
pretty picture, so it's easy enough to imagine the desperation strong
enough to drive him towards accepting the drastic change.  Hansel
wouldn't have had a problem adapting to womanhood as he considered
himself a "girly boy" anyway, but with a one-inch penis and no breasts,
his difficulties increase.
Once in America, Hedwig's husband leaves him for another boy.  Hedwig
gets by with odd jobs and finds solace in American music.  Inspired by
artists like David Bowie, heard over American Forces Radio while in
Germany, Hedwig joins up with a band and writes songs based on his life.
Now it's arguable that someone bitching about their dysfunctional life
for an hour and a half could be depressing, boring, or otherwise not
worth the bother.  But Hedwig is such a charismatic protagonist that
this is never an issue.  He's high maintenance for anyone in his circle,
and even cruel to those most patient with him.  On the flipside, he's
full of contagious humor and self-sacrifice for his passion, be it
people or music.  He has an admirable presence whenever he walks in a
room, and it's not just because he's in drag.
Sadly, the film lacks some of the emotional intimacy that occurs when
watching a live performance.  Instead of all the musical numbers
occurring over one evening's performance, Hedwig's gigs are spread out
through different dives.  Each stop is carefully planned to follow the
more popular Tommy Gnossis, Hedwig's ex-lover/now-enemy.  This only gets
monotonous when each audience, excepting the last, have the same drawn,
scared look on their faces as Hedwig belts out his unfortunate life
story.
The story takes great advantage of the film medium by using animated
fantasy images to convey Hedwig's ultimate purpose to find his other
half.  Flashbacks, normally used in films as easy exposition, give the
circumstances of Hedwig's life more weight.  It is far more spellbinding
to actually see Hansel fall for the officer, and Hedwig's early
connection with Tommy, than it is to simply hear about it from painted
lips.
Another accomplishment is the film's ability to combine music and a
dramatic story on screen.  Usually when someone bursts into song in a
film, an audience will cower in a corner to cover their ears and watch
for facial muscles to relax.  But because music is Hedwig's life, and
therapy, it is just as pertinent to the story as his daily life and
flashbacks.  And because the music varies in tempo and lyrical style, it
compliments Hedwig's rocky journey.
For a hard knocks story, Hedwig and the Angry Inch is an enjoyable
ride.  You'll either sit back and say "At least my life is better than
that," or simply be amazed at how good a musical movie about a
half-woman, half-man can be.
Director: John Cameron Mitchell
Producer: Pamela Koffler, Kaite Roumel, Christine Vachon
Writer: John Cameron Mitchell, Stephen Trask
Starring: John Cameron Mitchell, Miriam Shor, Michael Pitt, Andrea
Martin, Alberta Watson
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com

Title
Review for Life and Debt (2001)
Jamaica is a hot vacation spot.  The exchange rate encourages delusions
of wealth (approximately 30 Jamaican dollars to one American), the sea
is a brilliant blue, the air is warm but lacks humidity.  And as tourism
is unfortunately Jamaica's biggest trade, foreigners enter and leave
with a sense of relaxation.
Life and Debt takes a brassy look at life inside this impoverished
country.  While normal documentaries take the Sally Struthers approach
of underlying scenes of starving children with tearful music, this film
guides the viewer with a sarcastic voiceover that brings the troubles
home without begging tears to the surface.
The voiceover is written by acclaimed author Jamaica Kincaid.  It guides
the audience along a tourist's journey and the story of the native
inhabitants.  Instead of telling you what you are already seeing on
screen, it quips, "You don't see what happens after you flush the
toilet."  This engages a viewer to see and think about devastation
instead of merely being told it is there.  This strong, sparse
storytelling approach runs throughout the film.
Stephanie Black is also intelligent in how she chooses to disclose the
problems faced by the locals.  This isn't just another talking head show
of people moaning about their horrible lot in life.  People are
interviewed from all sectors of occupation, from field to factory, as
well as social theorists and the banking organizations that continue to
invest in the country.  The variety of discussion perpetuates a
compelling internal dialogue with any viewer, whether they are seeing
Jamaica for the first time or not.
Of course, as can be expected, the United States is slammed, owing to
its involvement with the International Monetary Fund and the World
Bank.  Officials look moronic as they explain why their plans for
Jamaica's economy will help the country back on its feet, but only if
they are willing to follow the advice word for word.
The next moment we see why and how each of these initiatives has failed,
usually due to imports being cheaper than local labor or whether or not
the soil is appropriate for the next agricultural trend the U.S. is
forcing on the citizens.  Admittedly, some of the back and forth between
the business-minded organizations and the failures they produce gets
repetitive, but it also drives home the impact ignorance can have on
both sides of an international argument.
But Jamaica isn't against the United States, and this documentary does
not accuse the U.S. of being the sole perpetrator of its grief.  If
anything, it begs for a better understanding of the nature of Jamaican
society before stepping in to change it based on foreign regulations.
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com

Title
Review for W.I.S.O.R. (2001)
What a tough sell this film must have been: Documenting the development
of an engineering device that would automate the fixing of broken steam
piping underground at the flip of a switch.  Set against the backdrop of
other advances in technology, with a focus on what robotics has done for
humans so far, W.I.S.O.R. may be smart, but does anyone care?
Of course, we're supposed to care.  After all, steam pipes burst all the
time, flooding streets, exploding buildings, killing innocent people,
and causing nasty traffic jams.  These pipes date back to the early 20th
century and it's time they got updated to the rest of civilization.
So ConEdison (purveyor of gas and electricity in New York City) set
Honeybee Robotics to the task of creating a device that would weld
ruptures in underground systems with help of a human interface.  It's no
small feat, as it's never been done before, so there are no predecessors
to work from, and even the schematics of the underground systems are
questionable.  It's a seemingly impossible task, even for a large
corporation used to building robots for IBM.  But it will happen, and
the end result will be W.I.S.O.R., or welding and inspection steam
operations robot.
Michel Negroponte, who came to understandable recognition after his
successful debut with Jupiter's Wife, tries to make this subject
interesting.  It starts out with gusto, a short energetic cartoon of
what W.I.S.O.R. will eventually do, brief shots of the men making it
possible, and some horror scene news footage that prompted ConEdison to
take action.  But not halfway through the film, it is difficult to
stifle a yawn.  The engineers bounce scientific theories back and forth,
prove themselves frustratingly wrong, and get back on the horse time and
again.  To make matters even more annoying, the robot they are making is
given a voice that mimics them.
The archival footage that is interspersed to break up the development of
the machine has some interesting historical perspective.  However, the
voice over is a condescending one, as if it were speaking to mere 5-year
olds (who of course would never sit through a film like this).
Visually speaking, it doesn't matter which section of the "robo-welder"
they are working on, though each piece gets an exhausting length of
time.  Again, Negroponte tries to make up for this in shifty camera work
mixed with slow and fast motion, but all this creates is an eyesore. 
For some reason, the screen also changes from black and white to color
at random.
The redeeming values are few and far between.  It's respectable that
Negroponte would try to teach the masses about such a subject and that
the subjects aren't portrayed as perfect geniuses of noble personality. 
The structure of the film is pleasantly tight; none of the scenes are
particularly over-extended.  But while it is human tendency to turn to
technology to fix things, and some of these advances are fascinating,
W.I.S.O.R. just doesn't make the grade.
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com

Title
Review for Biandan, guniang (1998)
When the country of Vietnam is mentioned in conversation, it is usually
in conjunction with the war, not its citizens.  This film embarks on a
remarkable journey through working class Vietnam in the late 1980's, as
three characters struggle to help each other in a nation still trying to
get to its feet.
The plot is simple, allowing the characters the attention they deserve. 
Dong Zi (Shi Yu) comes to the city from the countryside because of the
opportunity to make money.  He earns an honest living as a petty
"shoulder pole" on the docks and is permitted to crash with Gao Ping
(Guo Tao), an older gentleman and self-proclaimed businessman who tries
to show him the ropes because they are from the same town.  But Gao has
a vendetta against a man who cheated him out of money.  Though he
dresses better and lives a fuller life than Dong, he is none the happier
for doing so.
Dong follows Gao everywhere as he tries to adapt to city life.  The pair
divide, however, after Dong helps kidnap Ruan Hong (Wang Tong), a
nightclub singer whom Gao believes to be associated with the past
partner who cheated him.  Dong shies away further as Gao and Ruan begin
to have an affair.
The lovers' relationship doesn't last for long as Ruan still doesn't
divulge information on the man Gao is seeking.  Ruan leaves when Gao
treats her like a prostitute, but does scratch a note to him as to where
to find the man he has been obsessed with.  Gao is then nowhere to be
found for days.  Dong continues to keep tabs on Ruan, and even records
her singing at the club without her knowledge.  They strike up a quietly
uncomfortable friendship as he actually listens to her instead of just
wanting to take her to bed, pretty though she is.
Amidst this starkly built emotional tide is the backdrop of an
unconvincingly confident government-controlled media versus the rampant
crime perpetrated by a character simply referred to as "The Boss."  The
Boss has thugs everywhere to keep innocents like Ruan and Dong in check,
and no amount of television reporters that the government encourages
helps them feel safe.
It's easy to understand why this was an Official Selection at Cannes two
years ago.  Xiaoshuai brings poignant body language out of his actors,
Shi Yu and Wang Tong, both of whom are making their feature debut.  The
script is kept tight at 90 minutes, most of which lacks dialogue and
allows the camera to linger on the characters within the sparse
possibilities of their environment.  There may not be much in the way of
physical action, but eyes are still glued to the screen because anything
could happen to this sympathetic threesome.
There are minimal drawbacks to this film.  Xiaoshuai makes a habit of
extending emotional tones after a scene has made a point.  It's
acceptable to do this several times in a film, but not one scene after
another and another.  Luckily the characters are interesting enough that
this tedious routine can be excused.
The political overtones, though laughable at first, round out the movie
by providing the context to which these desperate lives are able to
continue their vicious cycle.  It's understandable why Gao attempts to
seek his fortune on the sly, but just as believable that Dong would try
the honest way in reaction to his role model's difficulties.  This is
not an environment strictly based on right and wrong, but once you have
chosen one path it seems impossible to change course.
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com

Title
Review for Tootsie (1982)
Dustin Hoffman has been nominated for seven Oscars and has won two for
roles in Rain Man and Kramer vs. Kramer.  With an inescapable nose and
smallish stature, he's one of the few talents able to prove that the
business of entertaining isn't always dependent on looks.  He'll play
boring or annoying roles every now and then, such as Captain Hook, but
whatever he takes on, he does it with style.
Before Tootsie, Hoffman had been known more for his dramatic appearances
in such films as All the President's Men and The Graduate.  He hadn't
been involved with all-out comedy yet, whether for lack of industry
faith or blind luck.  So Tootsie was his first venture into this more
mainstream audience area, and he more than filled the part.  Which
brings us to one of the greatest role-reversal movies of the 1980's, for
which Hoffman was nominated by the Academy again (though he didn't win).
Michael Dorsey (Hoffman) is an unemployed actor.  He is passionate about
his career, if only he would be given a chance!  He becomes so
frustrated, in fact, that he decides it is probably easier for a woman
to get an acting job than a man, so dresses like one in an audition. 
His struggles begin with the famed casting couch as he must keep his
femininity intact while still using wiles to get the part.
Now Dorothy Michaels, he lands a supporting role in a soap opera and
fame arrives instantly.  As his star rises, so does his love for his
costar Julie Nichols (Jessica Lange, who did win an Oscar).  As
incestuous turmoil breeds on set, Dorothy becomes more popular.  And as
Michael takes turns being a mother to some, confessor to others, best
friend, and object of lust, his respect for what he thought would be
easy grows.  There is a specific individual part Michael he must play
for each person he works with, otherwise his paycheck will be gone,
along with the woman he loves.
It may be a predictable story by now, almost 20 years later, but much of
the humor still stands the test.  What keeps this movie so entertaining
is not the plot, which has been seen time and again, but the comedic
writing (penned by Larry Gelbart, also famous for MASH) and the fine
acting of Hoffman and Bill Murray.  Murray isn't a major character but
his meaty supporting role is flawless in terms of judging the change in
Hoffman as well as their comfortable banter.
Hoffman's growth is earned instead of just a slew of easy plot devices
thrown in to say, "Look, he's different now!"  The character that Dorsey
creates in Dorothy has three dimensions as well, instead of being a mere
alter ego.  Where Lange could simply have been the object of desire at
the end of his tunnel, she lends a pleasurable presence whenever she
walks onscreen before she even opens her mouth.
The scenes that take place behind the camera of the soap opera also
never get long or boring.  There is constant movement and attitude
swirling in the environment.  And where some of the secondary characters
become a bit like caricatures, they are each charismatic enough to be
able to affect great reactions from the protagonist.
A great movie for couples or those who like a good laugh at stereotypes
and sexual mores, Tootsie is as wonderful of a romantic comedy today as
it was 20 years ago.
Director: Sydney Pollack
Producer: Sydney Pollack, Dick Richards
Writer: Murray Schisgal
Starring: Dustin Hoffman, Jessica Lange, Teri Garr, Dabney Coleman,
Charles Durning, Bill Murray
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com

Title
Review for Trolösa (2000)
Liv Ullman may get the directing credit, but every line in Faithless is
stamped Ingmar Bergman (who wrote the script).  Between the immoral
souls of the characters twitching with desires they can't control and
the extended two and a half hours to endure, who else could it be? 
(Bergman's original Fanny and Alexander was close to five hours long,
though the American version is two and a half).
Bergman showed a penchant for family drama with Fanny and Alexander and
Wild Strawberries, among others. He enjoys mixing the imaginary world of
his characters with their reality.  This can lead to a deeper emotional
entanglement with the characters; it's human nature to reflect and react
based on internalized stimuli.  Unfortunately for Faithless, Bergman is
revisiting territory he excelled in some 40 years ago, without shedding
any new light on his subjects.
This isn't the first film in which Bergman has written an old man
getting close to the end and brooding with a fantasy companion about his
wrongdoings.  It's basically Wild Strawberries, only this time the crime
is adultery instead of hubris.  The main character is even sitting at a
desk and writing constantly, again.
Bergman (the character, played by Erland Josephson) is an elderly
gentleman who beckons Marianne (Lena Endre) to discuss her adulterous
relationship with David.  Marianne, an actress, and Markus (Thomas
Hanzon), an orchestra prodigy, have been happily married.  They have a
young daughter, Isabelle (newcomer Michelle Gylemo), and David (Krister
Henrikkson) is their best friend.  David is a director and the
stereotypical brooding, unhappy artist.  One day David offhandedly
suggested sleeping with Marianne, and when she went to Paris on a
special project, he found reason to go as well, and their new
relationship began.
Bergman and Marianne journey through the entire story of the
relationship.  Often the camera cuts from the tense face of him to the
tear-strained eyes of her.  Every once in a while these moments are
punctuated with a flashback sequence.  In fact, the experience feels
more like a play than a film, as screen time is consumed with the two
sitting in a room and chatting away.  The circumstances that brought
Bergman to be the repentant weakling he is today and Marianne as his
mirage take a back seat.  Multiple takes of a man feeling horrible and a
woman crying do not a film make.
Not to say that Faithless is a complete waste of time.  When scenes that
reflect on Isabelle come along, her innocence and quiet intelligence are
well drawn.  Because she gets to underplay the situation she has no
control over, her plight becomes more important than that of her
parents.  This young amateur remarkably carries more presence in her
silence than Marianne does with her tears.
Another fascinating point in the film is how simple and suddenly
adultery can come to pass between two old friends.  No easy excuse is
made for it -- "trouble in the marriage" -- and the subsequent actions
of the characters involved are realistically complicated.  The film
sticks to its story without attempting to pander to a mainstream
audience.
For those who have never seen Bergman's work, this is not the place to
start.  A predecessor by some 40 years, Wild Strawberries is a more
interesting story (even if it was shot in black and white) because the
characters are more active, both in imagination and real time.  They
don't just sit around and brood all day but instead reflect based on
external cues in their environment.  That is what made Strawberries
emotionally engaging.  Perhaps if Faithless was told from beginning to
end instead of through glimpses into a past, driven by tears, it would
have hit half the nerves it was striving to.
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com

Title
Review for Caveman's Valentine, The (2001)
After working as an actor for some time, Kasi Lemmons (The Silence of
the Lambs) wrote and directed her first feature, Eve's Bayou, in 1997. 
She has since spent the past 4 years putting together The Caveman's
Valentine, which took 10-plus producers to come to fruition.  Instead of
directing original material, Lemmons directs from the book by Georges
Dawes Green, who adapted it for the screen.
Samuel L. Jackson (Unbreakable, Shaft) teams up with Lemmons again (he
played the philandering husband in Eve's Bayou) to star as the disturbed
and homeless Romulus.  Thankfully, no easy explanation is ever uttered
as to the nature of his psychosis.  He lives partially obsessed with a
fantasy world in which exotic dancers inspire his hands on the piano,
and his ultimate nemesis resides in the Chrysler building.
His daughter, Lulu (Aunjanue Ellis, Men of Honor) is a New York City
cop.  She cares about her father but has difficulties getting through to
him as he insists on living in a Central Park cave and allows the voices
in his head to control his actions.  One of those voices is ex-wife
Sheila (Tamara Tunie, The Devil's Advocate, also the narrator from Eve's
Bayou), which leads him in his internal struggle.
Romulus becomes even more obsessed with his archenemy after a young man
is found frozen to death in a tree outside his cave.  He learns from a
local street urchin that the deceased kid was a model for a famous,
popular, and abusive photographer (Colm Feore, Titus) and begins to hunt
the mystery.  He tries to enlist his daughter's help, but this appears a
simple case to the department, so he is on his own.
What follows is an intricately woven tale of sorting reality from the
surrealism that lay siege to one another in the mind of Romulus.  Even
when he doesn't follow rules of common sense, it's difficult to argue
with his actions or his need for justice.  Because he is mentally
innocent, it would be unthinkable to blame him for stupid remarks or
walking into danger.
The question of whether or not he will succeed in taking down a
murderer, or simply making more a fool of himself to his daughter, is
kept grippingly open throughout.  Because Romulus' mind can be struck
with otherworldly ideas at any moment, the audience is kept in just as
much ignorance as he is.
The only tiresome moments in the film are Romulus' interchanges with
upper crust businessman Bob (Anthony Michael Hall, Pirates of Silicon
Valley).  Bob and his wife are the stereotypically ignorant white folk
who find Romulus such an intriguing revelation to their otherwise boring
world.  Luckily these scenes are kept brief and are solely used for plot
purposes, like cleaning Romulus up for his investigation of the
photographer.
Lemmons' vision is once again brought to focus through the talented
cinematography of Amy Vincent.  Vincent shot Eve's Bayou as well, and
again with The Caveman's Valentine shows a beautifully artistic eye in
blending fantasy with reality.  The distinction between the two is overt
enough to be noticeable and yet never overwhelming because the fantasy
is shot as crisply as the reality.  It's easy to become captivated by
scenery that's so visually compelling and adds weight to the mixture of
internal and external worlds the audience is forced to live in for 105
minutes.
Lemmons is one of a meager handful of black female directors.  One can
only hope that successful adventures such as The Caveman's Valentine and
Julie Dash's Daughters of the Dust have far reaching effects on the
Hollywood machine.  With help from peers such as Samuel L. Jackson, who
helped produce both of Lemmons' films, perhaps other filmmakers will get
their chance.
Director: Kasi Lemmons
Producer: Danny DeVito, Scott Frank, Elie Samaha, Michael Shamberg,
Stacey Sher, Andrew Stevens
Writer: George Dawes Green
Starring: Samuel L. Jackson, Aunjanue Ellis, Ann Magnuson, Tamara Tunie,
Anthony Michael Hall, Colm Feore
Web: http://www.cavemansvalentine.com
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com
To unsubscribe from this group, send an email to:
critic-unsubscribe@yahoogroups.com
Your use of Yahoo! Groups is subject to http://docs.yahoo.com/info/terms/ 

Title
Review for Wayne's World (1992)
Sometimes, no matter how much you love analyzing and breaking down
movies, you have to understand that some are just made for fun.  Wayne's
World is a prime example.  Sure, you can predict everything that's going
to happen, but the characters are entertaining and it's a fairly decent
mix of physical and verbal comedy.  Of course, who can forget the
variety of endings they invented and the moments of dialogue that still
pop up today, such as, "Shaw... and monkeys might fly out of my butt!"
The most memorable television I watched in my teens consisted primarily
of those "not ready for prime time players" at Saturday Night Live. 
They had cutting edge music and hosts who could act.  Not to mention
they had talented writers, including Michael Myers and Dana Carvey. 
Carvey had the Church Lady and Myers had Dieter and Simon.  And when
they worked together to produce the Wayne's World sketch, I never
thought I'd love a pair of naďve losers more.
This sketch, surprising, turned into a successful feature film.  After
all, adults who don't want to grow up can only be interesting and fun
for a certain amount of time... say five minutes.  But a full 90? 
Carvey had participated in a few failed attempts (not really his fault,
poorly written material) like Opportunity Knocks and Myers was pretty
much getting his start with this film.  The last time Lorne Michaels had
produced a successful film based off an SNL sketch was with The Blues
Brothers, 12 years previously.
To top it off, Wayne's World was directed by Penelope Spheeris, who was
infamous by that point for her classic observation of punk rock artists
in Decline of Western Civilization (over ten years previously to the
making of this film).  Asking a director to switch from this documentary
style to a comedy about two innocents in the Midwest with a cable access
show was quite a leap of faith.
Despite these reasons for reservations, Wayne's World was far from
disappointing.  Is it an important movie to see?  Heck no, but if you
want something to watch on a rainy afternoon that will lighten your
mood, this should do the trick.  It's unclear how much creative input
Spheeris had in the final product as the two stars of the film had also
created the characters, but there are signs that this was an enjoyable
team effort.  For instance, the conversations that Wayne and Garth have
directly with the camera are actually engaging.  This device is normally
annoying, but Spheeris has done this before and has an eye for
concentrating on subjects one by one.
Films about small-timers who suddenly make their dent in society and
receive instant fortune only to realize they rather appreciate their
simple lives are a dime a dozen in Hollywood.  The trick with Wayne's
World that seems to cross age and gender in terms of enjoyment is that
the characters are endearing.  They lead humdrum lives, but they enjoy
them enough that it's interesting to watch them from one scene to the
next.
Wayne (Myers) is the leader of the pair.  He makes all the decisions
about where the show goes, drives the car when they hang out, and gets
the best wise cracks.  The show is also named after him.  He's not the
most attractive or intelligent of men, but he is charismatic and knows
how to enjoy himself.
Garth (Carvey), his sidekick and best pal, keeps his mouth shut most of
the time while he fantasizes about "Dream Girl" (Donna Dixon) in the
donut shop.  He allows himself to be led around by Wayne, including
during their show, but he does get to reach his own shining moment when
left to go his own way as success has spoiled and separated them,
courtesy of smarmy television producer Benjamin (Rob Lowe).
Spheeris may not be the best female director Hollywood has to offer.  It
seems that she will do films like Wayne's World for the sheer value of a
paycheck so she can concentrate on other observational material when she
has saved her pennies.  And I don't begrudge her this possible
tendency.  I'd probably do it myself if I were in her shoes.
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com

Title
Review for Lantana (2001)
Men have feelings too.  Men cry, despite the stigma attached to their
gender, or at least they want to more than they let on.  It's all
societal conditioning.  That's the pretentious premise of this
never-ending, two-hour look at couple dysfunction.
With a highly acclaimed cast that includes Anthony LaPaglia, Barbara
Hershey, and Geoffrey Rush you would hope this idea would provide great
material for such illustrious actors to sink their teeth into. 
Unfortunately, having been adapted for the screen from a play, by the
playwright himself, much of the emotional impact is lost in
overwhelmingly dramatic dialogue.
Valerie (Hershey), married to John (Rush), is a therapist, and her
patients' lives are starting to intrude on her own mental state.  Her
daughter was horribly murdered two years before and her marriage has
been stagnant ever since.  She and John love each other but cannot
connect.  One of Valerie's patients, Patrick, is a homosexual who
continually talks of an affair with a married man.  Slowly, Valerie
becomes convinced that the divide between she and John is larger than
she thought, possibly as a result of Patrick.
Then there's Leon (LaPaglia) a cop married to the beautiful and vibrant
Sonja (Kerry Armstrong), who is secretly going to Valerie for therapy. 
Leon is having an affair with Jane (Rachael Blake), though he is still
in love with his wife, as an attempt to feel something.  Jane herself is
consistently lonely after separating from her husband and often spies on
the family next door.
These circles become claustrophobic because Valerie suddenly disappears
one evening.  Leon is put on the case as a detective and breaks off his
affair with Jane, but still can't get his life in order.  These factors
combine to create many a scene in which men are trying to express
emotions and mistakes to one another, and fail miserably.
To give the film some credit, it is able to portray masculine anxiety in
reacting to a situation too much like a stereotypical woman would.  The
real problem is that during sympathetic moments, emotive speeches seem
forced on all the characters that are uttering them.  While the acting
is basically impeccable, the conversations are unreal and difficult to
accept, even at their most dramatic climaxes.  It doesn't help that,
when these men are trying to talk to one another, there is repetitive
whining about how men aren't suppose to cry or show emotion.
Still, what keeps things interesting is that every person involved is
heavily flawed.  They lie and cheat and find it difficult to learn from
their mistakes.  There's always hope, in a new scene filled with
tension, that some kind of new barrier will be breached, that some
catharsis will come through.  The plot is hazy enough, as are its
characters, that any growth or change is unpredictable.  To see the
little details that spring from the characters' effects on each other
rings true enough.
What also works are the dysfunctional marriage scenes between husband
and wife.  Communication comes through looks and stares instead of
accusatory speeches.  The annoying chatter present when it's two
movie-character men talking is thankfully left out.
Lantana's strengths and weaknesses, like its characters, balance each
other out.  Not a flaw can be found in how it articulates difficulty
within a marriage.  If only it would stop complaining about how men are
raised.
Director: Ray Lawrence
Producer: Jan Chapman
Writer: Anthony Bovell
Starring: Anthony LaPaglia, Geoffrey Rush, Barbara Hershey, Kerry
Armstrong, Rachael Blake, Vince Colosimo
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com

Title
Review for Royal Tenenbaums, The (2001)
Family isn't based on sweet kisses on the cheek.  Affection between
parent and child is not established by saying the magical phrase "I love
you."  Instead, the strongest conversations often come through in stares
and sarcastic remarks.  As the old saying goes, you only hurt the ones
you love, and family members are usually first in line.
This adage is wholly true for the Tenenbaums, a charismatic
dysfunctional family set in a slightly surreal New York City.  With an
all-star cast and crisp dialogue, this film does what many other films
of its genre lack -- it creates a family environment that is
entertaining as well as easy to relate to.
The three kids of the family are each geniuses in their own right.  Chas
(Ben Stiller) started his own business in his early teens by selling
Dalmatian rats overseas and reinvesting in real estate.  Richie (Luke
Wilson) was a champion tennis player, and Margot (Gwyneth Paltrow), who
is continually reminded that she was adopted, won a grant for
playwriting at the ripe age of 14.
But father Royal (Gene Hackman) was kicked out by their mother, Etheline
(Angelica Huston), while the kids were still young, due to infidelity
and other nasty habits.  Eventually, the kids move back home with mom,
which prompts Royal to try and connive his way back into the family's
good graces.
Categorically, Royal is a selfish prick.  He fakes illness to be allowed
back in the house.  He doesn't know Margot's middle name.  He forgets
that Chas is a widower.  He picks a fight with Etheline's suitor Henry
(Danny Glover).  But for every idiotic verbal stumble to come out of
Royal, he's clearly trying so hard that you want him to gain some kind
of affection from his estranged kin.  Once Royal enters the picture, his
interaction with others pulls us along, and what an engaging ride it is.
Behind the scenes, Wes Anderson and Owen Wilson team up again, after
their deservedly successful Rushmore, to pen this masterpiece.  (They
also wrote Bottle Rocket together.)  Wilson rarely gets the credit he
deserves, playing characters with little gray matter in such films as
The Minus Man and Zoolander.  But, because this script is so well
written, Wilson's Eli Cash gets to play an intricate, poignant part in
the Tenenbaum environment.  Having grown up across the street from the
eccentric family, he has always wanted to join their ranks.  This is a
normal jealousy for most children, that the home life of their friends
must be better than their own.  Only through watching the Tenenbaums
unravel can Eli come to grips with his own life.
And Wilson isn't the only actor who shines through the brilliant
material.  Paltrow is the best she has ever been.  Stiller doesn't
choose dramatic roles often, but watching his inner resentment strikes a
powerful chord.  Gene Hackman is the most charismatic jerk ever
portrayed on film.  The characters and their situations might be old,
but this fabulous cast finds a way of adding new and fascinating layers
to every moment.
The beautiful sincerity of this collage comes through a rational
reactivity rarely found in family dramas.  While dire circumstances
normally bring people together in a rush to forget their grievances, The
Royal Tenenbaums doesn't treat the possibility of death as an excuse for
all to be miraculously happy with one another.  When Royal moves back
into the homestead for treatment of his "illness," none of the
Tenenbaums rush into his arms and forget his prior failures.  Instead,
he is tolerated and taken care of from a distance.  It's the little,
intelligent details that totally make the picture.
To get into the plot too much further would ruin some of its freshness. 
Suffice it to say that for all the seriousness presupposed when watching
a family story unfold, The Royal Tenenbaums is surprisingly pure
entertainment, with well-timed and original humor based on old problems
that recur in any family.  There is no such thing as forgetting the
past, but there is a point at which you can purge your system of anger,
laugh at it, and live easier with those blood relations you never got to
choose in the first place.
Screened at the 2001 New York Film Festival (feature coming soon).
Director: Wes Anderson
Producer: Wes Anderson, Barry Mendel, Scott Rudin
Writer: Wes Anderson, Owen Wilson
Starring: Gene Hackman, Angelica Huston, Ben Stiller, Luke Wilson,
Gwyneth Paltrow, Danny Glover
http://bventertainment.go.com/movies/royal/index.html
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com

Title
Review for Hamlet (2000/II) (TV)
When most people think of Shakespeare they cringe, thinking of
melodrama, costumes, and strange vocabulary.  But what happens if you
pare down the stereotypical theatrical imagery of Shakespeare and simply
concentrate on the characters in the story?
This new version of Hamlet, directed by Campbell Scott (The Spanish
Prisoner) and Eric Simonson does just that, and beautifully so.  The
setting is Americanized (the post-Civil War-era South), the production
design simple, and nobody is forcing an accent unknown to them.  It
makes you want to scrounge for the books you packed away in high school
because you didn't feel like figuring them out at the time.
Everyone knows the story of Hamlet by now, so I'll pass on the plot
description and stick to appreciating this provocative adaptation.
The production is woven by an impeccable ensemble cast.  For instance,
Polonius (Roscoe Lee Browne) and his kin (Lisa Gay Hamilton as Ophelia
and Roger Guenveur Smith as Laertes) are captured as a family unit --
not just as the councilor of Claudius (Jamey Sheridan) or the
unfortunate love interest of Hamlet (Campbell Scott).  They are also
African-American, which adds yet another layer as to why Ophelia and
Hamlet can't end up together, and why Polonius will always be an advisor
but never king.
This is just a fraction of how the secondary characters aid in
articulating the prison-like world that Hamlet is stuck in.  Even the
Players, who normally have a quick few shots in a film to show that the
play prompted by Hamlet aggravates Claudius (Jamey Sheridan), have
strong scenes.  When they come up the driveway, Hamlet is pleased to
finally have someone to talk to, and Hamlet actually gets a few moments
of happiness.
Unlike most adaptations of Hamlet that center on the title character --
almost becoming a vanity piece -- Scott and Simonson wisely choose to
give these secondary characters ample screen time.  Hamlet is also
played with a refreshingly different, layered interpretation.  He isn't
simply melancholy, or even self-pitying.  Scott evokes in Hamlet an
intelligence and quiet charisma that keep you focused on his progress
throughout the almost-three-hour movie.
Even better, everything is wonderfully underplayed, allowing the viewer
to appreciate the feelings conveyed.  The words themselves haven't
changed but are spoken with human simplicity and not the common
theatrical bravura.  Monologues blend well into the rest of the dialogue
and aren't just set up to remind you that you are watching Shakespeare. 
This is a coming-of-age story and is played as such instead of shouting,
"See, this is a classic!"
A unique fantasy element has also been added so that there is nothing
shocking about the method to Hamlet's madness.  It is easier to
understand the complexity of his emotional upheaval.  These moments are
set apart simply but effectively through the use of a beating drum.  His
experience with the Ghost continues to impose on his mind, forcing him
into submission.  At one point he cuts his own arms with glass, more to
come back to reality than as a suicide attempt.  Though Shakespeare
purists may argue that this wasn't in the original play, it's a powerful
scene impossible not to connect with.
This is one of the best Shakespeare adaptations ever filmed.  It may be
three hours long, but you get so caught up in the motives of individual
characters and how they affect one another that you barely notice the
time.  Highly recommended.
Director: Campbell Scott, Eric Simonson
Producer: Mary Frances Budig, Jonathan Filley, Campbell Scott
Screenwriter: Campbell Scott, Eric Simonson
Starring: Blair Brown, Jamey Sheridan, Campbell Scott, Lisa Gay
Hamilton, Roscoe Lee Browne, Roger Guenveur Smith
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com

Title
Review for Under solen (1998)
Nominated last year for Best Foreign Language Film, Under the Sun is a
gentle look at romance through the eyes of a middle-aged innocent.  It's
a pleasantly simple story, shot with overwhelming beauty, but it falls
short in terms of sweeping an audience off its feet.
The setting is the lush fields of Sweden in the late 1950's.  Olof (Rolf
Lassgĺrd) is a lonely farmer who can barely hang on to the house his
mother left to him when she died nine years before.  His young,
boisterous friend Erik (Johan Widerberg) helps him with errands and some
work when he isn't digging graves.
Olof is simple and quiet, and ashamed that he can't read or write.  He
is also still a virgin.  He goes to the local paper to place an ad for a
housekeeper, hoping she will also become a female companion.  Word gets
out around the small town and their priest puts Erik on guard.
Ellen (Helena Bergström) arrives with little warning.  Olof is instantly
attracted to her and fumbles with conversation as Erik gets aggressively
flirtatious, apparently in the protection of Olof.  As time goes on,
Ellen has set the house in repair and managed the finances without
knowing that Olof can't read.  She and Olof become romantically involved
as she continues to duck Erik's advances.  Erik won't rest until he
finds a chink in her armor.
This character driven story is respectably able to keep the key players'
motivations in question. You never know if Ellen is being coy with Erik
or if she is really devoted to Olof, because her past is always in
question.  Erik seems to care a great deal about Olof but then makes
successive comments trying to degrade him in Ellen's eyes.  Olof himself
appears a simpleton led by around by others but is allowed to show more
intelligence as time progresses.  This mixture keeps the mind reeling
with anticipation as to what will happen next.
However, there are also flaws to the ambiguity.  When Olof is finally
able to show that he knows more about human nature than he lets on, it
is only after he has had intercourse.  The film seems to relate sexual
intercourse with all newfound knowledge of the world surrounding Olof,
which is hard to swallow.
Also, lacking knowledge of the characters' motivations from one scene to
the next may keep you on mental toes, but it keeps you begging for the
filmmaker to get on with allowing something to happen, already.  There
are at least eight scenes in which Erik tries to gain Ellen's physical
affections and only one in which she stops him to challenge his honesty
to Olof.  The scenes themselves are intriguing enough to watch, but
there are too many of them to keep one's attention from waning.
There is a fairy tale quality to the film that keeps the situation
endearing enough to watch.  Olof is a large man, and not particularly
attractive, while Ellen is slim and perfectly coiffed.  A link to Beauty
and the Beast can easily by made.  Between that, Erik's talk of what
little Olof has to offer, and the stunning landscapes in which
everything is shot, the viewer is transported into the environment where
the characters live instead of merely being a spectator.
Unfortunately this film falls into a difficult category to appreciate. 
It isn't necessarily a good film for couples, and yet a modern single
won't find much to like either.  A bit too much like life for our
tastes.
Director: Colin Nutley
Producer: Colin Nutley
Writer: Johanna Hald, David Neal, Colin Nutley
Starring: Rolf Lassgĺrd, Helena Bergström, Johan Widerberg, Gunilla
Röör, Jonas Falk, Linda Ulvaeus
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com

Title
Review for Saison des hommes, La (2000)
The Season of Men is a ponderous portrait of Arab women slowly freeing
themselves from tradition, each generation getting just a touch more
gutsy than the one before it.
Aicha (Rabia Ben Abdallah) is the matron who starts the domino effect. 
After being married to Said (Ezzedine Gennoun) for some time, she
decides she doesn't want to wait for the one month of the year that he
returns, as is the custom of the village.  Said finally relents that if
she bears him a son, the family will move to the city with him.  It's
the dream of every woman in the village, each wife takes turns to
joyfully brag about it even knowing the chances it will actually happen
are slim.
She bears two healthy girls, Meriem (Ghania Benali) and Emna (Hend
Sabri), and finally a son, Aziz (Adel Hergal).  But after having moved
to be close to Said, it becomes apparent that Aziz has health problems,
and Aicha is blamed for this.  Now, even more estranged from Said, Aicha
decides to move back home with her daughters in tow.
But Aicha finds it difficult to keep close tabs on her growing
daughters.  Meriem is married but can't seem to provide her husband with
sex whereas Emna sleeps with a married man and doesn't acknowledge
tradition at all.
This setup could have become a gripping story of women coming into
independent power, but it falls short of the mark by concentrating too
much on flashbacks to drive cultural difficulties home.  Again and again
we see Aicha fight with her overbearing, power-hungry mother-in-law for
the rights of her daughters.  And when these scenes aren't taking over,
there's always a cryptic "character looking in the mirror" shot right
around the corner.
It is regrettable that the story doesn't focus more on interaction
between Aicha and her daughters in the present.  After all, Aicha has
chosen to drag them away from their lives, due to Aziz's constant need
for care.  Instead of elaborating on how these women are becoming
different from their predecessors, it repetitively concentrates on
scenes of feminine claustrophobia within the community.
Still, there are beautifully poignant moments to this film.  Each
character is able to shine through a mixture of emotions.  Watching
Aicha stand up for her rights during especially emotional scenes demands
respect for her decisions, even when they are fallible.  Emna is allowed
a strong, simple exploration of what she's learned when she tells her
married lover that she never wants to marry.  The overall strength of
these women is articulated well through being three-dimensional instead
of perfect icons.
The men are thankfully not seen as completely tyrannical, which is
unusual for a film about female empowerment.  For the most part they are
simply following tradition, and some are open to allowing women more
space.
The cultural details can also be refreshing, such as how these women
prepare for their men with henna.  It is interesting to see how every
person in a given family has a specific task no matter their skill. 
Aziz is a young boy with health problems, but he is put to work weaving
carpets.
The Season of Men is a unique cultural study of gradual feminine growth
within a strict community.  Though it has its share of misses, it is
still a positive and reflexive look at a people much ignored.
Director: Moufida Tlatli
Producer: Margaret Ménégoz, Mohamed Tlatli
Writer: Nouri Bouzid, Moufida Tlatli
Starring: Rabia Ben Abdallah, Sabah Bouzouita, Ghania Benali, Hend
Sabri, Ezzedine Gannoun, Adel Hergal
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com

Title
Review for On Hostile Ground (2000) (TV)
Abortion is a hot political topic no matter which side of the fence
someone is on.  Those that lobby for and against a patient's right to
choose concentrate on the pregnant women who walk into clinics.  But
what about those who perform the actual procedures?  How are their lives
affected?
On Hostile Ground takes a closer look at the lives of three doctors who
provide abortions in Montana, Alabama, and upstate New York.  They vary
in background but have one thing in common: They are picketed and
persecuted by their community for the services they perform.  After
seven abortionist killings (and many more injured), shockwaves have
shuddered through this decreasing sect of the medical community.
This documentary puts a human face on an issue rife with extremes, and
from an angle seldom considered.  The focus shifts from doctor to
archival news footage to what members of the community have to say. 
Unfortunately, this exact cycle repeats monotonously throughout the 73
minutes.  News footage of violence becomes repetitive, especially when
it is related to the same case.  Every now and then these dragging
stretches of scenes are punctuated by statistics on a black screen or
shots of protesters in front of clinics.
Admirably, while the documentary is staunchly pro-choice, this is
captured through the movie's subjects instead of heavy-handed
photography.  Because the doctors talk directly to the camera and not to
a narrator, connection is a little easier with the audience, no matter
the stance.  The statistics that are utilized aren't trying to prove or
disprove the right to choose.  The number of women who have abortions in
any given year isn't important to the argument.  The numbers concentrate
solely on the number of professionals in the field of abortionism and
those that have suffered due to their profession.
Unfortunately, though the doctors profiled have compelling personalities
and views, to hear them say that a woman should have the right to choose
several times during any given 10 minute span tries anyone's attention,
whether you agree or not.  There is also a great deal of extraneous
footage that isn't quite captivating enough to sustain focus.  This may
be due to the filmmakers having more interesting discussions than
visuals to work with.
Surprisingly, there is only a brief mention the shooting of Dr. Gunn in
Florida, though the entire basis of the film is how these doctors are in
danger.  Dr. Gunn was one of the first abortionist victims to make
national news.  His death occurred well before the shooting of Dr.
Slepian, of whom so much is heard during the course of On Hostile
Ground.
On the other hand, On Hostile Ground provides a complete, and fairly
objective, portrait of the communities these doctors serve.  The
Christians that picket the offices but don't get violent are not judged
for their convictions, either by the filmmakers or the doctors' staffs. 
Patients' opinions are juxtaposed against other local residents, staff
who work with clients, and families of the professionals.  A viewer can
get the feel of what it's like to live in that town, without political
ideas thrown in your face.
The documentary seeks, and succeeds, in putting a human face on the
medical practitioners providing health services to those who choose to
have an abortion.  It edges on preaching -- wondering if the extremists
that shoot such people are any better than those they harm -- but
considering the severity of violence, this is easily excused.  It could
have been shorter, but the lives of these doctors are intriguing enough
to warrant a document of their stories.
Director: Liz Mermin, Jenny Raskin
Producer: Catherine Gund
Starring: Richard Stuntz, Susan Cahill, Morris Wortman
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com

Title
Review for Things Behind the Sun (2001)
Allison Anders not only has enough balls to revisit one of the worst
experiences of her life in Things Behind the Sun, but she travels
through emotional territory normally unheard of in films based on rape
-- namely a male character who is a victim and a perpetrator at the same
time.
As a woman, it is always difficult to watch a movie involving rape. 
When filmed realistically, as Things is, it's impossible to distance
yourself from the onscreen pain.  And when a film is not constructed
with realism the result is anger from shoddy storytelling, or with a
filmmaker failing miserably to grasp the emotional honesty in a
situation they can't understand.
Owen (Gabriel Mann) works for a music magazine.  A colleague wants to do
a story on Sherry (Kim Dickens), whose music has become popular on
campuses after building a following through the Florida bar scene. 
Sherry's songs are filled with emotional pain, based on having been
gang-raped at a young age.  Owen not only knows her, but he was a forced
perpetrator of the crime by his elder brother Dan, (a chilling cameo by
Eric Stoltz) so he ends up taking over the story.
Sherry doesn't appear as a victimized angel like other women have in
films about rape.  She makes herself easily available for sex,
especially after alcoholically anesthetizing herself, despite the
efforts of her well-meaning boyfriend Chuck (Don Cheadle).  She treats
her fellow band members like peons.  And for some reason, once a year,
keeps passing out drunk in front of a house she can no longer recognize.
There is a fascinating emotional struggle as Owen attempts to help
Sherry remember the details of her worst experience, supposedly for her
sake but also to purge himself of the guilt that still doesn't allow him
to achieve orgasm.  After all, it is Sherry that initially influenced
his appreciation for music, and hence his adult life.  It's
understandable that he would feel as if he owes her some peace. 
Unfortunately, he cannot define what will give her that calm, so this
assistance is also pushed away.
Sherry's turnaround to work for a healthy life is a bit forced, possibly
because after showing one self-destructive scene after another this
change seems so quick.  By the same token, you need her to find some
inner strength, or the film becomes depressingly unwatchable.
This is a hard film to watch, and yet it adheres to a perspective
important for both men and women to see.  It's not a story of good
versus evil, though it's based on a horrible crime.  Films like The
Accused are powerful in that they comment on the short-term effects of
rape -- namely the immediate needs of the victim.  What sets Things
Behind the Sun apart from such predecessors is that it takes these
stories one step further, to the severe aftermath of living with these
memories years later.
Director: Allison Anders
Producer: Daniel Hassid, Doug Mankoff, Robin Alper
Writer: Allison Anders, Kurt Voss
Starring: Kim Dickens, Gabriel Mann, Don Cheadle, Alison Folland,
Elizabeth Pena, Eric Stoltz, Rosanna Arquette
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com

Title
Review for Caveman's Valentine, The (2001)
After working as an actor for some time, Kasi Lemmons (The Silence of
the Lambs) wrote and directed her first feature, Eve's Bayou, in 1997. 
She has since spent the past 4 years putting together The Caveman's
Valentine, which took 10-plus producers to come to fruition.  Instead of
directing original material, Lemmons directs from the book by Georges
Dawes Green, who adapted it for the screen.
Samuel L. Jackson (Unbreakable, Shaft) teams up with Lemmons again (he
played the philandering husband in Eve's Bayou) to star as the disturbed
and homeless Romulus.  Thankfully, no easy explanation is ever uttered
as to the nature of his psychosis.  He lives partially obsessed with a
fantasy world in which exotic dancers inspire his hands on the piano,
and his ultimate nemesis resides in the Chrysler building.
His daughter, Lulu (Aunjanue Ellis, Men of Honor) is a New York City
cop.  She cares about her father but has difficulties getting through to
him as he insists on living in a Central Park cave and allows the voices
in his head to control his actions.  One of those voices is ex-wife
Sheila (Tamara Tunie, The Devil's Advocate, also the narrator from Eve's
Bayou), which leads him in his internal struggle.
Romulus becomes even more obsessed with his archenemy after a young man
is found frozen to death in a tree outside his cave.  He learns from a
local street urchin that the deceased kid was a model for a famous,
popular, and abusive photographer (Colm Feore, Titus) and begins to hunt
the mystery.  He tries to enlist his daughter's help, but this appears a
simple case to the department, so he is on his own.
What follows is an intricately woven tale of sorting reality from the
surrealism that lay siege to one another in the mind of Romulus.  Even
when he doesn't follow rules of common sense, it's difficult to argue
with his actions or his need for justice.  Because he is mentally
innocent, it would be unthinkable to blame him for stupid remarks or
walking into danger.
The question of whether or not he will succeed in taking down a
murderer, or simply making more a fool of himself to his daughter, is
kept grippingly open throughout.  Because Romulus' mind can be struck
with otherworldly ideas at any moment, the audience is kept in just as
much ignorance as he is.
The only tiresome moments in the film are Romulus' interchanges with
upper crust businessman Bob (Anthony Michael Hall, Pirates of Silicon
Valley).  Bob and his wife are the stereotypically ignorant white folk
who find Romulus such an intriguing revelation to their otherwise boring
world.  Luckily these scenes are kept brief and are solely used for plot
purposes, like cleaning Romulus up for his investigation of the
photographer.
Lemmons' vision is once again brought to focus through the talented
cinematography of Amy Vincent.  Vincent shot Eve's Bayou as well, and
again with The Caveman's Valentine shows a beautifully artistic eye in
blending fantasy with reality.  The distinction between the two is overt
enough to be noticeable and yet never overwhelming because the fantasy
is shot as crisply as the reality.  It's easy to become captivated by
scenery that's so visually compelling and adds weight to the mixture of
internal and external worlds the audience is forced to live in for 105
minutes.
Lemmons is one of a meager handful of black female directors.  One can
only hope that successful adventures such as The Caveman's Valentine and
Julie Dash's Daughters of the Dust have far reaching effects on the
Hollywood machine.  With help from peers such as Samuel L. Jackson, who
helped produce both of Lemmons' films, perhaps other filmmakers will get
their chance.
Director: Kasi Lemmons
Producer: Danny DeVito, Scott Frank, Elie Samaha, Michael Shamberg,
Stacey Sher, Andrew Stevens
Writer: George Dawes Green
Starring: Samuel L. Jackson, Aunjanue Ellis, Ann Magnuson, Tamara Tunie,
Anthony Michael Hall, Colm Feore
Web: http://www.cavemansvalentine.com
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com

Title
Review for Amati Girls, The (2000) (TV)
Did you hate those cheesy PBS after-school specials when you were a
kid?  The ones where the smallest conflict was made into a volcanic
crisis but all was miraculously solved within a half an hour's time?  If
your answer is "yes", stay away from The Amati Girls.
Written and directed by Anne De Salvo, this sickeningly saccharine 91
minutes revolves around a supposedly tight-knit, triple-generation
family of women.  Each character embodies the ultimate in annoying
stereotypes, from selfless martyr to irresponsible wanderer.  And of
course, they each have a male in their life to represent the standard
issues of women's liberation from 30 years ago.
These issues are blatantly imbued through four sibling daughters, the
product of Dolly (Cloris Leachman, Hanging Up) and a recently deceased
father.  As Dolly is obsessed with taking care of her burial details,
the girls come together to discuss and judge her life and each other's.
Grace (Mercedes Ruehl, The Fisher King) allows her husband (Paul
Sorvino) to walk all over her.  She is the ultimate Energizer bunny for
her family.  Her special skill besides homemaking?  She always knows
which saint to pray to.  Denise, (Dinah Manoff, in her first role in
eight years) defends her right to remain single as she searches for a
storybook romance.  Is Mark Harmon the one, after he had the nerve to
tell her she couldn't sing professionally while he's still supporting
her through auditions?  Christine (Sean Young, Blade Runner) is
currently separated from the father of her child (Jamey Sheridan)
because he is far more focused on being a successful ad man than caring
about his family.  To round out this list of polarities is Delores (Lily
Knight), a young woman who is mentally damaged and treated like a thorn
in everyone's side.
Do any of these women deserve respect?  They certainly don't try to
improve their situations.  Grace admits she surrendered her needs to her
own husband as Christine complains her marriage just can't work.  What
does Christine do to comfort her disappointed daughter each time Daddy
doesn't show up?  Sit around the house all day and complain, or go to a
relative's house.  To complain.
These issues are dealt with in the same conversational fashion prevalent
20 years ago.  Christine argues with her mother that she wants out of
her marriage.  She proclaims that women expect more these days, to be
happy instead of accepting a life of servitude to their husbands.  Her
mother stereotypically replies that she is glad she got married when she
did because at least she had "stability."
The blandness of this dramatic work comes inherently from overly emoting
dialogue: "Mom, he gave nothing in return!"  "Christine, he gave me my
children."  "Paul, you're gonna die alone because your whole life is
alone."  This last said by a male co-worker who leaves Paul to work on a
major project by himself so he can read his child a bedtime story.  "How
did you know Aunt Loretta was the one?"  "Because she had a good heart,
what else do you need?"  This is just a small sample of the
excruciating, explicit dialogue.  The entire movie sounds this bad.
On the flip side of one exasperating emotional note after another, the
structure shifts to provide easy endings to conflicts without natural
plot devices to go with them.  Dolly suddenly allows Delores to have a
boyfriend, after explaining that some people are picked by God to go
through life without significant others.  Of course, Paul and Christine
work things out when he skips a big project to come to their daughter's
ballet recital.  Sheridan, Harmon, and Ruehl exit with the least amount
of shame, using silence just as well as their quiet dialogue.  If only
the other characters had been so lucky.
It's this type of storytelling that keeps women from being able to write
and direct projects that are intelligent and worthwhile.  Ugh.
Director: Anne De Salvo
Producer: James Alex, Melanie Backer, Steven Johnson III, Michael I.
Levy, 
Henry M. Shea Jr.
Writer: Anne De Salvo
Starring: Cloris Leachman, Mercedes Ruehl, Dinah Manoff, Sean Young,
Lily Knight, Lee Grant, Paul Sorvino, Jamey Sheridan, Mark Harmon 
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com

Title
Review for Chain Camera (2001)
What happens when you give a high school student a video camera and tell
them to go play, with the single condition that the camera must document
his life for a week?  You expect the worst.  The turmoil, the pain, the
"nobody understands me!"  Or a load of made-up garbage from someone
starving for attention.  Maybe something even worse.
But Kirby Dick has found some gems by doing just this.  In April of
1999, he gave ten video cameras to ten students for a week.  At the end
of the week, those cameras were given to the next ten students.  The
stories accrued until the end of the school term.  He sifted 16 diaries
from them to create a collage of the perpetually unknown:  the mind of
adolescence.
It's not all as serious as it sounds.  The sole purpose of Leo's footage
is to have the camera watch him fake a piss, a rubber toy painted with a
face sticking out of his pants.  He not only talks for it, but beats the
camera with it as well.  It's only about a minute long, but it's just
the laugh you need after watching Stephanie worry about her overweight
father and his heart.
Bracketed by slow motion environmental images, each individual is
introduced with their first name.  With plenty of footage to choose
from, Dick is able to switch emotional tones with finesse, and without a
judgmental eye.  He has a knack for cutting to the next person before a
student gets monotonous.  The time allotted varies per teen, and this
aids the pace further.
Just as the world takes all types of creatures, Dick works with a
microcosm of the 41 different ethnic groups at Hollywood-area John
Marshall High School.  Luckily, this doesn't come across as trying to be
politically correct, but an attempt at trying to paint a full picture of
teenagers from one environment.  Just because all these kids go to
school near Hollywood doesn't mean they're rich and have fake body
parts.
The stories range as much as is possible, from an Asian runaway bulimic
that aspires to become a stripper to a normal white guy who just wants
to find a nice girl to the first American generation born of an Armenian
family who can't uphold tradition because of societal gaps to the
lesbian who shocked her mother after her first date with a girl.  But
oddly, though the individuals chosen are so different, their tales don't
always feel original.  This doesn't mean their emotions aren't valid;
it's just that the pressures of growing up lose flavor in repetition.
On the whole, Chain Camera surprises in how it manages to mix
entertainment and personal journeys.  The result is a talking head
video, but due to ever-changing narrative styles and subjects, it's
never boring.  Take that, Britney.
Director: Kirby Dick
Producer: Eddie Schmidt, Dody Dorn
Starring: Ethan Adagio, Silva Arzunyan, Leo Diaz, Timothy Docherty, Amy
Hattemer, Cinammon Hunter, Mena Mulat, Victor Naranjo, Jesse Ramon,
Manuel Ramírez, Lisa Reyes, Fernando Santillana, Rosemary To, Shannon
Whitmore, Winfred Wilson
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com

Title
Review for Monterey Pop (1969)
For those of us who weren't yet born when the 1960's rock 'n' rolled
around, Monterey Pop affords an affectionate glimpse of the music that
influenced our parents to be hippies.  From Otis Redding to Jimi
Hendrix, Janis Joplin to the Mamas and the Papas, and Jefferson Airplane
to The Who, this documentary is jam-packed with contagious energy.  But
I give fair warning that I will reveal the ending, which does not do the
rest of the film the justice it deserves.
Shot in 1969 at an outdoor concert that precluded Woodstock, the film
defies the stereotype of the general population at the time.  Sure, some
have painted their faces and smoke joints, but D.A. Pennebaker (The War
Room, Moon Over Broadway) surprisingly chooses to show a broad spectrum
of the audience.  No matter who is watching, it all comes back to the
talented musicians that stir your soul.
The excitement starts before the music even begins.  A young girl is
cleaning thousands of seats and when asked why by an interviewer, she
replies that she feels lucky to do so.  There are moments of organized
craziness as John Phillips, leader of the Mamas and the Papas and one of
the concert organizers, tries to get in touch with Dionne Warwick.  And
when one band is tuning up, a member remarks, "Finally, a decent sound
system!"
You can tell just by watching these first few moments that this show
isn't about vanity, it's about playing the music you love to those who
have an appreciation for it, a two-way street.  This interaction between
audience and performer continues throughout the film and becomes
infectious to the audience.
It's impossible to tear your eyes away from Janis Joplin as she belts
out her ballad about love being a ball and chain.  And while the lyrics
to "Wild Thing" may not be all that complicated, watching Jimi Hendrix
mime having sex with his guitar is as captivating as Otis Redding
singing about love.  Even if you don't recognize every band you see on
stage, you can imagine being as enthralled by their work as the public
sitting in those seats.
The only drawback to the film is the ending, which unfortunately I must
reveal.  All the other bands, big names then and still today, got
approximately 7 to 10 minutes of screen time.  In contrast, the last
band on camera, a wholly forgettable one, gets an entire 18 minutes of
screen time.  For a film that's only 78 minutes long, that's too large
of a chunk, especially when previous acts are much more stimulating.
All in all, Monterey Pop is a precious, rare look at a time period that
still holds sway over us.  The variety of music, as well as the
beautifully shot performances, are easy to become immersed in.  If there
was ever any question as to why most of these bands were so popular,
this is quickly dispelled.  It's almost depressing to think that music
this moving doesn't get made much anymore.  Instead we're stuck with
*Nsync, the Backstreet Boys, and Jennifer Lopez, all of whom should have
stuck with modeling.
Director: D.A. Pennebaker
Producer: Lou Adler, John Phillips
Starring: Janis Joplin, Paul Simon, Art Garfunkel, Otis Redding, Jimi
Hendrix, Grace Slick, Mama Cass Elliot, John Phillips, Pete Townshend,
Roger Daltrey
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com

Title
Review for Jin-Roh (1998)
Anyone growing up on Disney animation would be shocked by Japanese
Anime, a genre now famous for giving human experience a different look. 
It does what family-enticing animation has refused to, including
violence, sex, and other adult motifs normally reserved for live-action
big blockbusters.
Jin-Roh takes Anime another courageous step forward.  Its beginning is
chock-full of useful information, adding a documentary feel by
establishing the cultural setup in black and white with voiceover.  It
may sound like a high school lecture, but the images never get boring. 
Not to mention that without this necessary information, you'd be lost
when the key story starts to roll.
The setting is Tokyo, but if Japan had lost World War II to Nazi Germany
instead of the United States.  More than ten years later, the occupation
troops are gone, but domestic terrorists still fight against the
fascist, government-sponsored, military forces: the Capital Police. 
Another faction adding to the mess is "The Wolf Brigade," a rumored
extremist sect of the Capital Police that can't be pinned down.
We follow Kazuki Fuse (Michael Dobson), a young member of the elite
counterintelligence force.  During a city raid, Kazuki fails to kill a
young rebel girl face to face and she blows herself up.  As he tries to
continue on with his duties, he begins to obsess over her, dreaming of
her.  He contacts her older sister, Kei (Moneca Stori), and they spend
time together, finding a tenuous connection in the oppressive society.
As time goes on, the fight between personal needs and duty to his
command increases in Kazuki.  He is talented and therefore allowed to
continue training, but he is constantly being watched and even plotted
against with one mental test after another.  His times with Kei are
pleasant, but there is always an underlying tension as to just how much
is really possible.
Like many Anime films, Jin-Roh is brutally honest.  The storyline mimics
real human interaction, and none of the subplots are easily solved
because the terrorists' motivations are complex.  Blood, sweat, and
tears aren't covered up to save shock.  And even if the animation isn't
always as minutely detailed as the ever-popular CGI, this is made up for
in realistic bodily movements.  When a character gets hurt, his limp is
real.
The dialogue can be predictable, mimicking almost any other political
jargon heard in the average American blockbuster.  This could be from a
language gap in the translation from Japanese or simply a case of
rushing things.  It can be annoying but doesn't affect the overall
quality of the film.
More depressing than enjoyable, Jin-Roh demands respect because the
story is compelling and it's difficult not to be emotionally engaged
with the characters.  A far cry from something to show the kiddies, but
fascinating for those who appreciate an original gem.
Director: Hiroyuki Okiura
Producer: Tsutomu Sugita, Hidekazu Terakawa
Writer: Mamoru Oshii
Starring: Michael Dobson, Moneca Stori, Doug Abrahams, Colin Murdock,
Dale Wilson, Michael Kopsa
http://www2.production-ig.co.jp/eng2/jin-roh.htm
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com

Title
Review for Ni neibian jidian (2001)
Tsai Ming-Liang has garnered some deserved recognition for articulating
difficult emotions through the mundane actions of every day life.  How
more simply can a lack of motivation be expressed than when watching a
character urinate into a water bottle (no frontal nudity, don't worry)
placed beside his bed instead of getting up to go to the bathroom, not
10 feet from his bedroom door?
In What Time is it There?, like his previous work with The Hole and Vive
L'Amour, Ming-Liang utilizes long, ponderous, closely-framed shots of
characters amidst detailed backgrounds that reveal more about their
lives than anything that could come out of their mouths.  It's not
whether the character is clean or dirty so much as the items in their
lives that make up these traits.  There is virtually no dialogue. 
Together, these elements create the thrill of unpredictability.  There
seems no reason for the camera to linger on a specific moment, and there
are no recognizable clues as to what will happen next.  It's a
fascinating, but irritating, way to keep your attention focused on
screen.  You never know if a character is going to speak or what
reaction they will have to a given situation, if any at all.
The plot also matters little, or at least his films aren't based on a
structure of specific events in a given order.  Ming-Liang seems to
appreciate a documentarian's view, letting the camera hang at a
particular angle for a given period of time while people or props cross
in and out of frame at will.  The focus is kept on portraying the
complexities of human nature, mostly feelings associated with
alienation.  All the other film-related aspects of situation,
environment, and even camera work play second fiddle.
What Time is it There? centers on the experiences of Hsiao Kang (Lee
Hang-Sheng, whom Ming-Liang has used in all of his films) after his
father dies.  Kang sells watches from a suitcase on street corners,
smokes a lot, watches television, and basically walks through life on
auto-pilot -- until a customer who comes to purchase a watch begs him
for his watch before she leaves for Paris.  For no known reason,
possibly just looking for some purpose to guide himself, Kang sets out
to change all the clocks in Singapore to reflect what time it would be
in Paris.
Meanwhile, he and his mother recede from each other.  As Kang's
obsession with clocks escalates, so do his mother's compulsive acts to
help his father's spirit return.  It is in these uncomfortable familial
scenes that Ming-Liang's techniques strike their strongest chords.  It
is impossible to know how far each will disrupt the other's life before
something gives.
There is method behind those excessively long takes, during which your
interest is piqued into believing that surely something is going to
happen soon.  The buildup of silences and tension is akin to horror
films where you know somebody is about to get killed.  Only many of
There?'s scenes are disappointing because nothing does ever happen. 
Payoffs occur much later in the film.  Suddenly, Ming-Liang will cut to
the next scene and you'll still be trying to figure out what he was
accomplishing in the last.  This style of directing is effective but
it's consistently tiresome.
The physical extension of scenes makes this 2-hour film feel much
longer.  That the majority is focused specifically on one character at a
time, often for 15-minute stretches, doesn't help either.  Still, the
characters are easy to relate to, and that helps to hold interest. 
Overall, What Time is it There? is not so much a work of entertainment
as it is a unique, well-crafted psychological study of grief.
Aka Ni neibian jidian.  Screened at the 2001 New York Film Festival
(feature coming soon).
Director: Tsai Ming-Liang
Producer: Bruno Pesery
Writer: Tsai Ming-Liang, Yang Pi-Ying
Starring: Lee Kang-Sheng, Chen Shiang-Chi, Lu Yi-Ching, Miao Tien
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com

Title
Review for Éloge de l'amour (2001)
One might expect a cathartic viewing experience walking into a new
Jean-Luc Godard film.  After all, he was a founding member of the highly
influential French New Wave.  He is also an esteemed film critic,
lending intelligence and historical perspective to us in much of his
writing.  However, his latest creation, In Praise of Love, is possibly
the most exasperating film experience of the year.
The abstract concept on which the film is based had merit, to dissect
love into the following four categories: meeting, physical passion,
quarrels, and reconciliation.  These four universal truths would be
revealed through three different couples: young, adult, and elderly.  It
is Edgar's (Bruno Putzulu) self-appointed task to capture these moments
after a recent breakup, to define a central idea: "It's only when things
are over that they make sense."  Whether this project will end up a
play, film, or opera remains undecided.  The thesis is simple enough
that, if played right, it could really hold sympathetic value for
anyone.
Instead what ensues is an hour and a half of repetitive vignettes, the
next scene no more engaging than the last.  Only once does any character
utter something worthwhile, but by the time it happens you're so
thoroughly bored you can easily miss it.  But don't fret, it will
surface again.  You could easily sleep through whole sections of the
film (as some fellow critics did) and wake up in a scene exactly like
the one you nodded off in, not having missed anything worthwhile.
But you hold hope for some time.  The background music keeps you in a
state of urgency, and even suspense, for the first few conversations. 
It's only after repeated failures to pay any of this off that you lose
all hope.  And with speeches like, "I am thinking of something, but I
can only think of that something when I am thinking of something else,"
how can you expect to hold anyone's interest?
To Godard's credit, he certainly knows how to frame a scene.  The black
and white footage used for the first half of the film is starkly
beautiful.  Watching Edgar read while walking along a train track on a
mountain makes you wish you had something to ponder along with him.  And
if this film had anything poignant to say, you would have, which makes
you all the angrier at the numerous missed opportunities.  The
environments, be it city or country, are impeccably captured in crisp
detail, but the script never complements them.
Unfortunately, Godard also manages to pillage his photographic eye by
randomly cutting to black numerous times within any given scene. 
Sometimes these breaks are used for chapter headings, but these are even
more cryptic than the spoken words.  The second half is composed of
nauseating hyper-color that often blurs the image.  You suddenly feel
like a doomed character straight out of Scanners.
The only scene that makes any sense is one that complains about the
United States bastardizing history in the making of movies.  Steven
Spielberg is picked on in particular.  While I'll grant that this does
happen, and I tend to shy away from watching such garbage, it's still a
pointless focus for a film that purports to articulate the specific
qualities of couplehood.
It just goes to show, an intelligent person isn't necessarily an
admirable storyteller.  The days of Breathless are no more.
Director: Jean-Luc Godard
Producer: Jean-Luc Godard
Writer: Jean-Luc Godard
Starring: Bruno Putzulu, Cecile Camp, Jean Davy, Françoise Verny.,
Philippe Lyrette, Audrey Klebaner, Jeremy Lippman
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com

Title
Review for Stanza del figlio, La (2001)
For those who associate Italian cinema with Fellini and "high art," The
Son's Room is an inventive, subtle alternative.  Written by, directed,
and starring Nanni Moretti, it takes us through the slow, complicated
path of bereavement.
Slow is the best description for the film at first.  It takes its time
in establishing the habits of what appears to be a normal, happy
family.  Father and mother both work but still find the time to support
their son and daughter through homework and after school activities. 
They laugh, spend free time together, and reprimand the kids for
innocent wrongs with a sigh and soft pat on the shoulder.  You get the
feeling there is open communication and unconditional love amongst the
foursome.
But suddenly, the son is found to be dead after a diving accident.  The
family dynamics begin an unpredictable descent that gives the narrative
strength when you least expect it, but can also be trying on the
attention span.  Though the film drags and even repeats itself, this can
be somewhat excused as influenced by the process of grieving.
Though Nanni Moretti wore several hats for this production, it doesn't
come across as a vanity piece.  One might wish he hadn't picked the
profession of analyst for the father, Giovanni (which he stars as), if
only because this makes his character's reactions so predictable.  What
saves it is a well written script, with spare dialogue and an eclectic
variety of human interaction.
The potency of the film lies in the recreation of the tiny details of
everyday life that alter due to the death of a close relative, or that
remind a depressed person of loss.  You start to take notice of the
cracked dishes, ignored when familial bliss was in full swing.  You
remember bonding during the routine jogs around the block, and not
necessarily huge events like graduation.
Even better are the role reversals that take place within the
household.  While Giovanni and Paola (Laura Morante) do check up on
their daughter Irene (Jasmine Trinca), there is a sense of being on
autopilot.  Not only does Irene begin to take care of her own needs
more, she'll make her parents breakfast in an attempt to crack their new
shells to life around them.  These scenes provide interesting portrayals
of various coping mechanisms, frequently crossing a boundary as to how
much you can help yourself versus others during drastic, unexpected
change.
Respectfully, gender issues never enter the picture.  Self-propelled
isolation is universal in terms of dealing, so Moretti intelligently
uses this tool to separate the family.  Though Giovanni does stop Paolo
from discussing Andrea at a party with friends, there is never a sense
that he or she is more stoic, or more correct in the search to restore a
sense of a balance to their lives.
Most films that broach the topic of death utilize annoying melodrama,
speeches, and conciliatory issues to get the waterworks flowing.  In
contrast, The Son's Room captures a more realistic depiction of the
effects of death on a family by graciously flowing among the five stages
of mourning (denial, depression, anger, bargaining, acceptance) through
each of its main characters.  It's not the most engaging 100 minutes,
but it is certainly easy to relate to.
Director: Nanni Moretti
Producer: Angelo Barbagallo, Nanni Moretti
Writer: Linda Ferri, Nanni Moretti, Heidrun Schleef
Starring: Nanni Moretti, Laura Morante, Jasmine Trinca, Giuseppe
Sanfelice, Silvio Orlando, Stefano Accorsi
http://www.bacfilms.com/chambre/
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com

Title
Review for Brother (2000)
Violence is bad.  Violence is ugly.  Violence breeds yet more violence. 
Kids, don't try this at home.  This weighty message isn't the only
barrier to enjoying Brother, but it's certainly one of the largest.
Written, directed by, and starring the infamous Takeshi Kitano
(Kikujiro, Sonatine) Brother is his first film made outside his familial
Japan, bringing the yakuza tradition to Los Angeles.  (Yakuza translated
for the average American is the Japanese mafia.)
If you piss a "family" member off, or dishonor yourself in any way, the
usual punishment is public display of self-mutilation, usually resulting
in the loss of limbs.  A definition of dishonor can be anything from
making a stupid decision to leaving one family for another.
It would be interesting to know more about where these and other customs
come from.  Unfortunately the film doesn't give too much of an
explanation, assuming its audience is aware of Kitano's earlier work. 
There are several shots that focus specifically on detailed tattoos that
spread across the entire back of the yakuza members, leading one to
assume they would be symbolic of something, but you never know what. 
Then there's a scene in which a man kills himself in front of a rival in
exchange for that rival joining the family.  Granted, this is one of the
best scenes in the movie, but it doesn't make a lot of sense.
Instead, the two hours are basically spent watching the following: 
people go out and shoot each other, talk about it for ten-plus minutes,
then go out and do it again.  The consistently repetitive discussion of
territory during these moments involuntarily provokes yawning.
There are also plot details thrown in for no identifiable purpose.  All
of the sudden Yamamoto (Kitano) has a girlfriend.  He barely speaks to
her, treats her like crap, and then sends her away.  Another missed
opportunity, considering it is such a big deal for Kitano to bring his
magic to the United States, is the combination of cultures, which rely
too heavily on overused stereotypes.
Though slow moving, Brother does have good elements.  The action scenes
are well directed, clearly defined, and interesting to watch.  Some of
the violence is more hinted at than shown, which produces the luscious
squirm that one goes to see such films for.
The actors would be more enticing if they had more to do.  Shirase's
(Masaya Kato) loud, sarcastic coolness set against Yamamoto's quietly
threatening attitude is truly an entertaining combination.  Their
moments together or apart steal the rest of the show.
Also to its credit, Brother tackles the cause and effect of crime with
realism.  A life of crime is easy to get sucked into with the first
reward of quick cash.  Sure people get rich, but they can also lose just
as easily.  It's a great moral, with a great cast, just not much
substance to back it up.
Director: Takeshi Kitano
Producer: Masayuki Mori, Jeremy Thomas
Writer: Takeshi Kitano
Starring: Takeshi Kitano, Omar Epps, Claude Maki, Masaya Kato, Susumu
Terajima, Royale Watkins
http://what.bacfilms.com/brother/
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com

Title
Review for Rhythm 'n' Bayous: A Road Map to Louisiana Music (2000)
What starts out as a monotonous talking-head musical history lecture
turns into a rich land of Louisiana discovery, as Robert Mugge
adventures into the various landscapes of that colorful state.
Three different sections of Louisiana are documented along the journey,
northern, southern, and southwestern Louisiana, separated by maps and
cutesy subtitles.  The latter two are the best installments, in that
they allow the charismatic performers direct camera time without the
interference of a boring onscreen interviewer.
Each county has a different character, style, instruments, and sound,
all distinct in their origins, as local experts tell us, and Mugge
respectfully picks up these discerning traits.  Where one town declares
that race isn't an issue, the other shows how racial tensions actually
aided in black and white musicians inspiring one another.  Southern
Louisiana has a strong Cajun/Creole base, while northern Louisiana leans
towards guitar and a cappella singing.
As a whole, this documentary is well layered with performance and
testimony but could easily have been shorter and made the same impact on
an audience.  In the first section especially, numerous concert
performances run superfluously through an entire song, with the camera
panning to and fro, looking for something to do.
Every person put in front of the camera is introduced, but only half the
multitude leave much of a mark.  The Director of the Louisiana Folk
Festival expounds on the glories of Louisiana's past for an interminable
period of time, but most of what he says goes in what ear and out the
other.  On the other hand, there's a remarkably short section devoted to
a 28-year disc jockey veteran, Sister Pearlee Tolliver.  She spends her
two hours on the radio exclaiming commercials in a gospel voice, with a
couple of records thrown in, and she amuses too much to forget.
As standard documentaries go, the expected talking heads are mixed in
with live concert performances.  But most endearing are the discussions
with actual performers about their influences and playing style, and
reminiscences about their colleagues.  These interviews, juxtaposed with
the local connoisseurs, provide a solid foundation for the musically
ignorant and die hard fan.
One of the best portraits is that of Kermit Ruffins, a local favorite in
southwestern Louisiana.  He takes the historical roots of jazz and blues
and mixes them with his own modern experiences growing up in the
streets.  Popularity hasn't blown his ego either, as once in a while he
barbeques for his audience out of the back of his truck.
Other details compliment this musical voyage.  The first record store in
Louisiana, Floyd's, is renowned for shipping impossible-to-find music
all over the world.  The original owner still runs it and helps to
promote new talent such as Rosie Ledet.  Rosie was a housewife who
taught herself how to play the accordion and she now sings and tours
with her husband's band.  At once mousy and humble, this lady has gone
on to break ground for female artists in the zydeco field.
Before walking into to this film, one might think that all of Louisiana
could be clumped into a simple stereotype.  It takes a while to be
interested in the material, but once the filmmaker moves onto southern
Louisiana, it's hard to look away from the screen.
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com
