Authors
Jim Pellmann
Number of Reviews
5

Title
Review for Godfather: Part III, The (1990)
SUMMARY:  A grand-slam finale to the Michael Corleone saga.  Not for all
tastes, and requires some homework, but those who expend the effort will
be well rewarded.  The best of the trilogy, easily one of the year's
best films, and with some actors' best-ever performances.  
     With all the hoopla surround the Christmas release of G3, I took
advantage of HBO's two-night back-to-back showings on G1 and G2 in
December.  (Not surprisingly, all video stores have been out of both for
the last several weeks.)
     Having never seen either, I was looking forward to catching up on
two Best Picture Oscar winners.  Perhaps it was because I'm not big on
gangster/Mafia movies (I absolutely hated GOODFELLAS) or perhaps they
lose something when viewed on TV, but my opinion of G1 and G2 was that
they were good, but not great.  So I was not terribly excited about
another two hours and forty minutes more of G3.  But I was greatly
surprised and concurred with the Chronicle:
     "If GODFATHER III were simply a worthy sequel, that would have
     been enough.  But this lushly photographed, brilliantly acted and
     wonderfully entertaining movie has its own claims to uniqueness.
     It's the most thoughtful of the three films, and its climax
     brings the entire series into sharper focus."
- Go rent G1 and G2 before seeing G3:  One of my friends who saw it
  with me had not seen G1 or G2 since they were released in '72 and '74
  and was terribly lost keeping track of who was doing what to whom.  G2
  has many passing references to characters and events from G1 and G2
  (see below for a brief summary).
- Don't expect an action-packed, shoot-out type movie:  Coppola
  deliberately develops the story at a slower pace, as we study each
  character's motivations.  It gradually builds to an edge-of-the-seat
  climax.
- Find a theater showing G3 in 70mm with surround sound.  I can't
  recall any other movie where the improved sound system enhanced the
  movie as much.  The movie's climax, which takes place at an opera
  house, is especially effective because of it.  
(WARNING: If you plan on renting G1 and G2 and don't want the plots spoiled 
 for you, don't read any further!)
Part 1:  During the mid-1940s, we meet Vito Corleone (Marlon Brando) and
         his four children: Sonny (James Caan), Fredo (John Cazale),
         Michael (Al Pacino), and Connie (Talia Shire).  Attorney Tom
         Hagen (Robert Duvall) protects the family's legal interests.
Part 3:  It is now 1979, and as Michael approaches retirement, he wants
         nothing more than to make the family completely legitimate.
         He divests his gambling business to other families and donates
         millions of dollars to Catholic charities.
     Al Pacino (Michael) shines and will undoubtedly be nominated for a
Best Actor Oscar.  You can feel his frustration when he says, "Just when
I think I'm out, they *pull* me back in."  He even takes on the gravelly
voice of Brando's Vito.  There are two particular scenes that are
brilliant: one where he confesses his sins for the first time in years
and another where he has a diabetic stroke.
     Andy Garcia (Vincent) is great--he is the very embodiment of Sonny
Corleone, hot-headed temperament and mannerisms.  This could well be the
turning point in his career.  If there should be any future Godfather
movies, they will no doubt revolve around his character.
     Talia Shire is deliciously evil as the conniving Connie, always
counseling Vincent on how to get in Michael's good graces.  In the end,
she even gets to dispatch one of the family enemies in her own special
way.  
     Sofia Coppola (Francis Coppola's daughter) does just fine as Mary,
despite many critics' caustic comments.  Not an outstanding performance,
but solid and believable.  
     Eli Wallach almost steals the whole movie as an old friend of the
family, Don Altobello, who is always trying to keep the peace.  Great
fun.
     Diane Keaton (Kay) is one of the movie's major disappointments, in
my mind.  It almost seems as if she is overacting to justify her top
billing for what is a pretty small role.  
     George Hamilton is merely passable, replacing Robert Duvall as the
family attorney.  Duvall reportedly wanted twice what Paramount offered
and wanted a larger role, so his Tom Hagen character was killed off
between G2 and G3.   
     John Savage has a throwaway role as Tom Hagen's son, and has
nothing to do with the plot, as far as I could tell.
     Likewise Bridget Fonda has a brief scene playing a reporter seduced
by Vincent, and is not seen again.
     Don Novello (better known as Father Guido Sarducci) plays it
straight as the family's PR man, attempting to convince a disbelieving
press of the family's respectability.

Title
Review for Drowning by Numbers (1988)
     Peter Greenaway, who gave us the most intriguing film of last year
(THE COOK, THE THIEF, HIS WIFE, AND HER LOVER) is back with DROWNING BY
NUMBERS.  (Actually, DROWNING was made in 1988, two years before THE
COOK, but is only now being released in the US.)
     This very black comedy is the tale of three generations of women
(all named Cissie Colpitts) whose love for, and solidarity with, one
another leads them to drown their husbands.  Each woman, in turn, uses
sexual wiles to convince the local coroner, Madgett, to record the death
as an accident, as the relatives and friends of the deceased get more
and more suspicious.
     As Greenaway fans know, he uses some visual device as a running
theme in his films (drawings in THE DRAUGHTMAN'S CONTRACT, colors in
THE COOK).  In this case, it is numbers.
     The film opens with a young girl playing a skip-rope game in which
she counts a hundred stars as the introduction to a 1-to-100 count which
runs throughout the film, charting its progress until the numbers run
out and the drama is complete.  The numbers appear unexpectedly in the
foreground and background of various scenes.  Some are hilariously
obvious, others are quite subtle.
     As to why he chose numbers to define the film, Greenaway says he is
intrigued with numbers and games, and he used the counting device "to
deliberately indicate the artificiality of the film.  We progress the
number count as well as the narrative count.  They very neatly finish
simultaneously.  You know the film is over, and you can all go home."
     The running count is only one set of numbers in the film.  The
preponderance of items appearing or happening three times only begins
with the three sisters.  The film could easily be called DROWNING *IN*
NUMBERS.
     One reviewer suggests that the film "takes murderous aim at our
obsession with gamesmanship and the semblance of order, through lists
and rhymes and formulas that have more to do with ancient superstition
than science.  It's all a sham anyway, Greenaway reminds us.  To impose
what we call logic on the illogical only points up how pathetic and
insecure we are."
     Like Greenaway, the characters of Madgett and his young son, Smut,
are obsessed with games and are always creating new ones, the rules of
which are narrated offscreen by Smut, as we watch the various characters
play them.  At a wedding, the 75 guests participate in "Hangman's
Cricket," for example.  
     And Smut is always counting something: hairs on a dog, leaves on a
tree.  One of Smut's solitary games is to discover, count, and label
animals throughout the local area which have met a violent death.  He
commemorates each by setting off fireworks.
     (Note: DROWNING does not contain the same type of graphic
violence seen in THE COOK, and is much lighter and more humorous in
tone.  Several have called it Greenaway's most accessible film.
Nonetheless there are some scenes that some might find objectionable.)
     As in THE COOK and THE BELLY OF AN ARCHITECT, Greenaway uses his
training as a painter and his love of the great Dutch painters of the
Golden Age to create lush, detailed, and impossibly elaborate scenes.
No one ever made the windblown English seashore look so appealing.
Every frame provides an incredible tableau of color and texture.
     Greenaway comments, "East Anglia--Norfolk and Suffolk--where we
filmed, is as close to the country of Holland as you can get across the
channel.  It has wide-open skies, long flat horizons, beautiful golden
light.  A lot of my excitement for that part of the English landscape is
very much written into the film."
     And as in past Greenaway films, Michael Nyman provides the
Mozartian chamber music score (some of which you will recognize from the
other films)--its repetitiveness provides an appropriate counterpart to
the detailed visuals.
     The level of symbolism used is mind-boggling: insects, pieces of
fruit, sheep, fires, joggers, and Biblical names appear throughout the
film; one jogger runs through scenes tossing multicolored ribbons in the
air; the town grave-digger always seems to be hanging around; and of
course, the ubiquitous numbers (a friend points out that numerologists
will have a field day with this movie).  What does it all mean?  Only
Greenaway knows.
     He hints that he has attempted to create a world that "mirrors
life"--at least his own personal view of it: "I think as in life, the
good do not get rewarded, the bad do not get punished, and the innocent
always get betrayed."
     One reviewer added: "Most of all, it suggests that a conspiracy of
women is unbeatable."  To be sure, the themes of blackmail and
unrequited love are also well represented.
     You may leave the theater scratching your head, but it's doubtful
you'll leave bored.  Greenaway fans or those with a taste for the
unusual (and especially puzzle lovers) should be sure to catch this one.
Jim Pellmann (jpellmann@rational.com)

Title
Review for Ladri di saponette (1989)
     One of the most entertaining and imaginative movies I've seen in a
quite a while.  This is an Italian comedy which slickly combines a spoof
of television with an homage to the 1949 classic Italian movie THE
BICYCLE THIEF.
There are several stories intertwined:
1) The story of a film director (played by Maurizio Nichetti, who also
wrote
   and directed) whose dramatic film called "The Icicle Thief" is being
shown
   on television.  The film starts out as he arrives at the TV studio to
be
   interviewed by a pompous film critic before the film is to be shown.
The
   behind-the-scenes antics at the studio are almost slapstick.  
2) As the movie starts to be shown on the TV station, we switch to it
and
   watch the beginning of what seems to be a typical Italian post-World
War II
   tear-jerker about a man (also played by Nichetti) who can't find a
job, his
   starstruck wife, their small son who has to work in a gas station to
   help support the family, and a baby who's constantly ignored while he
   narrowly avoids one disaster after another (a running gag throughout
the
   movie).
     At the most melodramatic points in the story, the movie is
interrupted for some inane (but hilarious) commercials.  As the director
gets more and more outraged at the way the TV station is destroying his
masterwork, the commercials seem to come even faster.  
     We switch back and forth between the movie, the commercials, the
studio, and the living room, and before we know it, the characters from
the commercials start interacting with the characters from the movie.
It doesn't take long until the characters in the movie are dealing with
all new problems introduced by the commercial, and vice versa.  The
director, watches in horror as a whole new plot unfolds before his eyes,
and before long, he too enters the action of the movie to try to get it
back on course.
     This is a movie made with intelligence, care, and wit.  There are
many clever touches and special effects as the characters interact.  Pay
attention to all the details or you'll miss some of the gags.  If you're
sick of gangster movies, check this out.  Highest recommendation.
Postscript:  After this movie played in Italy, the government passed a
law limiting the number of commercial interruptions in movies broadcast
on TV!

Title
Review for Awakenings (1990)
     Set in 1969, this is the story of a neurologist (Robin Williams)
who attempts to "awaken" a group of patients in a mental hospital who
have been in a catatonic state for 30 years or more due to having had
encephalitis when younger.  The doctor believes that the new drug
L-Dopa, which is being used to treat Parkinson's disease patients might
help them as well.
     Robert De Niro plays Leonard, the first patient to try the
treatment.  Leonard becomes a fully functional person again and the
doctor expands the treatment to other patients.  Their joy at becoming
"normal" again is short-lived when Leonard starts regressing to his
former state.
     This movie plays fast and loose with your emotions, but is not
manipulative.  It is based on a true story, but I don't know how much
(if any) has been altered to make for a better story.  Although
basically a drama, there are many hilarious moments.
     As Leonard, De Niro gives a highly effective performance along the
lines of Dustin Hoffman in RAIN MAN and Daniel Day Lewis in MY LEFT
FOOT, and he will no doubt be nominated for a Best Actor Oscar.  His joy
at getting his life back is as compelling as his rage when he realizes
he is losing it again.  
     As Robin Williams learns to tone down his manic comedic style, he
is becoming a better and better actor.  I think this is probably his
best work since THE WORLD ACCORDING TO GARP.
     Julie Kavner is the sympathetic nurse who believes in the doctor
and becomes his biggest supporter among the otherwise doubting staff at
the hospital.  There are lots of other well-known character actors
playing smaller roles too.
     Director Penny Marshall (who also did BIG) demonstrates that she
can do drama every bit as well as comedy.  Could be the first female
Best Director Oscar nominee.

Title
Review for L.A. Story (1991)
     This one took me by surprise: none of the ads, clips, or reviews I
saw prepared me for this good a movie.  It's an intelligent, funny
romantic comedy, using Los Angeles as a surreal backdrop.
     Written by and starring Steve Martin, it's the story of a "wiggy,
wacky TV weatherman" who gets dumped by his status-conscious girlfriend
(Marilu Henner),  has a brief affair with a frenetic valley girl named
SanDeE* (no, that's not my terminal acting up), and ultimately pursues a
British journalist (played by Martin's real life wife, Victoria
Tennant).
     But this is L.A. and the city is as much a character in this story
as anyone else.  Indeed, a central "character" is a freeway road
conditions sign that magically communicates with Martin and helps him in
his romantic quests.  One reviewer compared this movie's fairy tale
aspects to those of ALICE, but with a lighter touch.
     As is expected from Martin, L.A. is the butt of a continual string
of jokes and the film is filled with jabs at the people and lifestyles
of southern California.  Some are mildly amusing: Martin driving over
sidewalks and neighbors' lawns, and down steep staircases to avoid
traffic jams; power lunchers' blase ignorance of an earthquake.  Others
are wickedly hilarious: the TV station's ever-changing news show format;
Martin's attempts to obtain a reservation at the city's hottest new
restaurant, L'Idiot, where potential customers must submit complete
financial records, and diners are offered designer dental floss between
courses.  Two days later, I'm still finding myself chuckling over some
scenes.
     This is the type of California bashing the rest of the country
loves to see.  But in this case it is all tempered by gorgeous scenes of
the tropical, the bright, the successful side of L.A. life.  Martin may
complain of living in an "intellectual-free zone", but everybody is
enjoying it, and we do too.  There are many visually stunning scenes and
liberal use of time-lapse photography.  The mood is capped by lush
musical interludes from new-age artist Enya.
     With so much going on, you have to look fast.  You'll easily miss
some of the visual humor if you don't pay close attention.  There are
also literally dozens of uncredited cameo appearances by well-known
movie and TV personalities.  Rick Moranis shows up as a
Shakespeare-quoting gravedigger, Chevy Chase as a restaurant patron
whose financial failings relegate him to a table in the back, and
Patrick Stewart (Capt. Picard on the new "Star Trek") as the owner of
L'Idiot.
     While all the performances are on target, it's Steve Martin's
writing that impressed me the most.  All in all, thoroughly enjoyable
and highly recommended.
