Authors
Sean P. Molloy
Number of Reviews
5

Title
Review for eXistenZ (1999)
eXistenZ (**** out of ****)
Starring Jennifer Jason Leigh, Jude Law, Ian Holm
Directed By David Cronenberg
Mirimax/Dimension Films, Rated R, 1999
Running Time: 1 Hour 38 Minutes
Part One of "The Strangest Movies Ever Made" Series at www.mediajunkies.com
[LIGHT SPOILERS, nothing you shouldn't read]
eXistenZ has been called "a gooey Matrix", and while this is a correct
description in some ways, in others it is completely off. The only
thing the two films have in common is the idea of a virtual reality
that is indistinguishable from normal, "real" reality. A major
difference is that "The Matrix" has a base reality that is obviously
the true reality, while eXistenZ does the impossible and makes us
accept the most bizarre reality ever as true. And oh what a reality it
is. David Cronenberg has shown us before that he knows how to create
strange movies (Naked Lunch, Crash), but this one is one of the
strangest. Maybe it's because of how the mundane is mixed with the
bizarre. Technology is organic, but only some of it. Cars are
normal. Gas stations are the same. Cell phones are glowing bug like
appendages. You jack into a virtual reality game using a quivering
pink gooey animal like apparatus (referred to simply as a "pod").
High technology has been replaced with organic creatures, and it
provides a truly surreal setting for the characters.
A famous game designer, Allegra Geller (a fine looking Jennifer Jason
Leigh), flees a demonstration of her latest game, eXistenZ, after an
assassination attempt. She is on the run (from who, I'm still not
sure), and has to save her pod by playing her game with "someone
friendly". That someone friendly is her dubious companion and security
guard, Ted Pikul (Jude Law). Unfortunately he is lacking a fundamental
requirement for playing, a bioport. Sort of a hole in your spine (ok,
exactly like a hole in your spine), a bioport allows you to plug the
vaguely entrail-looking wires from the pod into you, allowing you to
play the game. Luckily a bioport can be installed easily (they install
them in malls), so off they go to get one. After a crazy series of
events at the local country gas station, they are able to plug in and
play eXistenZ.
The plot itself is a surreal melding of conspiracies, reality
distortion, Chinese restaurants, and multi appendaged amphibian things
("It's a sign of the times"). But the plot, while cohesive in it's own
creepy way is secondary to just trying to figure out what the hell is
going on in this universe.  Cronenberg just slaps this weird
organic-tech world into the viewers lap, and it's up to you to figure
out how all these things work. And that's the true joy of this film,
entering the vaguely nightmarish world in which eXistenZ takes place.
You learn a little bit piece by piece (oh, they make pods out of
those), and it's just enough to get you to accept the world that is
presented to you.
There are all kinds of twists and turns as the characters wander
around, including a fantastic scene in a Chinese restaurant that will
leave you trying to assemble something out of your Moo Goo Gai Pan for
months afterwards.  Also the bioports are occasionally used for things
other than porting into eXistenZ , the specifics of which I will leave
for you to discover. There's lots of little things that set off the
weird-o-meter, like the little tiny pods that you can buy in the video
game store, the two headed amphibian creature, and why that guy at the
gas station's name appears to be "Gas". It all adds up to a supremely
far out trip, and given the choice I think I would rather live in The
Matrix's virtual world... oh wait, I already do.
_____________
Media Junkies - Movie reviews, music, books, games, and more.
http://www.mediajunkies.com
Contact: media@mediajunkies.com

Title
Review for Magnolia (1999)
Starring John C. Reilly, Julianne Moore, Tom Cruise, Jason Robards
Directed by P.T. Anderson
New Line Cinema, Rated R, 1999
Running Time: 2 Hours 59 Minutes
[LIGHT SPOILERS - Nothing here you shouldn't read]
When I become a significant enough celebrity to be interviewed (not
too long now...), inevitably I will be asked how I wound up where I
am. And when that happens, I'll sit back in my flower-encircled
chair... contemplate the ceiling for a moment... and say, "Oh, let's
seeeee..." sigh... "Well, gee, I'd say it's gotta be my strong family
ties, all the common goals and interests I share with my friends... my
unflinching determination... my charismatic smile and humble
modesty... and a sense that, darn it, I know who I am and where I
belong..."
Or, maybe I'll say, "Oh, let's seeeee... it's gotta be a bus ride
twenty-five years ago in Washington DC, a passing compliment to a
stranger about a nice hat, the mechanics of alphabetical order, and a
3 a.m. emergency room visit a couple Januarys back."
With his stunning third film, writer/director P.T. Anderson has
composed a beautiful symphony of human interaction. This is a rich and
insightful study of the invisible forces that bind us together even as
they seemingly alienate us.  The story darts between the lives of
nearly a dozen lonely people that are all tangentially
connected. Weather patterns are used as both a recurring metaphor for
the fragile, forceful, seemingly chaotic connections between human
lives, as well as a bit of foreshadowing for a scene that I will
continue to marvel at until the day they stop making these moving
picture shows.
Some may ask: "Do we really need to sit through a three and a half
hour movie to find out that we don't have complete control of our
lives? I could have told you that when I was eight." My answer is,
well, no, I suppose you don't have to - but Magnolia never pretends
it's letting us in on something we don't already know.
P. T. Anderson proves here what he hinted at with Boogie Nights - he
is a gifted and talented filmmaker. I once read a book which argued
that entering the mind of another person would be like landing on an
alien shore - strangely familiar, mostly incomprehensible. Anderson
knows this too, it seems, as every character in Magnolia has a unique
history, personality, and drive.
The remarkable cast plays no small part in bringing these people to
vibrant life. There isn't a single off performance here, although in
this crew of standouts, Tom Cruise somehow manages to shine as the
repulsively charismatic Frank T.J. Mackey, a wreck of a human being if
ever there was one. His role requires dynamic personality changes, and
Cruise handles each one precisely right, delivering a complete and
complex character sketch. Phillip Seymour Hoffman, whose recent work
in Boogie Nights and Happiness (among a handful of others) have shown
us he is well on his way to becoming one of the all-time great
character actors, plays a nurse who lives vicariously through those he
takes care of. William H. Macy can do no wrong in my book, and his
role here as a former child game show star Donnie Smith is one of his
finest, as a man with a ludicrously tragic obsession that serves as a
poor placeholder for absent love.  A young kid named Stanley Spector
(Jeremy Blackman) is now on the same game show that made former quiz
kid Donnie Smith what he is today. As we watch the young Stanley, we
feel as if we are witnessing a re-creation; then we wonder what would
have become of ol' Donnie if the length of a commercial break and the
size of a child's bladder had somehow managed to intervene in his life
thirty years ago. John Rielly's good-hearted police officer and Melora
Walters' nervous drug addict have an eerie chemistry together - as I
watched I couldn't decide whether they're the perfect match for one
another or exactly the opposite.
Magnolia manages to sustain as relentless and dizzying a pace as this
sort of drama can for the first two hours. I was both completely
engaged and exhausted by the time some welcome calm finally crept in
at the beginning of the third hour... in this case, the calm before
the storm. A remarkable scene, in which the majority of the characters
come to the same realization at the same time - is made more powerful
by one of the best uses of a soundtrack song (Aimee Mann penned the
majority of the songs) in my film-going memory. Moments of eerie
coincidence like this recur throughout and serve to strengthen the
idea that you can never be alone in a crowd.
This is the kind of movie that reveals itself slowly; it was four days
before I finally sorted everything out. Some things still leave me
puzzled, including the title. I made a wild guess that Magnolias
blossom slowly in the morning, but my knowledge of flower behavior is
sorely lacking these days... or perhaps, as the poster would seem to
indicate, each petal on a flower is independent, yet connected to the
whole... or, perhaps still, it's just a cool thing to name your
movie-that-dodges-conventional-naming. I sure as hell wouldn't know
what to call it. There's also a strange and indecipherable (well, to
me, anyway) rap delivered to Reilly's cop character by a potential
prophet - either it contained every answer I was looking for in one
neat little rhyme and I missed it, or it was just superfluous. I'd
have to see it again to figure that one out.
There is nothing timid about Magnolia. It is daring and bold as any
other film in this year of wonderful originality. (You've probably
heard about the brashness of the ending, but I dare not discuss it
here for fear of being drawn and quartered... though oh how it pains
me to hold my tongue...) Magnolia is melodramatic and shameless. It's
one of the best movies I've seen this year.
_____________
Media Junkies - Movie reviews, music, books, games, and more.
http://www.mediajunkies.com
Contact: media@mediajunkies.com

Title
Review for Titus (1999)
Shakespearean acting for a modern filmgoing (read:
non-Olde-English-speaking) audience presents its own set of
difficulties. When you're sitting in high school English class taking
turns reading Hamlet out loud, the kid three rows down from you
doesn't know whether to inject bitter sarcastic irony or sincere quiet
remorse into Polonius' next rhyming couplet. In that kind of setting,
it's pretty easy for the words to lose their meaning entirely, turning
the pages upon pages of iambic pentameter into a tired, monotonous
exercise in outdated grammar.
Since I don't have any other criteria to judge such an unfamiliar
acting style, all I can really do is ask myself if I understood what a
character was saying even if I didn't fully grasp all the words. If
there's one thing I've learned from reading Shakespeare's stuff, it's
that the delivery is as much a part of the meaning as the words
themselves. So using the Uncertified Sean Scale of Shakespearean
Performance: the acting in Titus rates as truly exceptional all across
the board. Veteran Anthony Hopkins leads the pack as the title
character; Jessica Lange plays Tamora, Queen of the Goths, with
vicious cunning, while Alan Cumming struts and frets upon the stage as
the whiny, manipulative newly-crowned Emperor Saturninus as if he's
loving every minute of it. And, to be fair, Taymor's pacing and visual
decisions are equally responsible for Titus' success in the
clarity-for-us-common-folk department.
So what, then, holds Titus back from greatness? With so much in place
that's so wonderfully right, what exactly went wrong? Well, here's
something you don't hear a lot when it comes to a Shakespeare
adaptation: all of Titus' problems come straight from the source.
Before I get into this, let me tell you that I feel woefully
under-qualified to criticize Shakespeare... my experience boils down
to reading a couple plays in high school and watching a couple movie
adaptations in college. After leaving this particular film, I figured
that anything that didn't quite jive in my head was just a result of
my untrained ear missing the Bard's point. But poking around a bit
afterward, I soon discovered that Titus' flaws are almost universally
agreed upon by Shakespeare's critics - some go so far as to say that
the play is so bad, it's probably not even Shakespeare's to begin
with. So armed with that knowledge, I feel confident enough to point
out what I myself found wrong with Titus Andronicus...
The biggest issue lies mainly with the principal villain, Aaron - an
orchestrator of evil for evil's sake. The point of the play seems to
be that a single act of violence can beget a chain reaction, until
everyone involved lives only to exact vengeance before someone in the
other party can do it first...  a point that could have been more
effective without Aaron's unmotivated designs.  Don't get me wrong,
he's exquisitely played (here by Harry Lennix), it's the way he's
written that's the problem.
Even Titus himself is an uneven character - at one turn he is a
duty-bound soldier, loyal to Rome despite all the wrong that the City
does to him. He backs an Emperor that he couldn't possibly like time
and time again, even when it hurts his family and friends, and his
early motivations are difficult to sympathize with. He does something
horrible early on to one of his sons that dulls the edge of what
sorrow and hatred he's supposed to feel later.  Sometimes Titus seems
absolutely crazy (shooting arrows into the sky bearing messages to the
gods), and the next he seems extraordinarily clever (the revenge he
stages in the end), but all his plans and inspirations are pretty much
random in the end... A credit to Hopkins that he seems to understand
Titus as much as he could possibly be understood. Some critics argue
that Titus Andronicus is supposed to be a black comedy (like I was
hoping to find) rather than a tragedy (it isn't quite that either),
but if that's the case, I didn't find a whole lot to laugh at.
Could Taymor have "fixed" some of these problems? Certainly. A better
question is should she have? Perhaps an even better question is did
she even want to?  What adjustments she tries to make are purely
theatrical ones, and while they mostly hit the mark, sometimes they
don't quite seem to work... the film opens with a scene showing a
modern child playing violently with a pile of action figures and war
toys in his kitchen. The kid sticks around for the remainder of the
film, first as a silent witness; but then he gradually (and
seamlessly) becomes an active participant in the horrid affair as one
of Titus' grandsons.  Is Taymor just pointing out that violence has
always been around? Is she saying it's better to take out our
frustrations on toys and by beating the crap out of each other in
Mortal Kombat 5? I'm not sure... maybe it's a little of both.
Julie Taymor has done her beautiful best, and she's taken a great risk
(especially for a first-timer) to attempt to breathe life into a
lifeless play.  And the end result is something alive and original and
refreshing; so much so that it's honestly frustrating that Titus
Andronicus isn't a better tale.  The film never drags or has a moment
that feels like dead weight, even though Titus clocks in at nearly
three hours. Taymor and her devoted crew have left Shakespeare's words
untouched, and built upon them a lavish vision deserving of a better
foundation. Like Titus himself, they're loyal to a cause that simply
doesn't deserve their devotion.

Title
Review for What Planet Are You From? (2000)
When I watch a movie like Mike Nichols' What Planet Are You From? I can't
help
but feel like everyone is looking at me. It's as if all the audience is
gazing
at the back of my head in the darkness, eyes shooting daggers, quietly
blaming
me for the fact that they paid hard-earned money to spend their time
watching
this... this... thing. I shift uncomfortably in my seat. I'm reminded of how
I
feel when I see a pair of second- or third-rate celebrities engaging in a
teleprompted "funny" conversation to introduce the next Blockbuster award.
It's
not my fault, I know it's not my fault, but dammit, someone's gotta be
embarrassed, because it doesn't look like anyone on the screen is ready to
take
the blame.
I'm about to give you a list of names of people who are gonna make a movie
together: Garry Shandling, Annette Bening, John Goodman, Greg Kinnear, Mike
Nichols. Do any of these names make you instantly shudder? The answer I
would
have come up with before today is no, this is quite a list of talented
individuals we've got here. Granted, John Goodman was in The Flintstones,
and
Greg Kinnear has turned in some less-than-lackluster leading man
performances in
certified failures like A Smile Like Yours, but even so, they've got proven
power as excellent supporting players. Garry Shandling has two television
classics under his belt, his ingenious little It's Garry Shandling's Show
and
The Larry Sanders Show. And for God's sake, Mike Nichols directed The
Graduate,
and Annette Bening is just walking away from American Beauty.
What Planet Are You From? purports to be a comedy exploring the relationship
between men and women satirizing the whole pop-psychology Mars/Venus
phenomenon.
But what this movie winds up being is a collection of unfunny
cringe-inducing
moments coupled with uninsightful cringe-inducing moments; the end result
is,
unsurprisingly, an unfunny, uninsightful, cringe-inducing, thoroughly icky
embarrassment.
Garry Shandling plays an alien from a planet populated by technologically
advanced but emotionally vacant males (they reproduce through cloning, of
course). His leaders put a select group of males through a series of tests
designed to determine which one is most fit to fly off to Earth, find a
female
of the species, and impregnate her. They're taught how to pretend that
they're
listening by nodding and saying "uh-huh," and how to compliment shoes.
Imagine
my delighted surprise when, oh heavens, all their carefully practiced
tactics
turn out to fail miserably, producing comedic results! The lucky winner is
fitted with a penis (since theirs, after generations of disuse have long
since
shrunk out of existence... I will restrain myself from mentioning the
implausibility of such a scenario since the population has stopped evolving
due
to the fact that they're all just clones... whoops, too late.) The penis,
when
aroused, tends to make a humming noise. The writers, when frequently
strapped
for ideas, tend to turn to this as a source of "comedy." It isn't funny the
first time. It isn't funny the eighth time. It isn't funny the eighteenth
time.
If anything, it made me feel vaguely self-conscious.
Garry meets up with a coworker at a bank played by Greg Kinnear, who turns
out
to be a generic, unlikable scumbag. He's meant to fill the part of
unfortunate
role model for Shandling's alien character, but he's so flatly drawn that
even
the writers quickly give up and toss him aside. Kinnear's scumbagginess is
demonstrated by the fact that he claims other peoples' work as his own to
worm
his way into a Vice Presidents' position and goes to AA meetings to pick up
chicks. Wow. What a magnificent bastard.
Nearly every man in the movie, in fact, is played as the same sort of
sex-driven
slimeball. When Kinnear's wife walks into the office, there isn't a single
guy
who doesn't trip, bump into a wall, or otherwise pratfall as if they'd never
seen a woman before. The few guys that aren't particularly slimeballs, such
as
John Goodman's detective character, are simply uncommunicative workaholics.
Shandling meets up with Annette Bening, who will inevitably prove to be the
love
he never knew existed, at one of Kinnear's AA meetings. Shandling's mission
is
to have a baby, and when he reveals his desires to her, Bening instantly
falls
for him, and the next day... they get married. Yup. The next day. Cuz ya
see, it
turns out she wants a baby too!
Bening's character perhaps was the most difficult to watch, especially after
seeing her come apart at the seams so effectively in American Beauty... if
her
character here is supposed to be representing the female of the species as a
whole, then woe, I say, to the species. She's unfathomably insecure, and
succumbs so easily to all of Shandling's lines and lies that it borders on
tragic. There's a point where, after thinking she may not be able to bear
children, she learns that she is indeed pregnant. When Garry comes home
after
nearly cheating on her, she strolls into the kitchen and sings "High Hopes"
(you
know, the uplifting ant and the rubber tree plant song) to deliver the news,
and
then says to him, "now you can't leave me." We're supposed to empathize with
Shandling's discovery of the feeling of "guilt," but instead I wanted to
weep
for Bening that she was placing her entire life and soul firmly in the lap
of a
great big nothing. And eventually, Shandling falls in love with her... for
real,
I suppose, though I'm not sure exactly what prompted it.
What's the message I derive from all this? Men are liars, inherently empty
creatures, but if you hang around long enough... well, maybe something will
click. Ha ha... ha? I'm thankful such broad cynicism isn't frequently
allowed to
run so rampant.
There's also a subplot involving John Goodman as an airline incident
investigator that wades in the bog of stupidity. Goodman, through a series
of
astoundingly implausible realizations, puts together the fact that Shandling
is
a being from another world with a magic, vibrating penis. It has all the
makings
for a subplot of having Shandling be discovered, that, thankfully, never
comes
to the inevitable hackneyed fruition. Instead, it just dangles limply on the
branch for a while, withers, and falls away. Further proof that Goodman
should
just stick to doing Coen Brothers movies.
But let's not dwell on this any longer, I've already wasted plenty of your
time
and my own. Let's move on, forget about what we've seen here, and get on
with
our lives. And to help us out, let's end things on a happy note...
Congratuations go out to Annette Bening, winner of this week's "Title!"
award,
for delivering the awkward line of dialog containing the movie's name.

Title
Review for Eye of the Beholder (1999)
I should have known, damn it, I should have known. Ewan McGregor -
Codename: "Eye" - is pointing a high-tech rifle-ly gadget at a fat,
bald business-oriented American engaging in illicit sexual activities
in a window across the street. We get the requisite electro-green
through-the-sight view. We the audience, seeing a high tech rifle-ly
gadget, of course think that Eye is going to assassinate the target,
but instead, he pulls the trigger and the rifle takes twenty or so
hazy, low-quality photographs, which Eye then proceeds to fax and
e-mail to everyone in his target's office. All right, so thirty
seconds in, I was slightly befuddled by this seemingly pointless
rifle/camera, but I was still open minded... maybe there's a really
good reason for it. I've got reason to believe, you see - I admire a
lot of Ewan McGregor's previous work... and he's Obi Wan Ke-
friggin-nobi for God's sake. And director Stephan Elliot's last movie
Priscilla, Queen of the Desert was a quirky little delight. There's
some genuine talent involved here.
I think at the twenty minute mark, there was still a spark of hope in
my heart.  Eye has been assigned to investigate the leader of his
organization's son (I still have no idea what this organization was -
British intelligence?  National Spy Ring? Private investigation?), who
is apparently stealing from his trust fund. He has received his
assignment from k.d. lang, through an elaborate and expensive
teleconferencing briefcase. When Eye tracks his target to an
expensive- looking secluded house, he witnesses a mysterious and
beautiful woman (Ashley Judd) take a knife out and proceed to stab the
poor bastard. OK, that's odd, I think to myself, this could be
interesting. Then she starts to cry, and through her tears exclaims
"Merry Christmas, dad!" for the first time.
So begins our tale of obsession... or... something.
The rest of the movie involves Ewan McGregor's Eye character following
Ashley Judd around to every corner of the United States, totally and
completely obsessed by this woman from afar. Throughout his entire
professional life, he has been a voyeur; so when he falls for someone,
the only way he can handle it is to watch and drool through telescopes
and cameras. Fine, that's a lovely premise, I suppose. But gosh darn
it, if you're going to go there, you better have some sort of
explanation. And that's precisely where this film fails.
This is the kind of movie that pisses me off. It's an abortion, a
collection of half-formed and wasted ideas that amounts to absolutely
nothing in the end.  It pretends it is something that it is not - a
surreal and deep psychological character study wrapped in a high-tech
thriller. Here, the filmmakers have confused "surreal" and "deep" with
"vaguely unclear" and "crammed full of insultingly obvious metaphors."
I never, even for an instant, had the foggiest idea why Eye would fall
so in "love" with this woman who changes wigs and kills people. The
movie offers only two explanations, neither of which make a lick of
sense. Explanation Number One: The obnoxious presence of Eye's
imaginary daughter, who was taken away from him by his wife some time
ago, tells him he shouldn't leave Ms. Judd.  Explanation Two, which by
the end of the film has been beaten into our heads through imagery and
dialog and even the title of the movie: "Beauty is in the eye of the
beholder." Whoo hoo, that helps, thanks a bunch, case closed. That's
as deep as it gets, folks. There is an attempt at an explanation in
the final minutes, which, instead of tying everything together, ends
up being as profound as a clever sixth-grade Mad Lib.
There are secondary characters that move in and out of the picture and
serve little or no purpose except to make the audience wonder what the
hell the point was. My personal favorites include: the prison-matron
modeled after Austin Powers' Frau Farbissina, who apparently taught
Ms. Judd everything she knows about wearing wigs; Jason Priestley's
awfully played Dirty Desert Vagrant #1, who tries to emulate Dennis
Hopper a la Blue Velvet, but fails miserably; and the
cop-who-sees-Ashley-fleeing-an-accident-scene-and-
then-wants-to-pay-for-sex- but-is-shot. Each one in this sad little
parade is a little more pointless than the last.
The script pays no attention to the laws of time and space. Any time
one of the frequent location changes occurs, the camera zooms in on a
souvenir snow globe, and minutes, weeks, or years could have
passed. Bewilderingly inane stylistic decisions plague the whole
affair - one character passes a glass of cognac to another in a
slow-motion close-up awash in a lot of bass. Ewan McGregor at one
point takes up residence in a bell tower just so he could be
repeatedly awakened and deafened by the giant bell. Jason Priestly
starts philosophizing about sharks, then laughs maniacally... cut to
random guy with eye patch... iguana out of focus... iguana comes into
focus. Wow, man.
When I found out afterward that this film was based on a novel, it
came as no surprise to me. There are plenty of elements here that, if
extended and fleshed out more, would have made for a decent story. And
I wouldn't be surprised if I found out there was an hour and a half of
footage cut from this movie lying in a landfill somewhere, or waiting
in the wings for the DVD Special Director's Cut... Not that anything
would ever possess me to purchase such a thing to find out what I was
missing.
The last ten or so minutes featured a conversation between the Eye and
the Judd that was supposed to be some sort of revealing
exposition. Some guy in the back of the theater was talking on his
cell phone, and this time I didn't particularly care all that much
because what was happening on the screen was a steaming pile of unholy
crap; the audience around me chuckled and whispered sentiments similar
to what I was thinking. Someone near cell-phone-guy did eventually
yell, "Shut the hell up!", but it was a lot funnier when we thought he
was talking to the screen.
_____________
Media Junkies - Movie reviews, music, books, games, and more.
http://www.mediajunkies.com
Contact: media@mediajunkies.com
