Authors
Gary Pollard
Number of Reviews
2

Title
Review for Year of the Dragon (1985)
In an interview with the Paris Review in 1981 Tennessee Williams spoke of
the difficulty of dealing with racism on the stage: "In the theatre you
hardly dare use the word Jew, and it's really a detriment to a very fine
people that they're so frightened of any criticism whatsoever, although
after the Holocaust they certainly have reason to be frightened. I have no
feelings of anti-Semitism, but those feelings do exist in other people, and
it's difficult to present a picture of the world as it truly is without on
occasion allowing a voice to those sentiments."
As if to prove his words, an attempt in Germany to stage a play by
Rainer Werner Fassbinder on the subject of anti-Semitism was halted by
Jewish organisations angry at his representation of the Rich Jew. Of this
play Fassbinder once stated: "The really terrible thing about oppression is
that you can't show it without showing the person who's being oppressed and
who also has his faults. For example, you can't talk about the German
treatment of the Jewish minorities without evoking the Jew's rapport with
money, but when you do this it seems as if you're explaining or accounting
for this oppression." Later in the same interview he said: "I stand firmly
behind this thought: you must show the victim with his qualities and faults,
his strengths and his weaknesses, his mistakes. And for this I've been
called an anti-Semite !!!"
Given the reception that Year of the Dragon has met with in many quarters,
these are probably sentiments with which Michael Cimino would identify, and
it's dispiriting to have to defend the film from charges of racism, largely
because racism is itself a major theme of the work. Contrary to the
assumptions of many of the film's detractors, Year of the Dragon is not
primarily about Chinatown, although it is set there; it is about the
immigrant experience in America, about that country's present growing
conservatism, and - most centrally - about the redemption of one individual.
This individual, Stanley White, is - the film makes clear - a racist, a man
who has turned his back on his own immigrant ancestry, a man who is
frequently selfish and unfeeling. Michael Cimino has had the courage to give
us an unsympathetic protagonist who develops through the film to become
aware of his own limitations, limitations that he acknowledges in the film's
final line to Tracey Tzu: "You're right, I'm wrong. Sorry. I'd like to be a
nice man. l would. I just don't know how to be nice.'
The saddest thing about responses to Cimino's film that fall to take this
into account is that they would seek to limit the potential of cinema. They
assume that a less than perfect hero necessarily represents the director's
own world-view rather than a desire to stand back from that character and
represent him in all his flawed complexity. Attacks on Year of the Dragon
frequently reveal a misunderstanding of the nature of drama. It is almost a
truism that the more complex, and even flawed the central figure, the
greater the work of art. We accept this in theatre or literature, but in the
cinema many still want heroes and villains to be clearly delineated. Many
accept Dirty Harry and Rambo, reactionary though these films are, because it
is clear to them who is meant to be the hero. On the other hand, in an
obviously greater work like Shakespeare's 'King Lear' we see that the
protagonist is a vain, foolish and naggingly senile old man, and yet we
still sympathize and share his tragedy. Few watching the play would be so
naive as to assume that the character of Lear represented Shakespeare's own
temperament or world-view.
Michael Cimino has made a film that, as serious art must, moves beyond the
customary one-dimensionality of most current American mainstream cinema. It
is unfortunate that many have become so used to such superficiality in the
Hollywood film that they are now unable to look deeper. European films are
usually judged with more critical acumen; few would assume that Istvan
Szabo, for instance, approved wholeheartedly of the central character of
Mephisto. One can only hope that in future, affected by criticisms of Year
of the Dragon, Cimino does not turn to simplicity and present a policeman
who is liberal, understanding, all-compassionate, and yet as courageous as
Rambo. In reality few policeman fit that description.
Does Cimino in fact share the racism of his central character? True, Year
of the Dragon shows us the seamy side of Chinatown. a side that even the
film's detractors should acknowledge to exist; hut it does also show us the
positive side of the Chinese community in America: Tracey Tzu is a
professional television journalist whose father - we are told - is a
successful and honest businessman; Herbert Wong is a dedicated, though
inexperienced, policeman who becomes a martyr in White's attempt to refight
the Vietnam war and win; and Tony Ho is an honest man who informs the police
about the bodies of two dead youths and - in the film's most poignant
scene - attends the funeral of White's wife. Even Stanley White acknowledges
that Tony Ho represents much of what is good in Chinatown.
But what of White himself ? He is a Pole who has turned away from his
heritage, changing his name from Wyzcinski in a bid to become more American.
Part of his dislike of the people of Chinatown comes from the fact that,
unlike him, they have retained a separate cultural identity. His dislike of
Asians in general has been intensified by his experience in Vietnam. Like
Rambo, he tells himself that only politics lost that war, and he clearly
states that in Chinatown he intends to refight it and win. Yet he has a
grudging respect for the people he claims to hate. As his colleague, Lou
Bukowski, states: 'He's got a thing about Chinks.'
The schizophrenic nature of White's attitude towards Asians is revealed most
clearly in his relationship with Tracey Tzu, which is presented in some ways
as a process of sexual and racial colonisation: their first sexual encounter
is almost a rape, while later on he literally takes over (or colonises) her
apartment. Ironically though, she is perhaps more American and more modern
than he is, particularly with regard to sex: 'What year are you living in
?', she asks him at one point when he tries to force sex with her, 'You
don't have to get your money's worth.'
Even before his first meeting with Tracey, White is obsessed with her,
although he himself does not know why. He identifies her, in some way, with
the enemy, and tells her so in one confrontation in her apartment. Yet
despite that he feels that only she can help him. Talking to her in this
confrontation he walks into the water of her sunken bath, an action which
echoes his walking into water during the earlier examination of the bodies
in the bean-sprout basement and his meeting with Tony Ho. In that scene he
saw both positive and negative aspects of Chinatown. Now Cimino echoes that
encounter in purely formal terms. At this point, White's racist beliefs are
crumbling. Emotionally, he speaks of how hopeless a Vietnamese parade was,
and goes on to say: 'But then you'd come at us from fifteen different
directions.' Racism, respect, and confusion, all in one line. At this
moment, White is a man whose long-held beliefs are disintegrating.
Such changes are shrewdly observed throughout the film, and frequently
revealed in visual rather than verbal terms. For this reason, many miss them
entirely. One striking  example of this is the funeral of White's wife,
Connie, which Tony Ho attends. White's grief at her death is compounded by
the fact that only shortly beforehand did he realise how unhappy he had made
her. Guilt is added to his grief. Because of this, Joey Tai's hired
assassins have hurt him in a way more profound than they could have
suspected, and this would normally fuel the racist sentiments within him.
Yet the presence of Tony Ho at the funeral, his genuine sympathy at the
death, and his stand against the gangs, affect White deeply. Mickey Rourke
gives a fine performance throughout the film, but this is his strongest
moment. His confusion at Tony Ho's actions is made visually - though not
verbally -explicit; a speech would in any case be out of place. Cimino's
choice of music here also intimates the change in Stanley White: he uses
Mahler's s Resurrection Symphony, (the titles and lyrics themselves
revealing), a piece which is repeated at the end of the film when White
acknowledges not only his limitations but also his desire to become, with
Tracey's help, a better human being. Many have missed this, but to disregard
the function of music and the purely visual in a Cimino film does the
director and the film medium itself, a disservice.
Whereas hardly a scene passes without revealing some unpleasant aspect of
White's character, Joey Tai is frequently shown in a more sympathetic light.
He is a family man, whereas White is not really willing to give his wife a
child; he sends a girl through college; and he rescues an old acquaintance
from death in Thailand. We are even encouraged to fear for his safety when
he meets Ban Sung's men at the river in Thailand. To be sure, Tai can be as
ruthless as Stanley White, but his ruthlessness is born of ambition
(frequently a by-product of the American Dream), while White's is born of
his personal demons, his obsessions. As he revealed in Scarface,
scriptwriter Oliver Stone does have an interest in the dark side of the
American Dream. In that film, chasing the dream is equated with selling
cocaine. In this film, Stanley White actually refers to Joey Tai as someone
who has chased the dream successfully.
Part of the reason that White despises Joey Tai so much is that, despite
himself, he begins to identify with him. His savage attack on Tai after the
undercover policeman, Herbert Wong, is shot is motivated partly by anger at
himself. 'I am not going to kill myself for you Captain,' Wong had told him.
And yet he does die, leaving White aware that his hand, as well as Tai's,
was on the gun that killed him. Ultimately Joey Tai also - in one way -
kills himself for White, in a scene which makes the theme of
self-confrontation even clearer. Tai and White meet on a bridge (a symbol in
itself). Both men are lit almost identically, so that as they run at one
another it is difficult to tell them apart. Tai has turned to confront White
because he knows the policeman will hound him until he does so. But Tai's
death does not provide the resolution that White had expected. He is forced
to an awareness of his victim as a human being, and even allows him to kill
himself. Before he gives the gun to Tai he kneels, watching
uncomprehendingly but with a new respect.
Throughout the film White hopes that Tai's death will enable him to exorcise
his personal demons, and the people around him are largely aware of this.
His colleagues berate him for wanting to refight Vietnam, and are aware
that - as the film's conclusion reveals - he will not succeed. The film ends
as it began, with a death and a funeral, but White has not really 'cleaned
up' Chinatown. For this reason, it's ironic that Year of the Dragon has been
compared to Rambo, precisely because the film is a critique of Rambo. In a
racist film, we are not made uncomfortably aware of the protagonist's
racism, and this is very much the case with Stallone's film. It is also
ironic that Rambo attracted little of the criticism that was levelled at
Year of the Dragon. Ironic and sad. Because this implies that Rambo is a
better film, a more thoughtful film and it is not. White does speak like
Stallone's hero, he even says some of the same lines, and he also wants to
refight the war. But again and again he is told he is wrong, and he
eventually admits it himself. There may have never before been a film in
which so many characters have criticised the protagonist. Yet many
reviewers, while noticing the arrogance and obsessiveness of Stanley White,
have failed to see that Cimino does not exonerate it. In fact, he comes
dangerously close to straining credibility at times to belittle White and
present the Chinese case more clearly: White himself, Tracey Tzu, Herbert
Wong, and - in a way - Tony Ho, all either tell us or reveal by their
actions how unfairly Chinese, like other immigrants, have often been treated
in 'the Land of the Free'.
Much has been made of the idea that Cimino 'exaggerates' the violence in
Chinatown, but the point is clearly made in the film that the violence
exists precisely because of the machinations of Joey Tai and Stanley White's
attempt to refight a lost war. A bombing of a Chinese restaurant in London,
the Seattle massacre, the murder of a Chinese businessman (uncle of a friend
of mine) by triads in Glasgow, would suggest that Chinatown gangsters are
violent when the need arises. Cimino has done his research well, and much of
the film's plot is based on police opinions or police records. Fenton
Bresler's book: Trail of the Triads is one source that quotes police as
saying that, yes, the youth gangs are used as front-runners by the triads,
that the triads in the States are dealing with the Mafia, and that there is
much triad influence in many of the Chinatown 'benevolent associations'.
Triads are not, as many Hong Kong films like to suggest, heroes or a
courageous band of brothers. They are also not humorous or 'cute' to their
victims. They kill people if they have to. Time and time again, the Hong
Kong cinema has ignored or evaded that fact. It's likely that some of the
anger against Year of the Dragon comes from its criticism and destruction of
a much-accepted cinematic myth.
Year of the Dragon shows Chinese in America as people who have adopted
various strategies, sometimes criminal, to survive in a country that has
rarely welcomed them with open arms. Stanley White's listing of the social
evils of Chinatown to Tracey Tzu is not merely a criticism of Chinese
insularity, but also of America's image of itself as a non-racist, fair, and
just society. Cimino is not blaming only the gangsters for the high
tuberculosis rates, the overcrowding, or the dispossessed youngsters who -
filled with a heroic triad myth - are exploited by organised criminals
masquerading as businessmen or patriots. As well as making these points,
Cimino has given us a human, complex, and flawed protagonist, and one who
accurately represents the mood of much of America at this time. He has also
given us one of the most thought-provoking and critical films in recent
American cinema. This is not to say that the film is perfect: Tracey's
character is a little too sketchy, for instance, and'- as many have noted -
the triad leaders are portrayed in an almost humorous way influenced - I
suspect - by Wayne Wang's Dim Sum) which lessens their credibility. All the
same one can only despair that most reactions to the film have not been
worthy of Cimino's talent.
Whatever its weaknesses, and I do not count racism among them, I believe
that Year of the Dragon was one of the most ambitious and worthwhile
American mainstream films of the eighties, and one which unerringly captured
and attacked the sense of neo-Conservatism and almost xenophobia from which
much of that country so frequently suffers.

Title
Review for Titanic (1997)
Titanic - The Most Expensive Curate's Egg
"Titanic" is, like the famous curate's egg, "good in parts", but uneven
overall.
Firstly, I like the idea of the framing story. I like it because it adds to
the sense of the transitoriness of life. It's rather like seeing someone dig
up the remains of an Egyptian mummy when you have just been seeing a movie
about the love life of the Egyptian. I think the two era plot structure is
one that works well.
Secondly, I do like much about the romance. Class was an important part of
the times. It has been said, and not only by the publicists, that the
sinking of that ship marked the beginning of the end of a certain idea of
society. It's not a bad idea to use a cross class love story to do that. I
also like the idea of her feeling stifled by convention and feeling she
wants to escape. I like the idea that Jack liberates her to lead the life
she wants. All this was POTENTIALLY excellent.
Thirdly, I liked the time machine element of the film. That it places us ON
the boat, with many people whose fates we care about (even though not - for
me - the lovers). Most disaster movies have a big problem in that we don't
get time to learn anything about anybody, or to care about them. It was
fascinating to walk that boat, looking exactly as it did look (there's a
computer game that is also very good for this - the art direction matches
absolutely). Cameron did me a favour in introducing me to the real
historical characters. All that stuff fascinated me.
Fourthly, I loved that James Cameron fell in love with his material and got
obsessive over it. I think that when it came to dealing with the reality
this showed. He did not take too many liberties with it.
Fifth. The scale. The sheer scale of the movie. It took a lot of ambition
and determination to get it done. I admire Cameron for that.
Sixth. The engine room and the furnaces. A glimpse into the hell of the
manual labourer. The movie showed well how one class slaved to make life
pleasant for another. There was a WORLD on that ship. It's a strong metaphor
for an entire society. I'd like to have seen more middle class though.
Seventh. Transitions. Past to present. Life to death. The feeling that we
all love in the face of death, and because of that we should love as fully
and as well as can in whatever time is allotted to us.
Eighth. Tragedy. The film makes us more aware of something that existed in
our consciousness but that had not really been brought home to many of us.
The scenes of the ship going down were disturbing and breathtaking. As they
should have been. We had time to see who was dying and how they died. We had
time to see the bravery and the cowardice. And I, for one, loved the
musicians. Incredible to have had that kind of courage. Not the kind that
gets you publicity or does you any good. Just a devotion to duty. The stern
crashing down on survivors, the boat rowing through the dead. These are
images no-one who has seen them will ever forget. Even an image of crockery
falling off a dresser had power.
Ninth. Aftermath. Even in Ismay's face, as he sits in the boat of survivors,
we know this is a man who is aware he is ruined. There are stories that go
beyond the boundaries of the movie. Everything is not wrapped up, but hints
are there. I liked how she hid from Cal too. Much better than the
conversation in the first draft, although that conversation had made Cal a
bit more sympathetic.
There's more too. When I reviewed this movie I told people they had to go
see it. Maybe it is worth half a dozen Oscars, as before. I have been
telling people they should see it all week.
So, yes there is much to be grateful for. I talk about this movie, because
almost alone of movies I've seen lately it deals with big subjects, and big
ideas. If only it had raised the central story to this level I would have
found it perfect. And there aren't many movies you can say that about.
So much about the film is good, very good, even excellent, that it's a pity
that other things let it down so badly.
When Cameron is dealing with reality, as with the sinking itself, I think
it's terrific. But the problem is that Cameron is a good director but
a bad scriptwriter. Billy Zane's character is a melodramatic pantomime
villain complete with evil henchman. At no point in the movie does he rise
above being a one-dimensional bad guy.
It's this black and white sense of morality,  that , in my view, brings the
movie down. Zane is so vile that the mother might as well sell her daughter
into white slavery as force her to marry him. There'd have been other,
better prospects.
In this movie, poor people are all good. Rich people are all bad, unless
they were poor people originally.
Much about Titanic is great. I think it brings home the event far better
than I'd ever have expected, but if that central love story had been about
real flesh and blood people, with their mixture of good and bad, it would
have been better. It could have been one of the greatest movies ever made,
but in its attempt to pander to today's audience (Kate Winslet giving
someone the finger, as an example) it is less.
Review after review, has noticed clunky dialogue, stupid anachronisms, the
unsuitability of diCaprio, and a willingness to pander to contemporary
audiences. In other words the script is immature and aimed at today's
immaturity of audience attention.
The "defy authority" stuff turns it into Titanic meets Porky's. Of course,
audiences liked "Porky's" too. Fine. More people buy pocket romances than
Tolstoy. It does not make them better.
It was embarrassing in old period movies where people said: "There's that
young Beethoven. He's going to be great some day." It's just as embarrassing
when Cameron does similar things with Picasso and Freud. It's a plain
stupidity to put Picasso's "Les Demoiselles D'Avignon" on the ship. Unless
he's trying to suggest the girl was stupid enough to buy a forgery.
James Cameron almost had a great work of art on his hands. He did not. He is
a clumsy scriptwriter. The movie would NOT have been made worse had the
characters been more credible. It would have been better. It was set  in
Edwardian times. That does not mean the script has to be Edwardian
melodrama. In fact "The Age of Innocence" or any Austen adaptation can see
more complexity in their characters.
There are things in this movie that are great, yet at the end of the movie I
cared more about the Captain than the lovers. Almost every character based
on a real person was better drawn than the fictional ones.
Why did we have to sit through clunky lines like Bill Paxton's "I never got
it before. I get it now"? Or "A woman's heart is a deep ocean of secrets"?
If the film is already good, what would Cameron have lost by making it
better? And a good script collaborator with less of a tin ear and more of a
sense of period would have helped.
This film deserves several Oscars. But not best script. The cheapest thing
to fix, in all that budget, would have been the script.
