Authors
Rui Sadio
Number of Reviews
3

Title
Review for Dead Man Walking (1995)
Since I remember, I can't find any movie so capable to obligue an 
audience to reflect about a certain subject, in such a powerful way as 
"Dead Man Walking" makes us to reflect about the death penalty question.
First of all, I have to say that this movie is, in my opinion, the best 
movie of 1995 and certainly one of those which I won't forget easily.
"Dead Man Walking" is based on the book with the same name by Sister 
Helen Prejean, a nun who has worked with condemneds to death for a long time.
Directed by Tim Robbins, one of my favourite actors, this film has also 
the brilliant and unforgetable performances of Sean Penn and Susan Sarandon.
Sean Penn is Matthew Poncelet, a condemned to death who receives 
spiritual help of Sister Helen Prejean, a role interpreted by Susan Sarandon,
in his last days of life.
Both artists are sensational in their performances and that happens 
because they don't act separately. I mean, the Sean Penn's interpretation 
"lives" from the Susan Sarandon's interpretation and vice versa. Is 
something like Jodie Foster and Anthony Hopkins in "The Silence of the 
Lambs". However, now the dialogues between the two principal characters 
are even more dramatic and emotional than those in the Jonathan Demme's 
film. That's why I think Susan Sarandon and Sean Penn should win the 
oscars of the Academy, this year. The most significant part of the 
movie's power is due to their work.
"Dead Man Walking" is too far of being an anti-deathpenalty movie. On the 
contrary, "Dead Man Walking" follows a guide-line which divides the two 
opposite opinions, becoming the frontier between those convictions.
There are times when we think that death penalty is a fair way to punish 
a person who has already destroyed the life of so many people. However, 
there are times when we start believing that a death can't pay another 
death. After all, if no one has the right to kill then we shouldn't apply 
the death penalty, or else we should be punished too.
Tim Robbins is the responsible for this revolution inside our minds. He 
manipulates us as he wants and he never discloses what is his position.
He makes us be sorry for the condemned but he makes us hate the condemned!
All the directing work is superb, including the beginning of the film, 
showing that Tim Robbins is more than an excellent actor. In fact, he is 
also an excellent director.
At last, a reference to the mysterious music that emphasizes the dark 
side of the film. Songs which are intimately connected with the 
characters and the movie environment. We can listen to Bruce Sprinsteen, 
Johnny Cash, Suzanne Vega, Nusrat Fateh Ali Khan, Eddie Vedder and many 
others. After seeing the movie is very important to listen to the 
soundtrack.
"Dead Man Walking" is one of those movies that everybody should see and 
reflect about. The death penalty question deserves that reflection.
About my position, I just say I'm happy for living in Portugal, one of 
the first countries to abolish that kind of punishment.

Title
Review for Nuovo cinema Paradiso (1988)
The reason why this review will be very synthetized is because sometimes 
there are things which can not be described or explained by words.
Well, I think CINEMA PARADISO is in this conditions.
First of all, I must say that CINEMA PARADISO is, in my opinion, the most 
beautifull movie I ever saw in my all life and I'm sure that it will be 
difficult to see another movie as good as it in the next years.
CINEMA PARADISO is a great homage to the cinema; it's a story (perhaps a 
lesson) of love and friendship between people; it's a very particular view 
about life and dreams.
Everybody who sees CINEMA PARADISO can not be indifferent to the 
simplicity and, at the same time, the power of its message.
I congratulate Giuseppe Tornatore for his magnificent work, as well as 
Philippe Noiret and Salvatore Cascio, whose performances as Alfredo and 
Toto will be saved, forever, in the golden pages of Cinema History.
CINEMA PARADISO is more than a film to be seen, it's a film to be felt by 
our heart.

Title
Review for Braveheart (1995)
Along his carreer, Mel Gibson has collected several successes, not only 
from an economic point of view but also from an artistic point of view. 
For all that, I think no one could guess the skills and abilities now 
disclosed in BRAVEHEART.
The australian actor decided to produce and direct a film about Sir 
William Wallace, a popular Scotch hero of the 13th Century, where he 
would also perform the principal role.
Accepting so huge challenge, Mel Gibson run the risk of stain all his 
work of years, with a suppoosed failure, just to see recognized, by 
everyone, all his potentialities and, that way,to consolidate his position 
in Hollywood. It was, definitely, an enormous risk but I'm sure Mel knew 
exactly well what he was going to face.
BRAVEHEART is, in fact, a magnificent and magisterial film. For three 
hours we are completely absorbed by the narrative's rhyitm which never 
gives place to a single moment of monotony or uninterest.
The William Wallace's story is the story of so many others brave 
liberty's defenders who fought and gave the life for that essential 
value, along the centuries. 
Seeing himself and his people victims of injustices and violent 
repression, William Wallace dares to face the powerful Edward I, King of 
England, in a war by the autonomy of Scotland. As the victories succeed 
the number of fighters with Wallace goes growing up. His courage and 
inteligence are admired by everyone, including the princess Isabelle of 
Wales, wife of Edward's son.
However, William Wallace was also surrounded by enemies and some of them 
were closer than he thought.
BRAVEHEART may not be an historically corrected movie but the nature of 
its message make us think about the importance that we give to Liberty, 
nowadays.
Mel Gibson directs with a lot of brilliancy a brilliant cast. Patrick 
McGoohan has a very nice performance as Edward I, the King Longshank. The 
scene when he waits for the death and loses his voice is really good. 
Sophie Marceau, as princess Isabelle, has along the movie no more than 
fifteen minutes of performance but Mel Gibson gave to those minutes such 
a very special treatment that princess Isabelle soon becomes one of the 
major characters in BRAVEHEART. I also liked the performances of Angus 
MacFadyen, as Robert the Bruce, and, of course, Mel Gibson, as William 
Wallace. However, I think this time the Mel Gibson's work as director was 
much better than his work as actor.
The excellent music composed by James Horner is another thing that helps 
BRAVEHEART to be the success that it really is. When we join that music 
to the beautiful Scotch landscapes, view by the camera of John Toll, then 
we realize all the beauty of this film.
BRAVEHEART is, in my opinion, one of the best movies of 1995!
I've heard some people saying that Mel Gibson is gonna be a new David Lean.
For now, let's see if BRAVEHEART equalizes the 6 oscars of LAWRENCE OF 
ARABIA. It won't be easy! It's gonna be one more challenge for Mel Gibson.    
