Authors
John M. Bozeman
Number of Reviews
5

Title
Review for Sirens (1994)
     The movie reviewer for the Charlottesville regional arts newspaper
hates most new movies, so when he called SIRENS a "cheesy bit of soft
core porn [that] masquerades as a meditation of repression and sexual
liberation," I thought that he was exaggerating.  Unfortunately, he was
not.  Not since the unfortunate film adaptation of LADY CHATTERLY'S
LOVER (starring Sylvia Crystal) have I seen such a slick, high-budget,
and clumsy attempt at dealing with sexuality on the silver screen.
     The basic story goes as follows: an Australian painter (played by
Sam Neill) is creating a stir as a result of his voluptuous paintings
of classical subjects.  The Church dispatches an English minister (Hugh
Grant), accompanied by his wife (Tara Fitzgerald) to try to persuade
him to tone down the brazen nudity found in the artwork.  In the face
of cavorting, flirtatious, unbelievably beautiful models, the minister
remains affable but resolute in his quest--but wait!  His wife, against
her will, comes to appreciate the earthy passion on display here,
eventually sharing a night of ecstasy with the seemingly handicapped
(supposedly almost blind and perhaps mute) handyman with the body of
Adonis.  We also see the prejudice and hypocrisy of the nearby
townspeople, who shun the artist and his models while clandestinely
longing to engage in the very acts that he portrays in his work.
     When it comes to symbolism, this film surely puts the "b" back in
"subtle."  Like THE FISHER KING, SIRENS is laden with pretentious
symbolism that hits one in the face again and again; one can almost
hear the film's creators patting themselves on the back over their own
cleverness.  On the one hand we have the minister, representing dry,
intellectual, passionless, asexual, conventional, dull traditional
reason; on the other we have joy, passion, intensity, sexuality, and
artistic spontaneity represented by the artist and his crew of
mischievous vixens.  I suppose that the minister's wife is supposed to
represent us, the audience, who for a while partakes of the sublime
essence of raw art, but who in the end goes back--though leavened a
bit, and even perking up her rather bookish husband.
     In spite of these limitations (along with a few sex scenes so
pretentious as to be embarrassing), this movie does have some redeeming
qualities--but probably not the ones that the film's creators
intended.  Far more than the silly, prevalent ideology of sexual
liberation, the most impressive aspect of the film was the occasional
humanity that creeps in:  the frustration of the models with their
being shunned by the townsfolk; the superficially silly, but in
actuality profound devotion of the minister for his wife, despite his
knowledge of her participation in activities with lesbian sexual
overtones; the minister's liking and apparently honest concern for one
of the younger models.
     Indeed, I suppose I am a bit of a conservative, but I found the
minister to be the most enviable person of the bunch, and for this I
commend the producers.  Rather than being portrayed as a stodgy,
doctrinaire fuddy-duddy, he is intelligent, well-read, honest,
generally faithful, and (within his context) tolerant of the
narcissistic, hedonistic silliness going on around him.  Both he and
his wife retain an honest ability to care for others, in the face heady
passions with strong undercurrents of insincerity bordering, in some
cases, on duplicity.
Overall grade:  C+ (OK for a half-price matinee)

Title
Review for True Lies (1994)
     I love a good movie that skillfully unites a variety of genres.
Indeed, the "Lethal Weapon" series, in the mind of this reviewer, is a
modern classic as a result of its brilliant mixing of thriller, comic,
and tragic elements.  Achieving such a blend also appears to have been
the goal of the makers of TRUE LIES, in which an agent for a
super-secret government agency unintentionally finds his family
involved as he fights a ring of crazed Muslim terrorists intent on
setting off nuclear bombs in the United States.
     Our hero, played by none other than Arnold Schwarzenegger, leads
a double life.  Supposedly, he is a mild-mannered computer salesman.
In fact, he is so mild mannered that his wife (Jamie Lee Curtis) is
about to have an affair with a used-car salesman posing as a secret
agent, simply to give her life more purpose and pizazz.  Before long,
however, she finds herself involved in real life exploits, as she
herself is accidentally vacuumed up along with her husband the
terrorists.
     TRUE LIES attempts to combine the elements of thriller and
domestic comedy.  While a number of reviewers have found the movie to
be successful in this endeavor, this one is forced to take a much more
moderate tone.  It is true that there are some genuinely funny moments
in the purposely overplayed scenes, as in the case of Arnie's initial
encounter with his wife's would-be lover.  And some of the chase
scenes--such as a motorcycle-and-horse chase through an expensive
hotel--are also quite entertaining.  But there are also times when the
action veers from the merely highly improbable into the simply
impossible, such as when a dropped gun manages to kill a sizable number
of bad guys while leaving the heros undamaged.
     Also, some scenes dragged on too long, and could have used more
editing.  A couple of these were not only lengthy; they were also
embarrassing and gave rise to a sense of moral outrage, as our "hero"
uses his access to government facilities not merely to follow, but also
to psychologically torture his wife on two occasions.
     TRUE LIES is thus a mixed bag.  Some aspects of the movie are
excellent, but there are also substantial flaws.  I would suggest it is
good for a matinee or a "bargain" theater, but am less enthusiastic
about it as a full price blockbuster.

Title
Review for Forrest Gump (1994)
     In general, I tend to avoid plays and movies that I think will be
sappy and/or overly sentimental--not because I have an intrinsic
dislike for them, but because they are such a hit-or-miss affair.  A
good production of DEATH OF A SALESMAN left me misty-eyed.  A STAR IS
BORN had me wishing that the guy had killed himself a lot sooner than
he did.  Thus, it was with much reluctance that I went to see FORREST
GUMP.  I must say, however, that I was most pleasantly surprised by
what I found.
     Forest Gump is a man with not particularly bright prospects.  Born
in rural Alabama, he has a curved spine and a low IQ.  He does have a
few things going for him, though:  a resourceful mother (Sally Field)
who loves him, one friend who helps him through school, a good heart,
and a lot of luck.  Running from bullies allows him to discover a
talents that carry him though college and the army and eventually to
run a successful business.
     But, as the cliche goes, arrival at the destination is not as
important is the journey.  Gump wears many hats along the way to his
destiny, and his simple, direct approach to life is usually a blessing
to those around him.  Indeed, while a lot has been said about the
film's spectacular special effects, these are overshadowed by the sheer
humanity of the story.  The plot itself is not terribly original
(boy-meets-girl, boy-loses-girl, boy-becomes-famous-and-maybe-gets-girl)
and the underlying theme (do your job, work hard, be yourself, and you
will do well) is rather conservative.  Instead the movie is successful
through old-fashioned cinematic virtues such as characterization,
pacing, and irony.  Gump, brilliantly played by Tom Hanks, allows us to
perceive our world through the eyes of a simpleton, and thus see how
funny--and how stupid, and how sad, and occasionally how heroic--people
can be.  The result is a film that is sometimes funny, sometimes sad,
but always engrossing.
Overall rating:  A (worth seeing even at full price)

Title
Review for Batman & Robin (1997)
    Tonight I made it to a sneak preview of _Batman and Robin_,
the new Batman movie.  Featured is George Clooney as the newest
incarnation of Batman, with Chris O'Donnell returning as his side-kick 
Robin.  Joining the caped crusaders is Alicia Silverstone as Bat Girl--
who is not the police commissioner's daughter this time (which is
just as well, as most of the police here seem as dumb as a box of
rocks), but rather as Alfred's niece, Barbara, who comes to visit
and then stays after getting kicked out of a posh school somewhere.
And finally, there are the Bad Guys--Uma Therman as Poison Ivy,
and "Ah-nold" Schwarzenegger as Mr. Freeze.
   The strongest part of the movie is certainly not the plot, 
which would have been hard to follow had the film not been
so amazingly unsubtle.  In fact, several plots vie for attention:
on the one hand, there are super villains who must be created
and who then begin rampaging through Gothem City.  However, there
are also problems at home:  Robin is chaffing under Batman's
overly protective tutelage.  Alfred's neice feels that Alfred
has been exploited by Bruce Wayne.  And, worst of all, Alfred
himself is dying.  These various threads do manage to remain
at least tenuously connected throughout the entire movie,
though perhaps at the cost of some depth of characterization.
   But if plot is not the film's forte, what is?  The answer
would probably be spectacle.  On many occassions the film goes
over the top--and keeps on going, and going, and going...
The action is incredible, to the point of being at time preposterous.
The art direction and city design isn't just eye-catching, it is
eye-popping.  The ulimate goal  of  the villains isn't just
wealth, or even world conquest--it is human extinction.  And
in the Bat Cave, the weighty issues of trust and loyalty
are examined.
   So what to make of the film?  On the one hand, we have a
somewhat weak plot.  On the other, we have over-the-top action,
visuals, and melodrama galore.  What makes this combination work
as well as it does is the vital element of humor, which somehow
keeps the film chugging merrily along.  Each of the stars 
have their share of one-liners that serves
both to lighten things up and to humanize the characters.
And, for once, the bad guys don't get all the good lines.
One example:  when Batman and Robin first encounter Barbara
in costume after a fight, they ask her who she is.  
"Bat Girl," she replies.  Batman muses, "That's not very 
politically correct.  How about `Bat Woman'?  Or `Bat Person'?"
   There is also a very funny scene when Batman and Robin meet
Poison Ivy at a charity auction, and she enchants them with
a pheromone dust.  The two heros proceed to bid for her hand.
"One million!" says Batman.  "Two million!" says Robin.
Batman is shocked, as whispers, "You don't have two million!"
Robin replies and says, "I'll borrow it form you!"  
   In conclusion, I would say that the movie rates about
3 stars on a four star scale.  While the the film is a bit long
(about 2 1/2 hours, including previews), contains some serious
flaws in logic, and has special effects that vary from impressive
to just silly, its humor and sheer audacity score a number 
of points.  Also, some of the flaws of the prior movies of 
the series are corrected:  the villains are better drawn and
have interesting motivations; also, one villian does not overshadow 
the other in appeal (as the Cat Woman did the Penguin, or as the 
Riddler did Two-Face).  Clooney is less of a block of wood than
Val Kilmer was.  And gadgets do not overshadow characterization
as badly as in the past.

Title
Review for Fifth Element, The (1997)
Trailers for the 5TH ELEMENT have made made people wonder:
is the movie going to be another crummy sci-fi big budget
bomb done by people who don't understand the genre?  Or may
it's the "Star Wars of the '90"?  
The answer to this is:  It is neither.  The best way that
I can describe it is to say it is like H. R. Giger did 
"Blade Runner."  And made it a comedy.  
A description of the plot doesn't really do the film 
justice.  Most of the film is set about 200 years in the
future. Bruce Willis plays a down and out
cab driver, who used to be a crack special forces military.
One day he happens across a beautiful space alien (actually,
she's a clone of one in human form--it's a little hard
to explain) who, due to a big misunderstanding, is running
from the police.  Fortunately, Willis has just been 
assigned to hunt down some alien artifacts needed to save
the world from a really evil fate.  The same one that the
alien is looking for for the same purpose.  Too bad that
the Bad Guys--actually, several sets of bad guys--
are also looking for them, too.  Mayhem of course
ensues.
The best thing that can be said about the movie is that
it deals with some pretty heavy subjects (the destruction
of the world by evil forces) in a light-hearted manner.
In a way slightly like "Die Hard" and/or "Lethal Weapon,"
serious topics and violence alternate with very funny
events.
Other important stuff:  the acting is pretty good.  Bruce Willis
does a good job, as does the (cloned) alien (played by Milla
Jovovich).  And the main bad guy, played by Gary Oldman,
is well-done--sinister, yet with a comic/ironic edge.  
The sound track is very interesting, and the art direction
and some costumes are outstanding.  And there are a few
parodies of somebody who seems suspiciously like an artist
formerly known as Prince.
The film runs (with trailers) about 2 1/2 hours, but doesn't
seem that long.  Finally,  I would note that the people I 
was there with seemed to enjoy the film at least as much
as myself.  
