Authors
David Cromwell
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Wes Craven's New Nightmare (1994)
     All the good reviews you've been seeing about this movie are right
on target.  Not only is this a good horror movie; it's simply a good
movie period.  The intelligence behind this movie is so far above your
average dead teenager movie that it's practically in another
dimension.  The movie is also well-crafted, the production values are
excellent, and the pacing is wonderful.  There's not a single dead spot
in the whole film.
     I went to this movie because my teenage son and his friend wanted
to go.  I was a little leery about it, so one of the factors that
created tension in the movie for me is that I was always wondering
"when is he going to show something truly revolting; something that
makes me wish I hadn't come" (as in CALIGULA or I SPIT ON YOUR GRAVE).
The good news is that this movie always stays within the bounds of the
contract between filmmaker and viewer implicit in the old-time, classic
horror movies/psychological thrillers.  You see the shadow on the
curtain, you hear the screams, you see the blood-stained water spiral
down the drain, but you never see the knife enter the body.  In the
best Alfred Hitchcock tradition, the violence in this movie, at least
the violence that occurs in reality, is all implied.
     There is a scene in a morgue where the sheet covering a corpse is
lifted up only enough to see the face of the victim and only the
*beginning* of the claw marks that supposedly run the length of the
entire torso, which we're given to believe has been torn apart.  When
the sheet is lifted again for better look, you don't see much more than
you did the first time, but you do see the reaction of the person
viewing it.  My son observed that this film could be shown on TV
without any cuts.  However, it probably won't.  It is so intense and
scary, that my eight-year-old daughter would be *seriously* traumatized
by watching it.
     The best part of this movie is its complexity and the interworking
multiple levels of reality.  Wes Craven has created an amazingly
complete and consistent world, with all its different levels tied
seamlessly together.  Even the cliched character of Freddie is made
believable within the context of the film.
     Craven also has some fun on the side, throwing in some ironic
commentary about the effects of modern horror movies on kids, making
conscious reference to horror movies of the past, and observing a
number of time-honored horror film conventions.
     The first time I saw this movie, it was an experience.  When I go
back to see it again, it will be to watch for the details I missed the
first time and to appreciate the craft with which it was made.
