Authors
Pete Croatto
Number of Reviews
19

Title
Review for Soul Survivors (2001)
For more reviews and movie trailers, visit http://www.joblo.com/
PLOT:
Two teen couples go to a church party, drink and then drive. They get into an
accident. One of the guys dies, but his girlfriend continues to see him in her
life, and has nightmares. What's the deal? Watch the movie and "sorta" find
out...
CRITIQUE:
A mind-fuck movie for the teen generation that touches on a very cool idea, but
presents it in a very bad package. Which is what makes this review an even
harder one to write, since I generally applaud films which attempt to break the
mold, mess with your head and such (LOST HIGHWAY & MEMENTO), but there are good
and bad ways of making all types of films, and these folks just didn't snag this
one correctly. They seem to have taken this pretty neat concept, but executed it
terribly. So what are the problems with the movie? Well, its main problem is
that it's simply too jumbled. It starts off "normal" but then downshifts into
this "fantasy" world in which you, as an audience member, have no idea what's
going on. There are dreams, there are characters coming back from the dead,
there are others who look like the dead, there are strange apparitions, there
are disappearances, there are a looooot of chase scenes, there are tons of weird
things that happen, and most of it is simply not explained. Now I personally
don't mind trying to unravel a film every now and then, but when all it does is
give me the same clue over and over again, I get kind of fed up after a while,
which is this film's biggest problem. It's obviously got this big secret to
hide, but it seems to want to hide it completely until its final five minutes.
And do they make things entertaining, thrilling or even engaging, in the
meantime? Not really.
The sad part is that the Arrow and I both dig on flicks like this, so we
actually figured most of it out by the half-way point, so all of the strangeness
after that did start to make a little bit of sense, but it still didn't the make
the film all that more entertaining. I guess the bottom line with movies like
this is that you should always make sure that the audience is "into it" even
before they are given the secret password to enter your world of understanding.
I mean, showing Melissa Sagemiller running away from visions for about 20
minutes throughout the movie is just plain lazy!! Okay, we get it...there are
people chasing her and we don't know who they are. Do we really need to see it
over and over again? How about giving us different scenes offering further
insight into all of the strangeness going down in the movie? Apparently, the
studio took this film away from its director and chopped it up themselves, and
it shows. There might've been a pretty decent teen mind-fuck movie in here
somewhere, but I guess "the suits" decided that turning it into a music video
with little edge, would make more sense. The actors are pretty good for the most
part, although Wes Bentley just seemed to be playing the exact same character
that he did in AMERICAN BEAUTY, only in a new neighborhood. But my biggest kudos
go out to Sagemiller, who holds her own throughout the entire film, and actually
has you feeling her character's unraveling.
Overall, the film doesn't stick because it doesn't entertain, it's confusing, it
rarely excites and it feels pretty redundant for most of its runtime, despite a
pretty cool ending and explanation to all of the craziness that came before it.
Oh, and by the way, this is not a horror or teen slasher flick...it's just
packaged to look that way because someone is apparently assuming that the genre
is still hot with the kids. It also wrapped production two years ago and has
been sitting on the shelves ever since. Whatever...skip it!
Where's JoBlo coming from?
A Nightmare of Elm Street 3 (7/10) - Blair Witch 2 (7/10) - The Crow (9/10) -
The Crow: Salvation (4/10) - Lost Highway (10/10) - Memento (10/10) - The Others
(9/10) - Stir of Echoes (8/10)

Title
Review for Pane e tulipani (2000)
An unhappy Italian housewife, a lonely waiter, a goofy masseuse, lots of
love, and gorgeous scenery all come together in Bread and Tulips, which
proves charming despite its covering of predictable, well-worn material.
The story concerns the aforementioned housewife, Rosalba Barletta (Licia
Maglietta) who accidentally becomes separated from her immediate family
while on vacation.  Instead of waiting for a ride home, Rosalba opts not
to go home to her Italian town, but to instead hitchhike to Venice. 
Upon arriving, she tells her self-centered husband, Mimmo (an excellent
Antonio Catania) that she'll be home in a few days.
Of course, that doesn't happen, as Rosalba quickly gains a level of
independence that has been unattainable in her past life of scrubbing
floors and buying groceries.  In what seems like days, she moves in with
lonely, suicidal waiter Fernando (Bruno Ganz), gets a job as a florist,
learns the accordion, and befriends her neighbor -- a wacky holistic
masseuse named Grazia (Marina Massironi).  Rosalba, who is first seen
wearing a gaudy stretch pants outfit, starts wearing sexy dresses and
getting closer to Fernando.
I can think of at least five other (American) movies (including Fried
Green Tomatoes and An Unmarried Woman) that are more than similar to
Bread and Tulips.  But Maglietta and Ganz, who act with restraint and
care, help Bread and Tulips from becoming a tired retread.  Ganz plays
the suicidal waiter role with a solemn, sometimes playful dignity that
is a joy to watch, while Maglietta never overreacts to her growing
comfort with the outside world.  Throughout the movie, Maglietta has an
easygoing, confident demeanor, which makes it very easy to root for her
and her growing attraction for Ganz's character. The gorgeous scenery of
moonlit town squares and sparkling rivers provides a perfect love story
backdrop -- you just might want to ask the attractive stranger in the
seat behind you for coffee after the lights come up.
Director and co-writer Silvio Soldini must get credit for sprinkling the
movie with effective goofy humor.  The cheap Mimmo, desperate to find
his wife (after all, he needs his shirts ironed and his mistress won't
do it), hires a job applicant (Giuseppe Battiston) at his bathroom
supply firm to do the job.  The reason?  Mimmo discovers that the
prospective plumber loves detective stories.  The novice detective's
various misfortunes, including him saying goodbye to his weepy mother,
are very funny.
Unfortunately, there are flaws that somewhat spoil Bread and Tulips'
cheery tone.  Rosalba is bothered by several surreal dreams during her
time in Venice, which bring the movie to a halt.  It's like putting a
gunfight in a Nora Ephron movie.  Several details in Fernando's life
also never get proper closure, including his suicidal tendencies.  Early
in the movie, he nearly hangs himself before Rosalba knocks on his
apartment door.  After that, Fernando's step towards death is never made
reference to, probably because Soldini wanted to include a lukewarm,
underdeveloped subplot about Fernando's stormy past.  It seems more like
a desperate attempt to pump up the drama in a plot that doesn't need
any.
But there aren't a lot of overwhelming negatives in Bread and Tulips. 
The movie is fun and romantic, with beautiful scenery and characters
whose lives we'd like to live if we had the nerve... or if our passports
weren't missing. 
Director: Silvio Soldini
Producer: Daniele Maggioni
Writer: Silvio Soldini, Doriana Leondeff
Starring: Licia Maglietta, Bruno Ganz, Antonio Catania, Marina
Massironi, Giuseppe Battiston, Felice Andreasi
http://www.luce.it/film/panneetulipani
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com

Title
Review for Get Over It (2001)
Get Over It at least has one thing that a lot of other high school
movies don't:  earnest, affable leads.  It also has all of the key flaws
that make going to teen movies so risky:  an almost unbearable goofy
streak, a plot with the strength of a newborn fawn, and bland supporting
characters.
The movie makes the same mistakes over and over and eventually drains
one's patience, but yet I stuck around because the leads played kids I
would have liked to know.
Kirsten Dunst (Bring It On) plays an intelligent, friendly musical
talent, who for reasons never explained in the movie, helps a schoolmate
(Ben Foster) win back the girlfriend (Melissa Sagemiller) who dumped
him.  Dunst coaches him through an audition for the school musical,
which stars Sagemiller.
But nothing comes easy.  Dunst and Foster start falling in love, while
Foster still has the hots for Sagemiller, who is seeing her co-star
(Shane West).  Meanwhile, events conspire to force Foster to star
opposite the two girls he has feelings for.
Dunst and Foster (a real-life couple) are perfect for the leads.  He has
a very appealing, laid-back charm, while she displays a sweet, concerned
demeanor that makes her such a good pal here.  Together, they're fun to
watch.
Unfortunately, most of their (and the movie's) appeal gets lost among
the stupid activities that dominate the plot--a chronically humping dog,
punch spiked with vomit, a trip to a sex club.  Screenwriter R. Lee
Fleming seemingly wants his teenage audience constantly occupied, an
insulting and disrupting tactic.
By going the crass route, Fleming neglects developing most of the
supporting characters.  Foster's friends (Colin Hanks and "Thong Song"
crooner Sisqo) don't have personalities.  They're just extras with more
face time.  Dunst's friend (Mila Kunis from That 70's Show) appears to
have been cast simply because they needed at least one more attractive
girl to get the green light from Miramax.
Foster's sex therapist parents (Swoosie Kurtz and Ed Begley Jr.) are
also poorly written.  They readily accept their son's sexual/social
adventures.  Boring.  It'd be funnier if the parents were completely
shocked at everything their son did.  The only effective supporting
actor is Martin Short, who plays his typically unhinged self as the
school musical's obnoxious director.
Here he's doing a variation of his flamboyantly blunt talent agent from
The Big Picture, but it's still fun to watch him dance like a Backstreet
Boy and to perkily tell Dunst of her performance: "Yes, it's just not
very good."
Short's production of A Midsummer Night's Dream (think Grease meets
Shakespeare) is one of the movie's bright spots, as is a musical number
featuring Foster walking in lovelorn shame as singer Vitamin C and an
array of characters dance to "Love Will Keep Us Together."
Those moments of bubbly charm come in fits and starts, and the wait
requires lots of patience.  Either that or a predilection for watching
dogs hump objects.
Director: Tommy O'Haver
Producers: Michael Burns, Marc Butan, Paul Feldsher, Richard Hull,
Louise Rosner
Writer: R. Lee Fleming
Starring: Kirsten Dunst, Ben Foster, Shane West, Martin Short, Sisqo,
Colin Hanks, Mila Kunis, Swoosie Kurtz, Ed Begley Jr.
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com

Title
Review for Saving Grace (2000)
filmcritic.com presents a review from staff member Pete Croatto.
You can find the review with full credits at
http://filmcritic.com/misc/emporium.nsf/2a460f93626cd4678625624c007f2b46/69b77585c9487f348825695500652d49?OpenDocument
There is comic potential in Saving Grace, but its two interesting main
characters and their unusual business arrangement are buried under a
mound of predictable, weathered material.
In the movie, a middle-aged English widow (Brenda Blethyn) is left with
a stack of debts after her philandering dope of a husband commits
suicide.  Her Scottish gardener (Craig Ferguson of the irksome Drew
Carey Show) needs help growing hemp and Blethyn just happens to have a
green thumb.  With his insistence, they soon grow tons of weed in her
huge greenhouse, turning it into a stoner's wet dream.
Writers Mark Crowdy and Craig Ferguson (who also produced) don't flesh
out this scenario, though.  Blethyn does a fine job in the title role
and makes the film palatable.  With her sing-songy delivery and matronly
looks, there is a good foundation for laughs.  The scene of her dressed
like Superfly's aunt when she looks for London drug buyers is a hoot.
But Blethyn, a two-time Academy Award-nominated actress, never gets a
chance to interpret or broaden the role.  The film opts to throw in a
bunch of drowsy, sitcomish subplots that dwarf development on all
fronts.  Ferguson's fisher girlfriend is pregnant, but can't tell him
the happy news.  Director Nigel Cole should feel proud.  That device has
now officially been used more times than penicillin.  Blethyn meets,
befriends and uses her husband's mistress to get connected with a drug
dealer.  The whole bizarre chain of events doesn't get played for
laughs-a botched comic opportunity.
Ultimately, this all leads to Blethyn and Ferguson being chased by drug
dealing thugs and a corporate boss who wants his debt paid.  Yes, by the
end it's officially become the next Love Bug movie-Herbie Gets High.
The worst thing about Saving Grace is that the drug aspect isn't used
with any flair, further highlighting the film's bland, uncreative core. 
Every reefer joke involves button-down people acting goofy-whether it be
Blethyn laughing uncontrollably when taking a hit of her own stash, or a
garden party getting funky when she burns her considerable cash crop.
Come on.  Don't Ferguson and Crowdy know the best drug jokes come from
the fried responses, but not people acting like Woodstock bozos? 
Remember Jack Nicholson talking about aliens in Easy Rider?  Or Rory
Cochran describing Martha and George Washington as America's hemp
harvesting pioneers in Dazed and Confused?
Those were funny, unforgettable scenes.  Saving Grace is so bent on
thinking that just getting high is a hoot, that Blethyn's and Ferguson's
scheme comes across as an opportunity to only showcase this stupid
behavior.  That's not good. 
The bottom line is that Saving Grace doesn't bother to try.  It goes for
the easiest way out, the least amount of effort.  It tries to float
solely on the notion of a spinster growing drugs, buoyed by recycled
subplots.
        Director:  Nigel Cole
        Producers: Steve Clark Hall (line), Mark Crowdy, Craig Ferguson
(co-producer), Torsten Leschly (co-producer), Xavier Marchand (executive
producer), Cat Villiers (executive producer)
        Writers: Mark Crowdy and Craig Ferguson
Starring: Brenda Blethyn, Craig Ferguson, Martin Clunes, Tcheky Karyo,
Jamie Foreman, Valerie Edmond, Leslie Phillips
http://www.saving-grace-movie.com/index_flash.html
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?=tagfilmcriticom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!

Title
Review for Duets (2000)
filmcritic.com presents a review from staff member Pete Croatto.
You can find the review with full credits at
http://filmcritic.com/misc/emporium.nsf/2a460f93626cd4678625624c007f2b46/c07fa1f8af5471768825695c00674d56?OpenDocument
        In Duets, karaoke bars dominate the American Western landscape like
Taco Bells and Starbucks.  They're in every major city and full of hot,
young people swaying while marginally talented participants sing Weather
Girls covers.
Karaoke is a craze, the way dandruff or waxy ears are a craze.  I like
to think I'm pretty pop culture savvy, thanks to years of reading
Rolling Stone and Entertainment Weekly.  But I don't remember reading
one article about karaoke clubs being the discos of our times.
        The absurdity of introducing karaoke as a happening trend is the first
of many flaws in Bruce Paltrow's bafflingly bad movie, which features
three duos struggling with each other while traveling to Omaha for a
$5,000 karaoke contest.
        We have the rugged, wandering karaoke hustler (this is not a joke)
played by Huey Lewis(!).  He meets his long-lost, family happy daughter
(Gwyneth Paltrow, Bruce's daughter) after her mother dies.
Then we have a corporate, married schmoe (the talented Paul Giamatti),
chucking it all away after a bad day at the office.  Warbling through
Todd Rundgren's "Hello It's Me" in a New Mexico joint revives his
spirits, which he shares with the escaped convict hitchhiker he picks up
(Andre Braugher).
I'm not even going to bother describing the circumstances that bring
Felcity's Scott Speedman and Payback's Maria Bello together.  You've
probably run away screaming by now.  If not, thanks for keeping up.
Like most bad movies, the characters are rehashed.  I've seen Gwyneth
Paltrow and Lewis' situation countless time, mostly on daytime talk
shows.  Giamatti and Braugher have a kind of Odd Couple thing going. 
Bello plays another slut with a heart of gold, while Speedman is looking
for spiritual guidance.
Some of these people can act, especially Paltrow and Giamatti.  There
might be hope if screenwriter John Byrum hadn't included a stupid road
movie plot and vignette format, turning them into faceless dramatics. 
Since their development stops at scene one, they sound like a broken
record throughout the entire film.  Giamatti is the worst culprit,
blathering on endlessly about the need to return to old-fashioned
American values.  With more background this could have been interesting,
but instead it's like being hit over the head with a mallet.
This lack of character care also leads to more questions than the SATs. 
What caused Bello, who gets what she wants through her body, on her
path?  If Lewis has been away his family for so long, who gave him a
call that his lover was dead?  And why did he even bother to show up? 
What did Braugher do to land in jail, and why does he take a shine to
Giamatti, instead of robbing the guy?
The movie's lone bright spot is that the singing is okay.  At least it's
not
as bad as Woody Allen's misguided musical Everyone Says I Love You. 
Gwyneth in particular, sounds great.
But I didn't really enjoy the musical numbers, save for Gwyneth's
climatic duet with Lewis.  To me, karaoke is a self-indulgent,
embarrassing act that is best left in the privacy of one's own home. 
With the shades pulled.  And the doors locked.  I can't buy singing as
any kind of triumph of the will, as portrayed here.
For those die-hard karaoke fans (or hustlers) that go from dive to dive
craving for the next Leo Sayer tune to cover, you'll love it.  All five
of you.
Director: Bruce Paltrow
Producer: Bruce Paltrow, Kevin Jones, John Byrum
Writer: John Byrum
Starring: Gwyneth Paltrow, Huey Lewis, Paul Giamatti, Andre Braugher,
Maria Bello, Scott Speedman
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!

Title
Review for Tuesdays with Morrie (1999) (TV)
I didn't read Mitch Albom's book, Tuesdays With Morrie, which spent
about two jillion years on the bestseller lists.  But based on the
movie, I can see why so many people bought the book and why it's ripe
for criticism.
As Brandeis University professor Morrie Schwartz's body deteriorated
from Lou Gehrig's Disease, former student Albom decided to record the
man's thoughts on an array of topics.  If the movie is anything like the
book, then Morrie sounds like the world's foremost pop psychologist.
And that's part of the problem I had watching the adaptation.  Albom
claims that Morrie was "a force" in the classroom, but he gets stuck
saying things like "once you learn how to die, you learn how to live." 
Albom is certainly a happier person for having talked to his teacher,
but I get the feeling he could have rented Old Yeller or watched a few
self-help infomercials and came out OK.
Sarcastic comments aside, I can't fault a made-for-TV movie that has
sturdy, sensitive performances and good intentions.  If I can be taught
about the values of life and not want to smack any of the characters
upside the head, then the movie can't be all that bad.
Hank Azaria (The Birdcage) plays Albom, a work-obsessed Detroit
sportswriter who is constantly on the go.  His world stops when he sees
a news special profiling Morrie's condition.  Some 15 years after
promising to keep in touch and not doing so, Albom decides to visit his
professor.  Pretty soon, they regularly meet on Tuesdays--Morrie's old
office hours.
Jack Lemmon plays Morrie, a man whose indomitable spirit is still whole
regardless of the medical obstacles he faces.  It's a role that could
have been played like a geriatric Patch Adams, but Lemmon (one of the
best actors of his generation) handles the role with grace.
Azaria, always an undervalued actor, does a good job and even sounds a
bit like Albom, a regular on ESPN.  Azaria has always had a slightly
cynical streak to him that makes him more human.  That trait serves him
especially well in this occasionally sudsy, but overall entertaining
fare.
Director: Mick Jackson
Producers: Kate Forte, Susan Heyer, Jennifer Ogden, Oprah Winfrey
Writer: Tom Rickman
Starring: Jack Lemmon, Hank Azaria, Wendy Moniz, Caroline Aaron
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com

Title
Review for Hardball (2001)
Michael Robbins' Hardball is quite the cinematic achievement.  In about
two hours, we get a glancing examination of ghetto life, a funeral with
a heartfelt eulogy, speeches about never giving up, a cache of cute kids
(including a fat one with asthma), a hard-luck gambler who finds
salvation in a good woman and a climactic "big game," where the
underdogs prove to have a bigger bite than anyone ever imagined.
All that's needed is a guy getting hit in the nuts and a food fight to
have the first film solely based on cinematic clichés.  I can't wait to
see the deleted scenes when it comes out on DVD.
Obviously, Hardball is a strikeout of a movie that never gets the bat
anywhere near the ball.  It stars Keanu Reeves as the aforementioned
gambler, who seems to owe every bookie in Chicago an amount of money
that rivals the gross national product of Guam.  Out of solutions, he
begs his successful corporate friend (the always welcome Mike McGlone)
to lend him $5,000.  Instead, McGlone offers Reeves the chance to help
him coach a youth baseball team from the projects for a nice weekly
stipend.
Reeves, who wants to keep his fingers, accepts the offer, but discovers
McGlone is only too happy to let him handle the team entirely.  The
drowsy-voiced protagonist must teach the sassy inner city kids the
baseball basics in a life of absentee parents and merciless gangs.  And
maybe, just maybe, they'll play in the big championship game.
One of the glorious surprises in the screenplay by John Gatins (Summer
Catch), adapted from Daniel Coyle's non-fiction book, is that there
aren't any.  The movie coasts from heartfelt moment to heartfelt moment
like a zombie.  That wouldn't be so bad, if the characters had an ounce
of subtlety or humanity to them.  Most of the kids' time is spent
yelling at each other, talking in slang and acting surprised.  There's
little that's naturally amusing about them, as they all seem to know the
cameras are rolling.  The worst of the lot is a tough-talking younger
player (DeWayne Warren) whose sole purpose, as the movie unfolds, is
being an emotional pawn, a tactic so utterly despicable I can't find the
right words to express myself.
The adults also don't fare well.  Reeves is impressively uninspiring as
the down-on-his-luck loser.  The character is poorly written, but Reeves
gives another charisma-free performance.  Every time he speaks, he
sounds like he just got up from a long nap and is gradually waking up. 
Kids are supposed to rally around this guy?  Diane Lane, who co-stars as
Reeves' obligatory love interest, remains a glowing screen presence (see
My Dog Skip for better proof).  It's too bad that her role here consists
of uttering lines like, "These kids trust you, and they don't trust
anyone!"  Then there's D.B. Sweeney as an evil rival coach and John
Hawkes as Reeves' scummy betting buddy and other unoriginal characters
you've seen before and hope never to see again.
I wanted Hardball to be good.  Robbins' Varsity Blues was a funny and
alternately taut tale of Texas high school football that had Ali Larter
smothered in whipped cream and Jon Voight sneering at everything that
moved.  I haven't seen Robbins' goofy Ready to Rumble in its entirety,
but I am intrigued that "Macho Man" Randy Savage and Martin Landau can
exist in the same movie without there being serious worldwide
repercussions.
Robbins obviously needs to go back to his forte -- making sports movies
for guys and not cutesy, cuddly pap such as Hardball, which also manages
to annoy and insult the audience.  Here's hoping that happens in the
immediate future.
Director: Michael Robbins
Producer: Tina Nides, Mike Nollins, Michael Robbins
Writer: John Gatins
Starring: Keanu Reeves, Diane Lane, John Hawkes, D.B. Sweeney, Mike
McGlone, DeWayne Warren
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com

Title
Review for American Rhapsody, An (2001)
An American Rhapsody offers us an example of teen acting gone
marvelously right.  As a 15-year-old who wants to rediscover her
Hungarian roots, Scarlett Johansson portrays the thrill and frustration
of being a teenager so perfectly that I don't ever want her to grow
up.   And her voice, with its cracked rage, only makes her desire to get
control in her life sound more convincing.
When Johansson (Ghost World) is on screen, An American Rhapsody has a
riveting passion and dramatic urgency that is found nowhere else in the
movie, which is based on director/screenwriter's Éva Gárdos life. 
Johansson's character, Suzanne, is left behind in Hungary as an infant
when her family stealthily moves to America circa 1950.  Six years
later, the young Suzanne is finally brought to America, where she joins
her parents, Margit and Peter (Nastassja Kinski and Tony Goldwyn) and
her older sister (Mae Whitman).  However, Suzanne is torn away from the
parents (Zsuzsa Czinkóczi and Balázs Galkó) of a family friend who
nurtured and protected her from government suspicion.
Suzanne has trouble fitting in with a world of hula-hoops and
hamburgers, running away several times.  At 15, she is still fleeing,
only this time to smoke cigarettes, make out, and dabble in other forms
of teenage rebellion.  This doesn't sit well with Margit, who soon
results to locking Suzanne in her bedroom.  When Suzanne finds a shotgun
in her closet and starts blasting away at her locked bedroom door, she
decides that a trip to Hungary will set things straight.
Until Johansson appears, the proceedings dawdle.  Gárdos, a longtime
film editor, spends too much time setting up the movie's powerful final
stretch.  A fascinating array of characters gets left in limbo, and a
load of potential powerhouse dramatic moments get ignored.  Margit, who
has come from an obviously wealthy upbringing, finds herself working as
a waitress and writing letters to anyone who could bring Suzanne to
America.  Peter, who dreams of running a publishing house in America,
ends up building airplanes.  Gárdos doesn't show how the couple reacted
to such a sudden social shift without their little girl.  There had to
be nights of terse bedroom conversations, quiet sobbing and
reassurances.  
And what about Margit's mother (Ágnes Bánfalvy), who spends time in
prison for protecting her family, including Suzanne?  Late in the movie,
she tells Suzanne she endured the time behind bars by thinking of fairy
tales to tell her grandchildren.  With a more experienced director (this
is Gardos' feature film directing debut), the possibilities for showing
the grandmother's distraction could have been fascinating.
The movie works best when Johansson is onscreen.  Scenes involving the
six-year-old Suzanne (Kelly Endresz-Banlaki) are also wonderful. 
There's not an ounce of stage mother gusto in her performance.  And
Gardos does craft some nice moments in her film where the pursuit of the
American dream tears at your roots.  A scene when Endresz-Banlaki calls
Kinski "lady" as she's tucked in is hard to forget.
Most of the movie, unfortunately, lacks emotional power.  America is a
nation of immigrants -- we all know stories of how our families made
sacrifices to get here.  In a movie about immigrants' pluck and grit, a
director can't just focus on a settling story.  We've heard that
before.  He or she must take pains to hit on a human level.  Gardos
sporadically does that in An American Rhapsody, but fortunately there's
enough evidence here to support she will be more accurate in the future.
Director: Éva Gárdos
Producer: Colleen Camp, Bonnie Timmermann
Writer: Éva Gárdos
Starring: Nastassja Kinski, Scarlett Johansson, Tony Goldwyn, Zsuzsa
Czinkóczi, Balázs Galkó, Ágnes Bánfalvy, Kelly Endresz-Banlaki, Mae
Whitman
http://www.paramountclassics.com/rhapsody
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com

Title
Review for Greenfingers (2000)
My summer was recently saved by two very different movies.  On opening
night, I saw American Pie 2 and laughed like a moron.  Then a few nights
later, I watched and thoroughly enjoyed Joel Hershman's Greenfingers
even though it didn't feature a trip to band camp, girl-on-girl action,
or Seann William Scott.
However, I felt just as good leaving American Pie 2 as I did after
leaving Greenfingers, which tells the offbeat tale of British murderer
Colin Briggs (Clive Owen of Croupier).  After spending roughly half of
his life behind bars, he is transferred to a more lenient facility,
Edgefield.  The picaresque, rustic prison allows its inmates to learn a
trade, while enjoying accommodations generally found at most colleges.
At first, Briggs doesn't want to be there.  He's used to living as a
prisoner and wants to be left alone.  However, his ailing roommate,
Fergus (David Kelly of Waking Ned Devine), wears Briggs down through his
benign nature.  The two become friends, with Fergus giving Colin a
packet of violet seeds as a Christmas gift.
Briggs is astonished when the violets grow in the limestone soil, and
begins a fight with three other prisoners when an errant soccer ball
smashes his beloved flowers.  After the prison's governor (Warren
Clarke) reprimands them, he's awed at what Briggs has accomplished.  And
he's struck by an idea -- Briggs, Fergus and the other men will grow a
garden on the prison's grounds.
Greenfingers, which is "inspired by actual events," becomes a bit like a
sports movie after that.  Despite their differences, the men come
together and through hard work and love earn a spot at the big game --
in this case a prestigious garden show.  One renegade, in this case,
Briggs, will prove to have talent.  Of course, love will also rear its
head (no, not "prison love").  To Hershman's credit, he doesn't pump up
the drama or try for cheap laughs, like last year's lame marijuana
comedy Saving Grace.  I had to keep pinching myself when I didn't see a
single scene of a hardened con sneezing over a pot of pansies, or the
men giving high-fives over a particularly stunning batch of wildflowers.
The movie deals with people and scores on that concept.  It's wonderful
seeing Briggs turn from a bitter prisoner to a man who cares again. 
Give credit to Owen for keeping his cool in a part that begs for
overacting.  His speech to the parole board about being reborn through
gardening is the best scene of its kind since Morgan Freeman's last
stand in The Shawshank Redemption.  Owen's bedside scenes with Kelly,
who lends the film a human touch, are a marvel to behold, emotionally
gripping without being sappy.
Written by Hershman, Greenfingers contains plenty of laughs.  Most come
courtesy of Helen Mirren, who shines as the world-class gardener who
works with the inmates but fears for her daughter Primrose (Natasha
Little) when she starts dating Briggs.  The mother can't believe what
he'll do if her daughter "burns the Sunday roast."
Nothing is forced in Greenfingers.  The funny lines come forth naturally
in conversations and not from punch lines.  Primrose and Briggs'
relationship takes awkward steps.  Even when Briggs decides to go back
to Edgefield, it's done for reasons of loyalty, not because the movie
requires him to do so.  After grimacing through the forced screwball
antics of movies like America's Sweethearts and The Princess Dairies,
it's an almost indescribable pleasure to see a director taking his time
to tell a story very well.
Director: Joel Hershman
Producer: Trudie Styler, Travis Swords, Daniel J. Victor
Writer: Joel Hershman
Starring: Clive Owen, Helen Mirren, David Kelly, Natasha Little, Warren
Clarke, Danny Dyer, Adam Fogerty, Paterson Joseph
http://www.greenfingersmovie.com
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com

Title
Review for Princess Diaries, The (2001)
Anne Hathaway is a gorgeous, young woman with a gentle screen charisma. 
It's hard to believe she will turn 19 this fall; she looks and presents
herself like a woman who knows all the answers.
This is someone who should not be the lead role in a movie about puberty
blues, but here she is.  In Garry Marshall's latest outing, The Princess
Diaries, Hathaway plays a smart, gawky 10th grader who learns she is the
heir to the throne of a small European country.
The news is broken to Hathaway by her long-lost grandmother (Julie
Andrews), queen of fictional Genovia, while she tends to business at the
country's embassy in San Francisco.  Genovia is in desperate need of a
ruler and needs Hathaway to take over after her father's death.  Despite
her doubts, California klutz Hathaway agrees to take "princess lessons"
from Andrews and trusted chauffer Hector Elizondo before deciding
whether to rule a country or take the SATs.
This is all very familiar territory for Marshall, who directed Pretty
Woman over a decade ago.  However, Pretty Woman worked because of a
brilliantly brash performance by a pre-superstar Julia Roberts and the
movie's take as an adult fairly tale.  With The Princess Diaries, there
isn't anything distinctive to make it particularly memorable.
Among the flaws in Gina Wendkos' script, based on Meg Cabot's novel, is
the constant reliance on Hathaway's clumsiness.  She breaks things, has
trouble putting on panty hose, falls down a lot.  I'd love to see the
day when a comedy doesn't have to feature a beautiful woman flailing
around like she has an inner ear problem.  Words can be just as funny
coming out of a woman's mouth as they can a man's.  Watch Madeline Kahn
in Young Frankenstein for proof.
The script also doesn't have the wink-wink humor (like Shrek) that makes
a family film appealing to adults.  While the goofiness and pretty cast
(teen siren Mandy Moore has a sizable role as Hathaway's nemesis) will
certainly satisfy kids, there's really not a lot for grown-ups to
enjoy.  Andrews and Elizondo (in Pretty Woman mode) give spirited
performances, but they don't get a lot to do.  However, a dance scene
between the two is the movie's sweetest moment and hints at what could
have been.
This is Hathaway's movie, which is both a good and a bad thing.  She's
positively stunning and shows talent despite the clunky plot.  However,
I have a major problem with her character.  Even in frizzy hair and
Elvis Costello glasses, she would be popular in just about any high
school in America.  You can only imagine what Hathaway looks like in
princess mode.
Still, the leggy, elegant Hathaway is the lead in a movie that takes a
somewhat serious look at the awkwardness of growing up and the value of
a person's character.  I saw the movie with an audience during a Friday
matinee, consisting mostly of kids who probably are or soon will be
going through the same problems.  Certainly, The Princess Diaries isn't
the only culprit of questionable adolescent casting:  Varsity Blues and
She's All That immediately come to mind as well.  In The Princess
Diaries, Hathaway's presence also deflates her character's regal
metamorphosis.  What exactly was there to transform in the first place?
Director: Garry Marshall
Producers: Whitney Houston, Debra Martin Chase, Mario Iscovich, Ellen H.
Schwartz
Writer: Gina Wendkos
Starring: Anne Hathaway, Julie Andrews, Hector Elizondo, Heather
Matarazzo, Mandy Moore, Caroline Goodall, Robert Schwartzman, Larry
Miller
http://disney.go.com/disneypictures/diaries
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com

Title
Review for Night of the Hunter, The (1955)
Until I saw The Night of the Hunter, it had been a long time since I had
gasped while watching a movie.  Forget The Others and The Deep End
(which veered toward strained dramatics), The Night of the Hunter is by
far the scariest movie I've seen so far this year.  Even though the
movie is nearly 50 years old and there's a not drop of blood to be seen.
Luckily, The Night of the Hunter, Charles Laughton's first and final
directing gig, has been restored by the UCLA Film and Television Archive
and is being re-released in October 2001.  So, there's still plenty of
time to spill your popcorn all over the place.
Robert Mitchum stars as Harry Powell, a reverend with a nasty habit of
courting and then killing widows for their cash.  His newest target is
young mother Willa Harper (Shelley Winters), whose murderer husband Ben
(Peter Graves) has hidden $10,000 somewhere.  Powell finds out about the
stash and decides to court Mrs. Harper after he's released and Ben is
hanged.  But finding the money isn't easy for Powell, who must contend
with his stepchildren (Billy Chapin and Sally Jane Bruce), who know
where the money is, but aren't telling.
The hard part about seeing a classic now is the pop culture monster has
usually drawn and quartered and then flaunted all the memorable moments,
thus ruining the spontaneity and adventure when we finally watch it for
the first time.  How many spoofs or salutes to the shower scene in
Psycho have we seen in other movies?  What about the brilliant baby
stroller sequence from Battleship Potemkin?  (No, I'm not blaming Brian
De Palma entirely for this sampling problem.)
Yes, there are some visual elements that other directors seem to have
borrowed from The Night of the Hunter.  Powell's "love" and "hate"
knuckle tattoos obviously influenced Spike Lee in Do the Right Thing
(remember Radio Raheem?).  And Powell's black suit, with black tie and
white shirt, could have shaped Quentin Tarantino's early visual style.
Seeing The Night of the Hunter for the first time, I was amazed at how
much it crackled with wicked wit and fright and how much intensity was
intact.  You can now sign me up as president of the Robert Mitchum Fan
Club.    He plays the role with a controlled malice that induces unease
every time he appears.  He's like the senior class president with an
evil streak.  If I ever need to stay awake, I'll just picture him
crooning, "Leaning... leaning...."  Any actor who wants to play a
character with a touch of evil should study his performance the way a
rabbinical student studies the Torah.
And credit must be handed out to Laughton and cinematographer Stanley
Cortez, who create a series of haunting, surreal shadowy images over the
rural Depression-era backdrop.  It's a testament to both men that
they're able to invigorate what has become a hackneyed storyline (kids
harassed by evil guardians) by sticking to the old maxim that we're more
scared by what we don't see.
Screenwriter and legendary film critic James Agee does a beautiful job
giving shape and substance to an array of supporting characters: the
drunk Birdie (James Gleason) who's haunted by his wife, and the Spoons
(Evelyn Varden and Walt Spoon) whose marriage has become a verbal
vaudeville act.
The only lapse is the movie's third act, when Pearl and John run away
from home and find a home with the motherly, Bible-reading Mrs. Cooper
(Lillian Gish).  Her showdown with Powell is memorable -- a battle done
with dueling hymns.  However, the whole segment feels a little rushed
and underdone, but it's still a thrill seeing the queen of the silent
film era handling a shotgun.
Do yourself favor and don't miss this if it comes to a nearby theater.
Note:  A series of revealing, but overlong, outtakes preceded the
movie.  The highlights included the legendary Laughton (who sounds
eerily like Mr. Pitt from Seinfeld) running Winters' lines with Mitchum,
and the adorable, tiny Bruce having trouble descending a coal pile. 
Hours more of such footage exists, as Laughton liked to keep the cameras
constantly rolling.
Screened as part of the 2001 New York Film Festival retrospectives
(feature story coming soon).
Director: Charles Laughton
Producer: Paul Gregory
Writer:  James Agee
Starring:  Robert Mitchum, Shelley Winters, Lillian Gish, Billy Chapin,
Sally Jane Bruce, Evelyn Varden, Don Beddoe, James Gleason, Peter Graves
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com

Title
Review for Gojira ni-sen mireniamu (1999)
filmcritic.com presents a review from staff member Pete Croatto.
You can find the review with full credits at
http://a.filmcritic.com/misc/emporium.nsf/2a460f93626cd4678625624c007f2b46/1e402d313516b33788256940005d200c?OpenDocument
I have a confession. Even though I am a movie junkie-I saw Eye of the
Beholder and yet I still watch movies-I've never seen any of the
original Godzillas. (Note that Godzilla 2000 is not a sequel to the U.S.
Godzilla released in 1998; it's the American release of a 1999 Godzilla
flick called Gojira ni-sen mireniamu.)
So, part of me was excited as I drove to the local multiplex to see
Godzilla 2000-the latest entry in an almost 50-year old franchise. This
was a long-awaited treat. I was expecting a goofy good time, complete
with bad dubbing, science fair level sets and a ludicrous plot line.
The last thing I expected was for the movie to be soboring. I can only
imagine what the theatre full of kids I saw this with felt.
You do get all of the "so bad they're good" traits so normally
associated with the franchise. But you have to sit through a snoozer
plot that has the organization of a Rorschach blot. It's a deal I wasn't
willing to accept.
Hiroshi Kashiwabara and Waturu Mimura's script crams in way too many
details, and in many cases, fails to follow up on them. The maneuver is
not only disconcerting, but gives the movie a permanent logy, weighty
feel.
Godzilla starts off destroying power plants and then just stops. Was it
a whim? A bold political statement? I don't know. Its foe, an ancient
meteor that looks like Prudential's logo, doesn't just fight the Beast
from the Far East. No, it's got to have life-saving powers, a plot to
erase "the data" from Japan, a desire to clone and the ability to become
a spaceship and then some kind of tentacled space creature.
There's a battle between the head of the Godzilla Prediction Unit
(Takehiro Murata) and a slimy government official (Hiroshi Abe) over the
handling of Godzilla, and personal issues. And then there's the plucky
news photographer and blah, blah, blah. It's like watching Magnolia all
over again-except without the good writing, keen sociological insight
and Aimee Mann songs.
What a waste. When the talking and the plot points stop hurtling at you,
Godzilla 2000 does the job-it's entertaining and goes down easy. The
action scenes are cheesy in their grandeur though a little sluggish. The
dubbing is nice and awful, with Murata sounding like he's in constant
need of a cough drop.
As for the dialogue, one line summarizes the goofiness factor: "Did
anyone see that flying rock go by?" This movie also marked the first
time since The Three Stooges that I've heard the word "imbecile" used in
casual conversation.
Though the summer movie season is drying up and Godzilla 2000 has its
moments, I wouldn't take kids to see it. They'll probably end up asking
more questions than Charlie Rose.
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!

Title
Review for Innocence (2000)
The most amazing thing about Paul Cox's Innocence is how unlike a movie
it is.  I mean that as the highest compliment.  If most studios were to
profile an elderly couple who rekindle a 40-year-old romance, I'd want
to run and hide.  The sex scenes would be handled as a farce, producers
would shed 20 years off the characters' ages (so Susan Sarandon and
Harrison Ford could star) and true love would shine through any obstacle
without explanation and consequence.
Along with a charming romantic story, the Australian/Belgian Innocence
shows how an increasing sense of mortality combined with revisiting the
past while being entrenched in the present can make something that seems
so right seem downright questionable.
The romance gets started when former musician Andreas (Charles "Bud"
Tingwell), learns that his true love, Claire (Julia Blake), lives
nearby.  They decide to catch up on old times, but soon find themselves
in a reinvigorating affair.  Complicating matters is Andreas' frail
health, and Claire's longtime husband (Terry Norris), who can't
understand why he's suddenly become obsolete.
In my mind, the movie is less about the relationship between Andreas and
Claire, than the feelings of everyone involved.  John, Claire's husband,
endlessly questions what he did wrong.  Claire initially insists she's a
grown-up, but admittedly behaves like a child, a prospect that thrills
and disappoints her.  Andreas, an agnostic, begins to question his fate,
a message Cox delivers in a memorable dream sequence.
Cox litters the movie with flashbacks, including the repeated vision of
a roaring train.  It's a reminder of Andreas and Claire's past love (as
young lovers, they met by train), but as it recurs, we get the feeling
that the past and the present have clashed.  A pall is cast on the whole
affair.
A master of the understated, Cox strings together a series of memorable
moments.  In Andreas' dream sequence, amidst the roar of the train and
conversations, we get the whole picture of Andreas and Claire's love. 
We also get glimpses into John and Claire's relationship.  During a
silent candlelit dinner shortly afterward, Claire admits to John about
her indiscretion, telling more than any monologue could.  All that's
heard is the scraping of forks against plates.
The characters are unlike anything I've seen -- they're people.  So many
times, movies and especially television portray senior citizens as
gratingly spunky.  Or they're reduced to comedic buffoons.  Ordinary
people with a pile of emotions, Claire and Andreas aren't sure what the
next step is.  They do want to be happy, which consists of an entirely
different set of conditions than what they've known throughout their
adult lives.  Bravo to Cox, who wrote the script, for not making John a
monster, so that Claire's affair is automatically justified.  Norris is
so effective as John that he makes Andreas and Claire's love difficult
to accept.  We feel for him.  He's a decent man.  Sure, he may have
become complacent, but he never expected this, especially now.
With so much presented to the audience, it's only expected that the
material gets a little drawn out and repetitive, which it does. 
However, in bringing up tough questions and not offering easy answers,
Cox displays a skill and élan isn't likely to be surpassed by anyone
anytime soon.
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com

Title
Review for Tillsammans (2000)
My memory might be a bit hazy, but Together dealt with the following
subjects among a dozen different characters:  growing up, divorce,
lesbianism/homosexuality, loneliness, Communism, spousal abuse, shoddy
parenting, infidelity, and marital discontent.  I might have forgotten
about the release of Abba's third album in there, but again my memory
flickers.
What I do remember is that the movie takes place in 1975 Stockholm at a
large house full of free-loving Communists -- kind of like The Real
World, if Karl Marx and Hugh Hefner shared a flat with an MTV feed.  The
leader of the group is Göran (Gustav Hammertoe), a gentle fellow with a
great beard, whose sister, Elisabeth (Lisa Lindgren), escapes her
abusive lout of a husband, Rolf (Michael Nyqvist) by moving with her two
kids into Göran's clan.  This, of course, sets in motion a series of
changes for everyone in the house.
The moviegoer is also in for a challenge.  There are so many changes,
along with so many characters, that it's hard to keep up.  I entirely
forgot about two characters before they were reintroduced midway through
the film.  Dramas with large ensemble casts are difficult to maintain,
and Together is a great example of why that happens.
To me the model of a great ensemble drama is Paul Thomas Anderson's
Boogie Nights, because it took the time and the effort to let us know a
bit about each and every character.  It also had technical flair and a
plot that dug into the characters' hubris and fragile egos. 
Writer/director Lukas Moodysson doesn't let us know the characters
because it's in such a damned hurry.  We get no sense of a group
dynamic, no sense of character structure.  It's the cinematic equivalent
of a long flipbook.
Very rarely in Together do we get an idea of the emotions behind the
characters.  At one point, Göran suddenly and violently throws out his
promiscuous girlfriend, Lena (played with misguided, slutty conviction
by Anja Lundkvist).  It's easily the movie's most passionate moment. 
We've seen Lena's cavalier treatment of Göran and we understand his
action, though he says their relationship is open.  However, Moodysson
never offers this kind of absorbing history for everyone else, so we're
essentially stuck with empty gestures.  When he tries to offer some
sense of togetherness (no pun intended) like a soccer game or a crowded
dinner table, there's little to hold on to because we feel like we don't
know these people.
I would have been content just watching Rolf try to win back the
confidence of his wife and kids; Rolf's struggle to gain redemption is
fully believable and the sturdiest branch on the plot tree.  So much
goes on that it's not nearly as effective as it should be.  The director
is too busy looking at the repressed family next door, homosexual
encounters, and the household's introduction to meat and television.
There are definitely some highlights sprinkled throughout, apart from
the copious amount of nudity (both male and female).  The relationship
that Elisabeth's pubescent daughter (Emma Samuelsson) has with the boy
next door (Henrik Lundström) hits all the awkward notes, as does
Enqvist's painful attempts to get back in his family's good graces.  The
movie needs twenty more minutes, five fewer subplots, and a compass.
Director: Lukas Moodysson
Producer: Lars Jönsson
Writer: Lukas Moodysson
Starring: Lisa Lindgren, Michael Nyqvist, Emma Samuelsson, Sam Kessel,
Gustav Hammarsten, Anja Lundkvist, Jessica Liedberg
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com

Title
Review for Others, The (2001)
The Others has a great ending -- one that will be spoofed in Scary Movie
4 and referred to in Entertainment Weekly for years to come.  It's the
reason why people will rush to the theater this summer, spurred on by
the word of mouth from friends and co-workers.
What people will forget to tell you is that there's more than 90 minutes
of an OK horror movie to watch before a glorious 10 minutes.  Take away
the ending--which ties the script's agnostic themes together too
perfectly--and you get The Haunting, just with superior acting and
production values.
The latest horrorfest brings us to 1945 England, where the repressed,
icy Grace, played by Nicole Kidman (Note: Tom Cruise served as an
executive producer on the film), cares for her kids Ann and Nicholas
(Alakina Mann and James Bentley) in a colossal house, where things are
in turmoil.  Grace has been told that her husband (Christopher
Eccleston), who's fighting in World War II, is missing and unlikely to
return.  The house's staff has simply vanished.  And to top it all off,
Ann repeatedly sees visions of another family who she says used to live
in the house.
Ann tries to explain what she sees to her dubious mother, who drums
Christian doctrine into her children's heads and has an impatient
streak.  At first, Grace doubts her daughter.  But when doors fly open
and unknown screams are unleashed, Grace strives (unsuccessfully) to
gain control of the situation.  Meanwhile, the new housekeeping staff
led by the friendly Mrs. Mills (Fionnula Flanagan), acts peculiar. Mrs.
Mills tells Ann that she has seen the same visions, and that their
presence will lead to some changes in the house.
The movie is propelled by a few highlights, most notably its look.  The
house is devoid of natural light (the kids are allergic to it), which
gives the movie a continually creepy feel.  Fog swirls in and out,
creating a dreamlike environment.  Throughout the movie, Kidman dresses
in long, uncomfortable dresses, which scream her repression and cool
demeanor.  The kids talk in sing-songy English accents, giving the false
impression that everything is fine.
The one nuisance is director/screenwriter/composer Alejandro Amenábar's
pacing.  Amenábar (directing his first English language feature) spends
so much time establishing mood and religious symbolism that the movie
simmers, instead of boils.  There are very few chills until the finale. 
However, the ending still falls a bit flat because it's so much livelier
than the material before it.
Writing this review, I'm reminded of when I first saw The Blair Witch
Project two years ago.  I loved the idea, but I left the theater feeling
a little disappointed.  It just wasn't scary enough.  I feel the same
way about The Others.  The film geek inside of me is satisfied, but the
Scaredy Cat in me isn't.
Director: Alejandro Amenábar 
Producer: Fernando Bovaira, José Luis Cuerda, Park Sunmin
Writer: Alejandro Amenábar
Starring: Nicole Kidman, Fionnula Flanagan, Alakina Mann, James Bentley,
Eric Sykes, Elaine Cassidy, Christopher Eccleston   
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com

Title
Review for Emploi du temps, L' (2001)
Laurent Cantet effectively captures difficult feelings in Time Out, a
French film about a family man who pretends to start a prominent job. 
Vincent (Aurélien Recoing) drives around Switzerland, pretending to be
useful, trying to put up a successful façade while he crumbles inside.
Ennui and discontent aren't exactly propelling forces, which is why Time
Out falls a bit flat.  It isn't that the film is inadequate -- far from
it.  Like a long stretch of unemployment, too much dissatisfaction can
lose its charm.
As part of his lie, Vincent tells his wife Muriel (Karin Viard) that his
new job with the United Nations will require stretches of time in
Switzerland.  While Vincent spends his time aimlessly driving, he visits
old friends and convinces them to make huge investments that he pockets
instead.  He also takes a sizable check from his father (Jean-Pierre
Mangeot) under the guise of finding an apartment.
Recoing is perfectly cast in the lead role.  With his soft features and
receding hairline, he looks like any working class joe.  Even better,
Recoing delivers a passionate and heartbreaking performance, which is on
full display when he tells Viard that he can't take his new "job"
anymore.  We realize how badly he's trapped.  Even when he reveals the
truth, he can't set himself free.
Cantet also peppers his film with little moments that show Vincent's
situation with painful clarity.  As he counts his ill-gotten gains,
Vincent sees a young couple, a reminder of why he's on this latest
path.  A security guard politely tells him to leave an office building's
lobby, unless he has a reason for being there.  We keep seeing him
asleep in his car; the film opens with that scene.  We even hear Vincent
reading material about the job he doesn't have, so he can better
convince his friends and family.
The movie also has some welcome comic relief in the form of a shady
businessman (Serge Livrozet) who sees through Vincent's investment
scheme, but still offers him a job transporting overseas merchandise. 
The character is a humorous contradiction: He looks like a gangster, but
has the temperament and goodwill of a saint.  Vincent also gets himself
an unlikely mentor, which leads to a funny scene when the boss and
employee -- both pretending to work at the UN -- have dinner with
Vincent's family.
Cantet makes a few missteps, including not fleshing out Vincent's
conflict with his teenage son (Nicolas Kalsch).  Also, scenes of Vincent
talking to his friends about his investment plans are drawn out and
somewhat out of place, especially when Cantet focuses the most screen
time on one young couple willing to invest all of their savings.  The
most pressing problem is the film's length (132 minutes).  Time Out
would have been phenomenal had Cantet been willing to trim some unneeded
material here and there.  My guess is that he wanted the audience to get
the full effect of Vincent's aimlessness and desperation.  It's just not
necessary, and it takes the sting out of the movie's sharp message.
According to the folks at the New York Film Festival (where this was
screened), Cantet's movie doesn't have a distributor, but I'm sure it
will find one.  This is an intelligent and sobering look at a person's
self worth, and the measures he or she will take to restore it.  Someone
has to see the movie's value.  Let's hope that happens soon.
Director: Laurent Cantet
Producer: Caroline Benjo
Screenplay: Robert Campillo, Laurent Cantet
Starring: Aurélien Recoing, Karin Viard, Serge Livrozet, Jean-Pierre
Mangeot, Monique Mangeot, Nicolas Kalsch
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com

Title
Review for Higher Learning (1995)
I first saw John Singleton's Higher Learning when I was 17.  Back in
1995, my friend and I left the theater feeling like we had seen an
important commentary on American society.  We felt informed.
It just goes to show you how clueless teenagers are.  At 23, I rented
the movie again and realized that I had no idea what the hell Singleton
was talking about.  Certainly, a lot of big issues are broached in the
movie: racism, sexuality, democracy, college education and its value. 
Higher Learning poses a lot of issues, but rarely does it offer any
meaningful answers.
The movie takes place at the fictional Columbus University, where we
meet the world's oldest freshmen class, which includes a track star
(Omar Epps); a wide-eyed innocent (Kristy Swanson); a troubled loner
(Michael Rapaport) and a sensitive guy (Jason Wiles).  As the first
semester unravels, the students will undergo a series of emotional
struggles that will change their lives forever.
The plot would all mean something if Singleton offered his characters
any engaging conflicts--they all seem recycled from movies of the week. 
Swanson gets raped and starts hanging out with a lesbian student
activist (Jennifer Connelly).  Epps rants and raves about black
oppression to his professor and girlfriend.  In response to seemingly
being insulted by Ice Cube and Busta Rhymes, Rapaport becomes a
Skinhead.
And the most maddening thing is that Singleton seems reluctant to tackle
the issues his characters endure.  He's like a bad TV anchorman---he
sticks to the highlights and avoids the background.  Epps' rage is
actually handled well, as he finds himself mulling different points of
view.  However, I'm still not sure how the campus skinheads managed to
pick Rapaport out of the entire student population, or what pushed
Swanson to joining Connelly's activist ways.
The one subject Singleton seems to know a lot about is that white people
simply can't be trusted, which is alarming considering the movie's goal
toward understanding.  At least twice, white security cops assault Epps,
thinking he's the suspect in a campus crime.
I'm not naďve.  There are white people who are prejudiced against black
people, as much as I'd like to think differently.  But in Higher
Learning the white characters create all the problems.  They rape, they
kill, they show little emotional growth.  Aside from so many people from
The Program having lead roles, it's probably the most distressing
presence in a movie that should be more about peace, love and
understanding.
Director: John Singleton
Producers: John Singleton, David Alonzo Williams, Paul Hall
Writer: John Singleton
Starring: Omar Epps, Kristy Swanson, Laurence Fishburne, Michael
Rapaport, Tyra Banks, Ice Cube, Jason Wiles, Jennifer Connelly, Cole
Hauser, Regina King
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com

Title
Review for Mimic 2 (2001) (V)
Mimic 2 isn't an embarrassing rental.  It's about as good as any movie
about a giant, mutant cockroach can be expected to be.  There are a few
entertaining moments, some neat scenery to enjoy, and Jon Polito and
Edward Albert are both in it.  If that last piece of information doesn't
make you want run to the video store with heart-pounding glee, then I
don't know what will.
I didn't see the original Mimic -- the minor summer 1997 hit starring
Mira Sorvino and Jeremy Northam -- even though I worked at a movie
theater that summer and saw more movies than any sane person should. 
The newest installment focuses on one giant, malicious cockroach that
sets its sights on an entomologist named Remy (Alix Koromzay), who
teaches at a decrepit New York City public school.  The cockroach starts
killing off her dates and her co-workers, gnawing their faces off, when
the gruesome killings grab the attention of a hunky detective (Bruno
Campos), who starts having his suspicions and falling in love.  With the
girl, not the bug.
The body count leads to understandable problems at work for Remy, when
her boss (Polito, who is always fun to watch) relates the news of the
killings to parents.  As she packs up her gear and takes a student
(Gaven Eugene Lucas) home, the cockroach comes for them and a teenage
misfit hiding out (Will Estes).  Only a camera (roaches are light
sensitive) and our heroine's textbook knowledge of bugs can save them.
The movie tries to come off as a hybrid of Die Hard and the TV show
Buffy the Vampire Slayer, as director Jean De Segonzac and screenwriter
Joel Soisson fill scenes with lots of ironic, jokey dialogue.  But the
cast doesn't pull off the lines with any humor and though the movie
moves briskly, there's really nothing distinguishable in it.  It's
somewhat suspenseful and filmed with a certain amount of film noir flair
(a shot of a cockroach climbing on the ceiling is particularly
memorable).  The acting is OK; I always enjoy seeing Polito, a feisty
bulldog of an actor.  But Koromzay displays practically no charisma in
her role.  The same goes for the kid actors who are inexplicably thrown
in, probably to get teen appeal.
Still, I find it hard to complete condemn this movie.  There are lots of
goo (the insides of the cockroaches looks like a combination of Fluff
and melted mozzarella cheese), gunfire, and running around for dear
life.  Hell, Eddie Albert is in it.  I didn't think he still existed. 
Mimic 2 is not a great movie, but sometimes you need to see a giant
cockroach movie.  If that's the case, then here you go.  It's like your
first car, it sputters and rocks, but it does what it needs to.
Director: Jean De Segonzac
Producers: Michael Leahy, Joel Soisson
Writer: Joel Soison
Starring: Alix Koromzay, Bruno Campos, Will Estes, Gaven Eugene Lucas,
Edward Albert, Michael Tucci, Jon Polito
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com

Title
Review for Dude, Where's My Car? (2000)
I really wanted to like Dude, Where's My Car?  After a week of
deadlines, dead time, and dead emotions, I needed a goofy movie to
revive me.
So, imagine my horror as I sat alone in the cavernous theater, trying to
muster a chuckle or a titter.  Ornery ostriches didn't do the trick. 
Neither did a transsexual stripper, a pot-smoking dog or an appearance
by Fabio.
There is a place for movies like Dude, Where's My Car? -- National
Lampoon's Animal House, Blazing Saddles, Tommy Boy, etc.  When they
work.  And when that happens, I'm on a cinematic high for weeks.  I
still smile whenever I hear the phrase "double secret probation."  In
the case of the silly comedies that fail, it's like watching a guy slip
on a banana peel.  It might be funny the first time, but how about the
fiftieth time?
Unfortunately, Dude has crates full of bananas, and it's ultimately
doomed -- just like its two main characters, Jesse and Chester (Ashton
Kutcher and Seann William Scott, respectively), doper roommates with a
major problem.  After a wild night of partying with Chester, Jesse can't
find his car the next day.  The two friends don't even have a clue as to
what happened the night before.
The boys soon embark on a madcap adventure to find Jesse's car.  In
their odyssey, they gradually learn about last night's events, which
included strippers, buff aliens, and tattoos.  Jesse and Chester also
discover that they are now responsible for the fate of the universe. 
Bummer.
I know a movie like Dude is geared for brainless laughs, but shouldn't
some thought have been invested in making it? The movie survives solely
on the aforementioned wacky antics, which turns Dude into a feat of
endurance that would fatigue a marathon runner.
There's no break from the goofball proceedings.  Screenwriter Philip
Stark and director Danny Leiner don't give us a single character with
any wit or subtlety.  Watching Dude is like viewing a parade of the
hackneyed characters of movies past.  There are stoned morons,
sympathetic girlfriends, bullying jocks, super-intense space nerds, and
the soulful black pizza owner (from The Last Dragon, of course).
As for Jesse and Chester, they might be the first characters in movie
history without a working cerebrum.  It would have been funnier if these
guys were smart, so they could sarcastically comment on their absurd
situation.  But Scott and Kutcher are given little more to do than say
"shibby" and "sweet" in a frat-boy cadence... and then break things. 
And that's a shame, because I like both of these guys.  Kutcher is a
dopey highlight on the Fox sitcom That '70s Show, and Scott with his
prankster grin was a big reason why American Pie was my favorite movie
last year.  In Dude, their scenes induce empathetic winces, instead of
laughs.
I wish I could say something glowing about this mess, and I wish I had
an idea of why people are seeing it.  My guess is it's either an
indication that 2000 was truly a terrible year for movies, or it could
be a genuine sign of the apocalypse.
Director: Danny Leiner
Producer: Broderick Johnson, Andrew A. Kosove, Nancy Paloian-Breznikar,
Wayne Allan Rice
Writer:  Philip Stark
Starring: Ashton Kutcher, Seann William Scott, Kristy Swanson, Jennifer
Garner, Marla Sokoloff, Charlie O'Connell, Hal Sparks
Official web site: http://www.dudewheresmycar.com/
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
