Authors
Ryan Davis
Number of Reviews
36

Title
Review for Simon Birch (1998)
        I saw Simon Birch in a basically sold out theater, on a Sunday
afternoon.  When the movie was over and the audience was exiting, I didn't
hear one negative comment, and I didn't have any to offer.
        Simon Birch is primarily about the friendship of two twelve year old
boys, Simon (Ian Michael Smith) and Joe (Joseph Mazzello), and what destiny
holds for both of them. Simon is a dwarf, who was not supposed to last
through the night after birth due to a weak heart. Surprisingly, he does, and
now constantly reminds everyone that he is a living miracle.  Simon thinks
God has a plan for him, a purpose for his life, and his condition, he just
doesn't know what.  Joe is an illegitimate child(referred to both comically
and dramatically throughout the film as a bastard), who's mom (Ashley Judd)
won't tell him who his father is.
        Simon has more than just dwarfism as a problem, the people in the town
don't really like him, because he isn't "natural". Even his own parents don't
care about him, and are disappointed they didn't have a "normal" son.  He is
also  harassed in church by the local pastor, Rev. Russell (David Strathairn)
and Simon's chain smoking  Sunday school teacher played by Jan Hooks. The only
person, other than Joe, that really cares for Simon is Joe's mom, who he also
looks up to as a mother.
        It would be just Simon's luck, that he would accidentally kills Joe's
mom, something you are told at the beginning of the movie.  Joe, now
motherless as well as fatherless, feels the need to find out who his real
father is. With the help of Ben (Oliver Platt), the local drama teacher and
Joe's mom's current boyfriend(before her death) , he will attempt to locate
his dad and get in a little trouble on the way. Most of this trouble is laugh
out loud funny, although not all of it is. Simon will also look for God's
plan for him, although he loses a little faith along the way.
        Starring in the first (and last) five minutes of the film is
Hollywood's newest dramatic actor, Jim Carrey. Jim plays the adult version of
Joe and does a impressive job starting the film off, and then tying it up just
right. This is the first character Jim has played that is not over the top in
anyway, and he does a commendable job.
        Simon Birch is written and directed by Mark Steven Johnson, this is his
first film as director, but he has written several films, including the Grumpy
Old Men series.  He does an outstanding writing and  directing job here, the
film's structure is flawless and its flows together perfectly. The dialog goes
from extremely funny to morose without missing a beat.
        The cast is excellent. Joseph Mazzello gives the stand out
performance. Joseph is outstanding for someone of any age, not alone someone
who just turned 15. Ian Michael Smith, in his film debut, has such a strong
physical presence that you believe he is Simon without any hesitation. Other
great performances are turned in by the rest of the supporting cast.
        I loved this movie, it is far and away one of the best films I have
seen all year. Take your whole family to see Simon Birch, it is a magnificent
film- An American Masterpiece.
-----== Posted via Deja News, The Leader in Internet Discussion ==-----
http://www.dejanews.com/rg_mkgrp.xp   Create Your Own Free Member Forum

Title
Review for Deliverance (1972)
        Sure there are many films that are called classics. But once I saw
this, I knew where a number of newer films got some of their most impressive
scenes. Unfortunately, the newer movies seem to execute them better than
Deliverance.
        Not to say Deliverance isn't a superb film, it is. But I have been
spoiled by Tarantino's rendition of the, ever so famous, squeal like a pig
scene. For the time this scene must have seemed very shocking, but now it just
seems antiquated.
        The story involves four men who decide to go on a weekend long canoe
trip, in southern Georgia. They meet some strange inbreed locals, who along
the way cause some trouble with the group. In what appears to be a life or
death situation one of the locals is killed and the group must dispose of the
body. Now scared, they begin their journey to the end of the river so they
can get home. However, don't expect it to be a leisurely trip.
         The performances of the four men (Jon Voight, Burt Reynolds, Ned
Beatty, and Ronny Cox) are very impressive. Burt shows the same acting talent
here, that he displays in the more recent "Boogie Nights". Ned is also
standout as the poor overweight salesmen, who is sodomized by a hillbilly
man.
        John Boorman's direction is rather impressive. Although when compared
to today's, it may seem rather conservative. Vilmos Zsigmond's beautiful
cinematography does stand the true test of time, and is just as brilliant now
as it was then.
        Its hard to believe this movie was shot for a mere two million dollars,
something that could never be done today.  And even if this movie has not aged
as well as some, it certainly is a must see because of its originality and
maybe Ned squealing like a pig.
-----== Posted via Deja News, The Leader in Internet Discussion ==-----
http://www.dejanews.com/rg_mkgrp.xp   Create Your Own Free Member Forum

Title
Review for Big Lebowski, The (1998)
        Usually a movie is about something more than a soiled rug,  but not THE
BIG LEBOWSKI.  The new offering from the creators of 1996's critical hit
FARGO, is to say the least, wildly entertaining. Originality has always
been a strong trait in the Coen Brother's movies, and THE BIG LEBOWSKI is
insanely original.  
        It begins oddly enough when Jeff "The Dude" Lebowski(Jeff Bridges) is
mistaken for a millionaire, Jeff "The Big" Lebowski(David Huddleston),
who's wife, Bunny(Tara Reid) owes money all over town. Two goons,  out to
collect on Bunny's debt break into Dude's house. They attempt to collect
the money that Bunny owes them and one of them urinates on his rug. The
next day Dude explains his situation to his bowling team(Steve Buscemi &
John Goodman, respectively.) He is advised to go to the Big Lebowski and
get him to pay for the defiled rug.  He does this, and shortly after gets
tied up in a kidnapping caper. 
        This is a extremely funny movie with lots of belly laugh moments. The Coen
brothers have assembled a great cast that play off each other perfectly.
Also several great supporting roles, John Turturro as a child molesting
bowler named Jesus. The Coen's script plays off perfectly and it all goes
together to make it extremely entertaining. I doubt this movie will be
nearly as popular as FARGO, but its off the wall moments make it so far the
best of 1998. If you like anything else the Coen brothers have done you
will love this one, if not they give this one a try its a little different.

Title
Review for You've Got Mail (1998)
Since finding love on the Internet is a big 90s fad, it didn't surprise
me at all when I heard Tom Hanks and Meg Ryan were starring in a remake of the
1940 film, `A Shop Around The Corner.' Also rejoining Hanks & Ryan, from
`Sleepless in Seattle,' is director Nora Ephron.
The plot is interesting, fairly original, and everything fits together
so well, it's almost like a fable. Kathleen Kelly (Meg Ryan) owns a small
children's bookstore in New York City, aptly called, Shop Around the Corner.
Her mother started the business, and the store and its employees are her life.
Everything is going great, until a giant discount bookstore opens up close to
her shop. The store is part of a large company, named Fox Books. Joe Fox (Tom
Hanks) is one of the executives in Fox Books and Kathleen and he become fierce
business rivals.
Little do the both know that they have been communicating with each
other, under nicknames, on the Internet. After exchanging e-mails and chatting
for awhile, Joe asks to meet with her. But when he arrives at the meeting
place, he recognizes Kathleen and pretends he just happened to bump into her.
Joe's life gets complicated when Kathleen's shop starts to fail and he begins
to fall in love with her. Now he has to get her to forgive him for ruining her
business and figure out a way to tell her he was the guy on the net, all this
time.
It's a cute premise that plays out quite well. This is, in thanks,
mostly to Tom Hanks and Meg Ryan's great chemistry.  Whenever they are on the
screen together, sparks fly. Greg Kinnear turns in a good performance as
Kathleen's journalist boyfriend. The main drawback was its length, it runs
over two hours. Other than that, this is a great date movie; it's
entertaining, romantic, and downright likeable.
-----------== Posted via Deja News, The Discussion Network ==----------
http://www.dejanews.com/       Search, Read, Discuss, or Start Your Own    
--AAL07760.917856480/edison.ee.washington.edu--

Title
Review for Primary Colors (1998)
Well director Mike Nichols(The Birdcage, Regarding Henry) is nothing but a
talented director, who never fails to be entertaining, and even inspiring
at times. His latest film, a political satire, about the 1992 Democratic
presidential primary is all that and more.
Jack Stanton(John Travolta) is running for president, a big step up from
governor of a southern state. His campaign is being headed by Henry
Burton(Adrian Lester), a ambitious young black man who's grandfather was a
highly esteemed civil rights leader. Other members of the group include his
political strategist(Billy Bob Thornton), his wife(Emma Thompson), Libby
Holden(Kathy Bates), and Daisy(Maura Tierney), together, they form the
weirdest group ever to help win a presidential election. The road to the
White House isn't easy though, along the way they battle a sex scandal and
several skeletons in Jack Stanton's closet.  
This is a fun movie, lighthearted and generally amusing. Its filled with
splendid performances from John Travolta(Oscar Nomination in his future),
Billy Bob Thornton(always brilliant), Emma Thompson(great as the power
hungry wife), and Kathy Bates(One of the best things about Titanic).
Unfortunately the movie suffers from a few flaws. The point of view is my
main example, Henry's character was bland and his acting certainly lacked
passion and was rather somber at times.  The second flaw was the editing,
it left little bits and pieces of things(for instance Henry's relationship
with his girlfriend) that should have been edited out completely. Apart
from these complaints the movie it worth seeing simply for John Travolta's
incredibly brilliant performance as our beloved(or scorned) President Bill
Clinton, it is certainly a memorable role. Not to mention the mostly great
supporting cast, its highly entertaining and bitterly funny.

Title
Review for October Sky (1999)
        A small town boy makes it big isn't exactly the most
original of ideas, far from it. Although there is something about the
story of seventeen year old Homer Hickman (Jake Gyllenhaal) and his
friends trying to get out of their small mining town, that is quite
charming.
        Inspired by the launch of the Sputnik and scientist,
Dr. Werner Von Braun, Homer and three of his friends decided to build
a rocket. They hope to be able to win their local science fair and be
able to go on to the national competition. At the nationals there are
many colleges handing out scholarships, which would be their only way
out of their town.
        With the help of several of the local townspeople and their
teacher, Miss Riley (Laura Dern), they start building rockets. After
lots of misfires, they start to learn more and more about
rocketry. Soon their rocket launches become well attended by the
townspeople and they are all very proud of the boys. All except
Homer's father, John Hickam, who is played skillfully by Chris
Cooper. John wants his son to follow his footsteps, in the coal mines,
but Homer wants nothing to do with it.
        `October Sky' is an inspiring film and an entertaining
one, even if its corny. The acting is kind of weak; most of the kids
are quite bland. The script is good and tight; there are very few slow
parts. But, altogether, it's a good film suitable for the whole
family.
-----------== Posted via Deja News, The Discussion Network ==----------
http://www.dejanews.com/       Search, Read, Discuss, or Start Your Own    

Title
Review for Dark City (1998)
        There isn't much good about this movie. Not much I can say about the
acting, directing, or writing that would make you consider seeing this movie.
So I'll get my one good comment out of the way, at least Joel Schuemacher
(Batman & Robin) didn't direct it or it would be titled "Technicolor City". In
fact there is nothing colorful about this movie, its dark and depressingly
gloomy right down to the bitter end.
        The plot has a tendency to be interesting, but all that passes while
your laughing at the ridiculous things thrown into what could have been a
fascinating movie. The plot is impossible to explain due to how senseless it
gets, so I will just touch on the bare minimum. John Murdoch(Rufus Sewell)
awakes in the bathtub of a cheap hotel, only to find out he has forgotten
everything. John must find out who he is before the "strangers"(a.k.a. mind
erasing aliens) find him and use him for their own evil conspiracy.  During
the film some interesting points are raised about human individuality, and
the existence of inherently evil people. Any of these points however are
completely "erased" from your  mind as you watch the actors stumble through
the dreadful script.
        As I mentioned earlier, nothing but the atmosphere is right in this
film.  The acting is bland, and since there is virtually no character
development no one seems to care. The special effects are low budget and some
even hilariously  fake, a sign of a true "B-movie".  The direction is poor
and there is little continuity, not that you would expect it in a movie
switching realities constantly. Lastly the script is weak and has no concept
of reality, and doesn't deserve to have the word "science" in
science-fiction. If I haven't got my point across, I'll say it more plainly:
This is a bad movie. Lets hope the next movie by Alex "I wish I was Tim
Burton" Proyas is at least tolerable.
-----== Posted via Deja News, The Leader in Internet Discussion ==-----
http://www.dejanews.com/rg_mkgrp.xp   Create Your Own Free Member Forum

Title
Review for You've Got Mail (1998)
Since finding love on the Internet is a big 90s fad, it didn't surprise
me at all when I heard Tom Hanks and Meg Ryan were starring in a remake of the
1940 film, `A Shop Around The Corner.' Also rejoining Hanks & Ryan, from
`Sleepless in Seattle,' is director Nora Ephron.
The plot is interesting, fairly original, and everything fits together
so well, it's almost like a fable. Kathleen Kelly (Meg Ryan) owns a small
children's bookstore in New York City, aptly called, Shop Around the Corner.
Her mother started the business, and the store and its employees are her life.
Everything is going great, until a giant discount bookstore opens up close to
her shop. The store is part of a large company, named Fox Books. Joe Fox (Tom
Hanks) is one of the executives in Fox Books and Kathleen and he become fierce
business rivals.
Little do the both know that they have been communicating with each
other, under nicknames, on the Internet. After exchanging e-mails and chatting
for awhile, Joe asks to meet with her. But when he arrives at the meeting
place, he recognizes Kathleen and pretends he just happened to bump into her.
Joe's life gets complicated when Kathleen's shop starts to fail and he begins
to fall in love with her. Now he has to get her to forgive him for ruining her
business and figure out a way to tell her he was the guy on the net, all this
time.
It's a cute premise that plays out quite well. This is, in thanks,
mostly to Tom Hanks and Meg Ryan's great chemistry.  Whenever they are on the
screen together, sparks fly. Greg Kinnear turns in a good performance as
Kathleen's journalist boyfriend. The main drawback was its length, it runs
over two hours. Other than that, this is a great date movie; it's
entertaining, romantic, and downright likeable.
-----------== Posted via Deja News, The Discussion Network ==----------
http://www.dejanews.com/       Search, Read, Discuss, or Start Your Own    

Title
Review for Baxter (1988)
        Talking dogs might sound like kids stuff, but Baxter is far from a kids
film. Its an extremely dark look at communism, which can't be categorized into
just one genre, it's horror, suspense, thriller, and an intense character
driven film. Also its about a dog that thinks.
        Baxter(a dog) is given to an older women, Ms. Deville who overcomes
her fear of him to annoy the dog to death. You see, Baxter wants a challenge
he wants to be told what to do. Unfortunately Ms. Deville, has a tragic
"accident" and dies. Baxter is handed of to a young couple who lives close
by, who Baxter has admired from afar. He is happy and content with his life
until the women has a creature(Baxter's word for baby). Shortly after the
birth, the baby has a near-fatal "accident" and the young couple decides its
best to get rid of Baxter. He is finally given to a young teenager Charles,
who has a Hitler complex. Baxter has found his master and listen to Charles
commands to the end, and learns a lesson "Don't Obey"
        Baxter can be viewed on to levels, as a social commentary or a funny
little movie about a talking dog. Baxter is a brilliant film, the script and
direction are flawless and it is very interesting. Charles(François
Driancourt) gives an engaging performance as the young sadist, and all the
other actors/actresses are very convincing. The script is brilliant and
thought provoking, showing us the general publics want to be told what to do,
no matter what it is. If you can stand reading subtitles during a movie, go
rent this one, its a film worthy of several viewings.
-----== Posted via Deja News, The Leader in Internet Discussion ==-----
http://www.dejanews.com/rg_mkgrp.xp   Create Your Own Free Member Forum

Title
Review for Pleasantville (1998)
        When I watch Nick at Night, I laugh at the simplicity of the old TV
shows. Shows like `Leave It to Beaver' [1957-1963], and `The Andy Griffin
Show' [1960-1968] really made life look downright pleasant, or is it?
        David (Tobey Maguire), a high school student, is a huge fan of a
fifties television show called Pleasantville. One day in preparation for a
Pleasantville marathon, he and his sister, Jennifer (Reese Witherspoon) get in
a fight over what to watch on television. During the brief fight, they break
the television remote. Magically and without warning, a television repairman
(Don Knotts) appears and gives them a new remote control. With the press of a
button David and Jennifer are actually transported into Pleasantville.
        The two teens are instantly given a new family and a new life in the
entirely black and white town. Their new parents are delightful fifties
stereotypes. The father (William H. Macy) works all day to provide for the
family, and bowls with his friends in the evening. The mother (Joan Allen)
cooks and cleans all day and always has dinner ready for her husband when he
comes home from work.
        Pleasantville, at first glance, appears to be paradise. Upon further
study, they find a world infected with censorship and oppression. Things
begin to change in Pleasantville, and the citizens that break free of the
usual monotony are changed from black and white into color. These `coloreds'
are looked upon as weaker people, and are banned from stores and are outcast
in the black and white community. The film continues on as David and Jennifer
discover that maybe the `good old days,' are not as good as they seemed to
be.
        The movie, itself, is visually stunning and quite beautiful. The way
that black and white is mixed with color is simply brilliant. I wouldn't be
surprised if Pleasantville was nominated for art and cinematography Oscars.
        The acting is also great. Tobey Maguire and Reese Witherspoon do a
great job in their leading roles. Although it is really the terrific
supporting performances by William H. Macy, Joan Allen, the late J.T. Walsh,
Jeff Daniels, and the perfectly cast Don Knotts, that propel this film. The
leads have the most screen time, but they are nowhere near as interesting as
the characters each of these actors play.
        Pleasantville is an incredibly symbolic movie. In fact, it is far too
symbolic. Instead of concentrating on one or even two topics, it spreads
itself far to thin. After only one screening I noticed references to Nazism,
Racism, Individualism, Christianity, Judaism, Communism, Socialism and more.
With so much taking place it becomes almost muddled and unclear.
        Pleasantville runs a little over two hours long and it feels like
more. While some of the scenes are incredible, some seem to add absolutely
nothing to the story. Better editing would have made this movie much more
enjoyable.
Pleasantville still manages to be entertaining, and at least interesting to
watch. While it is about 20 minutes to long it is still rather humorous,
thought provoking, and contains a number of great performances.
-----------== Posted via Deja News, The Discussion Network ==----------
http://www.dejanews.com/       Search, Read, Discuss, or Start Your Own    

Title
Review for Antz (1998)
        Films that are animated sometimes get a bum rap. Mainly because people
assume that just because they're cartoons, these films are just kids stuff.
Dreamwork Entertainment's new computer animated film "Antz" definitely isn't
just kids stuff, or at least it tries it's hardest not to be.
        Antz's plot is simple enough; a worker ant, nicknamed Z(whose full name
is Z-4195), is tired of his life of forced labor and longs for freedom.
Troubled by ideas of a heaven-like place called "insect-topia" and his totally
by chance dance with Princess Bala(princess of the colony) in a bar; Z becomes
even more unhappy with his station in life.  In an endeavor to meet with
Princess Bala again, Z persuades his soldier friend, Weaver, into temporarily
switching jobs with him. Soon after while Z is attending a military assembly,
his squad is unexpectedly sent to war and Z has no choice, but to fight with
them.
        Z doesn't do much fighting, so he manages to be the only ant too
survive the battle, and goes home a war hero. While being introduced to the
Queen Ant, Z accidentally kidnaps the princess and inadvertently escapes the
ant colony with her. Now both Z & Bala are trapped outside the colony, and
they begin their journey for the mythical "insect-topia".
        Unfortunately for Z, the kidnapping of the princess has ruined the
evil scheme of the Hitler-like ant, General Mandible and his cunning comrade,
Colonel Cutter. The General is not going to see his plan ruined and is going
to do all he can to find Z, and get back the princess.
        The strongest point of the film are the vocal performances. Woody
Allen is just great as Z, he really does an impressive job. Tons of other big
names turn in good performances in their respective roles: Sharon
Stone(Bala), Sylvester Stallone(Weaver), and Gene Hackman(General Mandible). 
Another strong point are the one liners that add much needed fun to Antz.
        When you get right down to it, Antz is an Animal Farm clone. Z is
fighting a battle for individualism in a totalitarian society. While all this
may be well and good, Antz is making a point that no one objects to. There was
no need to make a nineties version of Animal Farm and the filmmakers got so
busy attempting to add symbolism, they forgot about how weak the actual story
was. So what you end up with is an interesting attempt at satire, some clever
dialog, good voices,  neat animation, and an unfortunately sparse story to
bring it all together.
-----------== Posted via Deja News, The Discussion Network ==----------
http://www.dejanews.com/       Search, Read, Discuss, or Start Your Own    

Title
Review for Wild Things (1998)
The neatest part about Wild Things is how it forced me to watch the
credits. By revealing key parts to the plot(I use this term loosely.)
in-between the credits, the filmmakers managed to keep three-fourths of the
audience in their seats until the credits completed, an impressive
achievement. 
I can only tell you a small portion of the movies plot, or you will miss
guessing the laughable plot twist. High school senior Kelly Van Ryan(Denise
Richards) falls in love with her guidance counselor, Sam Lombardo(Matt
Dillon). Kelly tries several times to lure him into an intimate
relationship, but when her attempts fail she accuses him of rape. Jumping
on the rape charge bandwagon Suzie Toller(Neve Campbell) accuses Sam, with
the two accusations he is quickly taken to court. Sam, out of money and
desperate for a lawyer, hires a sleazy insurance fraud attorney, Ken
Bowden(Bill Murray, in the best performance of the film.). Following a
confusing trial Sam's case is dismissed and all charges are dropped, this
is done by way of several predictable plot twists. When Sam is cleared of
the charges he sues Kelly's rich mother and receives a little over eight
million. So now you have to figure out who's playing who, and who should
anyone trust? There are so many plot twist in this movie its almost funny,
its sad that all the twist are ultra predictable and illogical.  
The cast is, on the most part, highly attractive.  They all get
opportunities through the film to display their bodies, there is even a
threesome scene with Denise Richards, Matt Dillon, and Neve Campbell. The
best actual performance is that of Bill Murray as the lawyer who makes his
money off insurance fraud, its a hilarious piece of work and he steals all
the scenes he's in. I could spend all day pointing out how bad the other
performances were, but then I wouldn't be able to tell you about the good
parts. 
This is a funny movie, I don't know if it was meant to be serious but I was
laughing out loud at some of the scenes. Maybe it was just the
implausibility or maybe the terrible dialogue, but it was just really
funny.  If you are looking for a entertaining, erotic, campy, and funny
movie, than this could be for you. If you want a good intelligent thriller,
look elsewhere.

Title
Review for Your Friends & Neighbors (1998)
Your Friends And Neighbors is a rather bizarre film about 6 people, who hop
in and out of bed with each other. Written and directed by Neil LaBute, who'
s first film, "In The Company Of Men" was simply marvelous, disappoints a
bit here with this one.
The story involves two couples(Ben Stiller & Catherine Keener and Aaron
Eckhart & Amy Brenneman), an artist assistant(Nastassja Kinski), and an
egotistical women abuser(Jason Patric). The character's names are not
apparent and are not mentioned in the entire movie.
Each of the characters has their own sexual style and they don't seem to
"merge" together well. So the group experiments behind their respective
partners back. There are some hysterical  scenes, one involves Jason Patric,
Aaron Eckhart, and Ben Stiller's characters. They are all in a sauna,
talking about their best "lay", when Jason Patric's character makes a
surprising confession. The whole scene is hilarious and exceptionally well
written and acted.
The enjoyed this movie, although it seemed a tad lengthy(even though it
only runs 99 min.). The film's cast is exceptional with Oscar caliber
performances by Catherine Keener, Aaron Eckhart, and Jason Patric.  I would
not recommend this film, to people who are offended by conversations that
are very sexually explicit. It did seem to offend people, more than half of
the people in the theater left during the film. Although Your Friends And
Neighbors doesn't have the power of LaBute's earlier film it still manages
to be somewhat entertaining and funny, while maintaining a melancholy
philosophy on human relationships.
-----== Posted via Deja News, The Leader in Internet Discussion ==-----
http://www.dejanews.com/rg_mkgrp.xp   Create Your Own Free Member Forum

Title
Review for Grease (1978)
        Twenty years is a long time. You would think that a movie considered
"hip", by teenagers twenty years ago, wouldn't sit that well with today's
teens. Well, if you thought that about Grease you'd be wrong. I attended
the film on it's opening night, March 27th, it was a sold out viewing- with
more teen girls then I saw at Titanic. What is it about this movie that
keeps yet another generation fascinated? Who knows
        Danny(John Travolta) is the coolest greaser at Rydell High, and a member
of the T-Birds. During the summer he meets an Australian girl, Sandy(Olivia
Newton-John), at the beach. He enjoys his summer fling with her, but when
she doesn't return to Australia and shows up at Rydell, things get a little
complicated. Danny is forced to decide if he should try to impress Sandy by
becoming a jock, or continue hanging out with his T-Bird gang. 
        I have seen this movie many times, but never in the theater. It was a
totally new experience seeing it with other people, who sang along and even
did the hand jive in their seats. The audience I saw it with seemed to have
a great time, and even applauded when it was all over. The music is really
catchy and the dancing is nicely choreographed. It is a fun movie, and
while it may not be anywhere near perfect it is a great experience.

Title
Review for Saving Private Ryan (1998)
        I have sat through endless history classes where the teacher attempts
to explain to the class what went on during WWII. But all those years of talk
didn't teach me anything about what happened, although in about three hours,
Spielberg showed me all. `Saving Private Ryan' reveals all the courage,
hardship, and sacrifice that kept our country free.
        Tom Hanks plays Captain John Miller, who is assigned to lead a small
group of men through enemy territory to find Private Ryan (Matt Damon). Ryan's
three brothers have all been killed in action and the Army doesn't want their
mother to lose all of her sons.
        Miller's crew consists of a number of extremely well acted and
memorable characters, which range from a bible-quoting sniper to a cowardly
translator, with lots of interesting people in between. The most fully
developed character in the group is Corporal Upham (Jeremy Davies), a mapmaker
and translator, who is made to join the crew because he can speak French and
German. He doesn't want to be there and has never been in an actual combat
situation before.
        The first twenty-five minutes are incredibly brilliant. The battle
scenes are like nothing I have ever seen before. You feel as if you are in the
war; the camera acts just like a soldier and crawls along with the company as
it makes its way up the beach. All the battle scenes are breathtaking and very
realistic.
        The acting is marvelous. The whole ensemble is entirely outstanding.
Tom Hanks gives the best performance of his career, his first truly Oscar
worthy role. Everything else is extraordinary too: Cinematography, sets,
special effects, and costumes. `Saving Private Ryan' is one of the finest and
most powerful films of the year. It was re-released in February in time for
Oscar nominations on Tuesday, February 9th.  If you missed it the first time
around catch this war masterpiece now in theaters.
-----------== Posted via Deja News, The Discussion Network ==----------
http://www.dejanews.com/       Search, Read, Discuss, or Start Your Own    

Title
Review for Lost in Space (1998)
If Special Effects were the principal parts of a movie, then Lost In Space
would rank as one of the best this year. But even with all the other
elements added Lost In Space is still a entertaining film, even if it runs
a little long.
In the future the world is dying, and there is only one hope, colonize
another planet. John Robinson(William Hurt) is in charge of building a
hyperspace tunnel to connect the colonized planet to earth. His only demand
upon accepting the mission is that his family may accompany him to the
planet, they include: Maureen(Mimi Rogers), Penny(Lacey Chabert),
Judy(Heather Graham), and Will(Jack Johnson). Also on the trip is the
pilot, Don West(Matt LeBlanc), who is none to happy to be there at the
beginning and the evil Dr. Smith(Gary Oldman). During the trip they run
into lots and lots of obstacles, one after another. 
The plot is a little weak, and the ending is a perfect setup for a sequel,
so don't expect closure. The acting is surprising good with the exception
of the constantly irritating Lacey Chabert. Gary Oldman is rehashing his
performance from The Fifth Element, but its done perfectly- So why
complain? Matt LeBlanc is surprisingly likable as Major West, maybe he will
be able to get work after Friends is over. The Special Effects are great,
but the bugs have been done before and it has a Starship Troopers feel.
There is a cute little monkey creature made by Jim Henson's Creature Shop,
although it looks like its been painted on the film, it is still a nicely
rendered image. All things considering its entertaining and fun. Check it
out if your a special effects or sci-fi fan.

Title
Review for L.A. Confidential (1997)
Welcome to 1950s Los Angeles, city of greed, corruption, money, and power,
just of few of it's qualities. L.A. CONFIDENTIAL displays all of these
characteristics in under two and a half hours, an incredible achievement.  
The story revolves around three cops, Jack Vincennes(Kevin Spacey), Bud
White(Russell Crowe)and Ed Exley(Guy Pearce). These three are out to find
out the truth concerning a slaughter at a local coffee shop the Night Owl.
During their investigation they find out that the motive is far more
involved than simply robbery.  During their investigation Bud gets involved
with a prostitute, Lynn Bracken(Kim Basinger), who looks like a famous
actress. Jack is also getting payoffs from  Sid Hudgeons'(Danny DeVito)
tabloid magazine all the while investigating the murders.
This movie has a lot good about it, in fact its relatively perfect.
Director Curtis Hanson(The Hand That Rocks the Cradle) does a superb job of
pulling everyone in the crew's talent together in a movie that is very
fluid and highly entertaining. The acting is flawless, Kevin Spacey and Kim
Basinger deserve Oscars for their standout performances. Guy Pearce,
Russell Crowe, Danny DeVito and James Cromwell deliver outstanding
performances as well. The cinematography(Dante Spinotti), music(Jerry
Goldsmith), costumes(Ruth Myers) and editing(Peter Honess) are noteworthy
and add to the film's excellence. Lastly the script(Brian Helgeland &
Curtis Hanson, based on the book by James Ellroy) is taut and full of
delicious plot twist that keep you on the edge of your seat in
anticipation.  This movie is an American Film-Noir masterpiece, and one of
my personal favorites of 1997.  

Title
Review for Full Monty, The (1997)
        THE FULL MONTY is a whole lot of fun, its wacky, witty, and original.
It's written and directed by relatively unknowns , Simon Beaufoy and Peter
Cattaneo, who both turned up Oscar nominations. How did this movie with a
budget under 10 Million gross over 175 Million worldwide? Its been rumored
that this film may be the second most profitable movie of the year! And to
think its about male exotic dancers, and not sinking ships.
        Six steel workers who have been recently been laid off and are all
looking for jobs. Inspired by the success of a Chippendale's production, Gaz
(Robert Carlyle) decides they should all put on a strip show to make some
money quickly. As the six team up to put on the show of their lives, they run
into a few problems. For instance, Dave(Mark Addy) is worried about his
weight, Horse (Paul Barber) thinks he may be inadequate, and Gerald(Tom
Wilkinson) is worried about his reputation and timing. So when the night of
the show comes, will the men be able to do the "full monty"?
        As I said before this is a fun movie, and not just that its really
artistically good. The writing and direction are great.  The acting is
appealing, all the performances have a human quality to them, so you can
relate to at least one of the characters. THE FULL MONTY received four Oscar
nominations including Best Picture. Which left me wondering one thing, why
didn't TRAINSPOTTING get a Best Picture nomination last year? While THE FULL
MONTY is a great lighthearted comedy, it doesn't carry the social impact of
the brilliant TRAINSPOTTING. Still, THE FULL MONTY is a great film,  a must
see!
-----== Posted via Deja News, The Leader in Internet Discussion ==-----
http://www.dejanews.com/rg_mkgrp.xp   Create Your Own Free Member Forum

Title
Review for Shakespeare in Love (1998)
        There are hardly any historical-romantic comedies produced, so
`Shakespeare in Love' is quite a rarity, a gem you could
say. It's funny, romantic, highly entertaining and even brilliant
at times. At first I thought all the hype was too much to live up to,
but it manages to live up to all my expectations.
        The film begins with Philip Henslowe (Geoffrey Rush), a bad
businessman who owns a theatre, agreeing to let some people he owes
money to in on his new play, which is supposed to be a comedy from
Will Shakespeare (Joseph Fiennes), entitled `Romeo and Ethel, the
Pirate's Daughter.' Unfortunately, Will doesn't have any
inspiration to write; he thinks he has lost his gift.
        That is until he meets Viola (Gwyneth Paltrow), at an audition
for the play. She is dressed up as a man, and is the only one who
auditioned to use one of Shakespeare's sonnets for the
audition. Soon he finds out she is really a woman and they fall madly
in love. Sadly their love can never be, because she is promised to
Lord Wessex (Colin Firth) and they are marrying in a few weeks.
        Will and Viola's relationship inspires him to change the
entire play to seemingly reflect their lives and it gradually becomes
`Romeo And Juliet' As things happen in his life, he adds
something to the story that is similar to their lives. As the movie
progresses, the parallelism continues to grow; it's remarkably
written.
        It's not just the parallelism of the script that's
great, the dialog is superb and the characters are extremely well
developed.  It's also beautifully filmed; the costumes and sets are
gorgeous. The acting couldn't be any better.  Joseph and Gwyneth
are phenomenal in their roles, and even Ben Afflect is terrific in his
cameo appearance.
        `Shakespeare in Love' is a perfect romantic film; it
never tries too be too sappy or manipulate the audience. Also
nominated for thirteen Academy Awards, this wonderful film should be
on the top of your must see list.
-----------== Posted via Deja News, The Discussion Network ==----------
http://www.dejanews.com/       Search, Read, Discuss, or Start Your Own    

Title
Review for Kundun (1997)
        Martin Scorsese is known for his realistic violence and extreme
profanity. He is known for causing controversy with Christians because of his
depiction of Jesus in "The Last Temptation of Christ". But what he isn't known
for is his role in a movie about peace and compassion, until KUNDUN.
        KUNDUN gives us a interesting look into the lives of Tibetan Buddhist,
and depicts the life of the fourteenth Dalai Lama, from the time of his
discovery(Around age 2) until his late teens when he is forced into exile.
>From the beginning of his life he thinks he is important, insisting he sits at
the head of the table, but when he is 5 he is taken from his family to become
the next  Dalai Lama. When he comes of age and is crowned head of Tibet he is
forced to become the religious and political leader of the country.  He's
greeted with an invasion from Communist China, which ends the peace that has
existed for centuries in Tibet.
        There are several touching parts in this film, these few parts give
us a glimpse into a culture which seems strange and extremely foreign to most
American movie-goers. One particular scene that stands out in my mind is when
the 5 year old        Dalai Lama is brought to his castle for the first time. His
family is seated before him and his older brother is smiling at him, until he
is pushed to the ground and made to bow before his younger brother.
Unfortunately, there aren't many more scenes that show the effect on the
family that their brother/son is Buddha's reincarnation.
        The acting is admirable, considering the majority of the cast are real
monks. The script is to unquestioning of the Dalai Lama, and makes him seem
like a perfect individual. In addition the film's pace is way to slow, not a
usual Scorsese complaint. On a better note, the cinematography, costumes and
art direction is great. I would suggest you watch this film just for its look
at the Asian culture, but wait till its out on video.
-----== Posted via Deja News, The Leader in Internet Discussion ==-----
http://www.dejanews.com/rg_mkgrp.xp   Create Your Own Free Member Forum

Title
Review for Bug's Life, A (1998)
        It's rather strange too have two computer animated talking ant movies
come out in a single year, but that is what Disney and Pixar Animation;s
latest film represents.  While A Bugs Life isn't nearly as deep as it's
predecessor, Dreamwork's Antz, it is just as funny.
        A Bug's Life centers, appropriately, around the life of an ant, named
Flik. Flik, cutely voiced by Newsradio's David Foley, hates sticking too
tradition and attempts too find new ways of harvesting food and other task.
When one of his inventions causes the offering too be completely lost, the
leaders of the Colony send him out on a mission too get him out of the way.
The offering is food that a vile group of grasshoppers force the ants
too harvest for them. The leader of the grasshoppers is Hopper, who is
fiendishly voiced by Oscar winner Kevin Spacey.  When the offering is lost
Hopper is very upset and he vows to return shortly too retrieve double the
amount of food. When the leaders of the ant colony send Flik out on his
mission, they never dream he will be successful, they just hope they can get
him out of the way so they can harvest the extra food.
Flik's mission is too hire some warrior bugs too fight off the
grasshoppers when they return. Instead Flik accidentally hires circus
performing bugs, who he mistakenly assumes are warriors. When he returns with
the `warriors', the town is ecstatic until they find out the truth about their
heroes.
A Bug's Life has animation that is simply stunning. The sheer
uniqueness of the day to day bug life is very imaginative. Together with the
great voice acting, this film is the perfect holiday family film. Its main
weakness is that it couldn't beat Antz to the theaters, making it seem like
stale material.
-----------== Posted via Deja News, The Discussion Network ==----------
http://www.dejanews.com/       Search, Read, Discuss, or Start Your Own    

Title
Review for 54 (1998)
Studio 54 looks like a really crazy place, from what I have seen in a ton of
documentaries on 54, on such "informative" channels like VH1 and E!.  These
programs depict lots of sex and extreme amounts of drug use, it doesn't
appear to be dull. Then why would a movie about a wild exclusive night club
be so ordinary? Maybe its because, in his first major film writer/director
Mark Christopher didn't want to upset any studio executives. The film never
dares to take any risks, it follows the path you would expect and doesn't
challenge you to anything.
You would think a director like Mark Christopher would be more risqué.  He
has made a few independent films, The Dead Boys' Club (1992) and Alkali,
Iowa (1995). Both of these films deal with young homosexuals, and their
coming out stories. Therefor, Christopher has taken risks with his films
before, and instead of making a movie like 54 that tried he to make
mainstream while also trying to tell a story that isn't mainstream just
doesn't work.
The story is told though the eyes of Shane O'Shea (Ryan Phillippe), a young
guy with dreams to get out of his lame life in New Jersey, and go into the
city where things are really hot. Shane coerces some of his Jersey friends
to go to New York City one night, to party at 54. They reluctantly agree and
when they arrive Shane is the only one admitted in to the club, by the owner
of 54, Steve Rubell (Mike Myers) himself.
Needless to say Shane loves it and shortly after gets a job as a busboy at
54. He makes friends with Greg (Breckin Meyer), another busboy, and Anita
(Salma Hayek), a amateur  Latin singer. Things go well for Shane as he works
his way up to bartender at 54 and he meets and "connects" with Julie Black
(Neve Campbell). But it can't be this good forever you know it has to come
crumbling down.
People have described this movie as 1998's "Boogie Nights". It isn't, so
don't expect it. "Boogie Nights" was raw and told it like it was. 54 is a
watered-down version of it, shorter and far less entertaining. Plus he doesn
't show all that went on at 54, it barely touches on all the sex and drug
abuse that went on there.
The directing and writing were mediocre at best. The dialog just didn't pop
like it should have, and they actually use the line, "Its not the size of
the boat, but the motion of the Ocean."
As far as acting goes, it was surprisingly good on all counts. I was
thoroughly impressed with Mike Myers who took his one dimensional character
and really worked with it. Kudos to Mike for his excellent freshman dramatic
role. It was also nice to see Heather Matarazzo from "Welcome To The
Dollhouse" again, she has a small role as Shane's sister.
But the acting doesn't cover up all the flaws.. Next time Christopher make a
movie with some energy and don't be afraid to take risk,  if you are dealing
with a topic as outlandish  as Studio 54.
-----== Posted via Deja News, The Leader in Internet Discussion ==-----
http://www.dejanews.com/rg_mkgrp.xp   Create Your Own Free Member Forum

Title
Review for Your Friends & Neighbors (1998)
        Your Friends And Neighbors is a rather bizarre film about 6 people, who
hop in and out of bed with each other. Written and directed by Neil LaBute,
who's first film, "In The Company Of Men" was simply marvelous, disappoints a
bit here with this one.
        The story involves two couples(Ben Stiller & Catherine Keener and Aaron
Eckhart & Amy Brenneman), an artist assistant(Nastassja Kinski), and an
egotistical women abuser(Jason Patric). The character's names are not apparent
and are not mentioned in the entire movie.
        Each of the characters has their own sexual style and they don't seem
to "merge" together well. So the group experiments behind their respective
partners back. There are some hysterical  scenes, one involves Jason Patric,
Aaron Eckhart, and Ben Stiller's characters. They are all in a sauna, talking
about their best "lay", when Jason Patric's character makes a surprising
confession. The whole scene is hilarious and exceptionally well written and
acted.
        The enjoyed this movie, although it seemed a tad lengthy(even though
it only runs 99 min.). The film's cast is exceptional with Oscar caliber
performances by Catherine Keener, Aaron Eckhart, and Jason Patric.  I would
not recommend this film, to people who are offended by conversations that are
very sexually explicit. It did seem to offend people, more than half of the
people in the theater left during the film. Although Your Friends And
Neighbors doesn't have the power of LaBute's earlier film it still manages to
be somewhat entertaining and funny, while maintaining a melancholy philosophy
on human relationships.
-----== Posted via Deja News, The Leader in Internet Discussion ==-----
http://www.dejanews.com/rg_mkgrp.xp   Create Your Own Free Member Forum

Title
Review for Apostle, The (1997)
        Watching Robert Duvall's newest movie is a incredible experience. As the
film progresses you will begin to see what, quite possibly, is one of the
most unique and thought provoking movie I have ever seen. To call this film
anything less than a fascinatingly intense character study would be, in a
word, sacrilege.  
        At the start of the film you get the idea this isn't typical Hollywood
fair, Sonny(Robert Duvall) tells a injured young man and his wife about
God, and comforts them in their moment of need. Sonny may not be the
typical minister. He admits that he is flawed and that he has problems with
drinking and faithfulness to his wife,  Jessie(Farrah Fawcett). His wife
has had enough of his cheating and has an affair with a young minister,
Horace(Todd Allen). Sonny gets a little drunk and goes to talk with Jessie
at their son's baseball game. When Horace tried to stop Sonny from taking
his family away from the part, Sonny strikes him with a bat and he is put
in a coma. Sonny, fearing legal repercussions, flees to Louisiana. He meets
a few people and starts a church, along with a fellow minister, Brother
Blackwell(John Beasley). He knows, and the audience knows, that
Sonny(re-baptized Apostle E.F.) will not escape the long arm of the law.
How he changes the lives of several people in the town, shows you can be a
good Christian and a sinner. 
        This film is easily one of the top five of the year, and a milestone in
Christian film making. Robert Duvall's performance is the best one I have
seen, since Billy Bob Thornton's incredible roll in Sling Blade. The script
it tight and the direction is great. I really loved this film's ability not
to be to preachy to the audience and doesn't force them to side with Sonny.
The movie's emotional look at the topic of religion and society is almost
refreshing. This is a triumphantly brilliant film, Duvall's performance is
the best of the year and deserves the Best Actor Oscar. Go see it!

Title
Review for Rush Hour (1998)
Jackie Chan  has been in well over 60 movies, so what makes this buddy cop
movie special? Not much. Sure it has some funny scenes, but they are much to
spaced out to really hold your  interest in what's going on during Rush Hour.
Jackie Chan plays Detective Inspector Lee, who is flown from Hong Kong to
America, to assist in a kidnapping investigation. The missing kid  is the
daughter of Consul Han (Tzi Ma), a wealthy Chinese diplomat. The problem is
the FBI doesn't want Lee messing up their investigation, so they get a cop
from the Los Angeles Police Department to baby-sit Lee while he's in town.
That babysitter is the flamboyant, egotistical, and mildly amusing Detective
James Carter (Chris Tucker). Carter is a loner and he doesn't like having
people interfere with his investigations. He definitely doesn't like a baby-
sitting assignment and decides to do some investigating without the FBI's
permission, with the help of Lee.
Rush Hour's gimmick is far from original. It's just a buddy movie, with the
usual "two unlikely friends" theme. Chris Tucker and Jackie Chan have pretty
good screen chemistry, unfortunately the script fails to supply them with
enough funny scenes to use it. When you add the predictable plot and mediocre
directing, Tucker & Chan become the best thing about Rush Hour.
By now Chan is a master at comedy martial arts films, so he is just along for
the ride. Chris Tucker gives the best performance here. Tucker, who was
unbelievably irritating in "The Fifth Element" and "Friday", tones down his
style and actually makes his character work.
Unless you're a huge martial arts fan, I don't see why you would want to see
Rush Hour. As a comedy it fails to deliver enough laughs and as an action film
it is nothing but karate rehash.
-----------== Posted via Deja News, The Discussion Network ==----------
http://www.dejanews.com/       Search, Read, Discuss, or Start Your Own    

Title
Review for Patch Adams (1998)
        The scene at the end of 1989's `Dead Poets Society,' when Robin
Williams' English students stand up on their desk and say, `Captain, My
Captain,' gets me every time. Unfortunately, the court room scene near the end
of Robin's newest film, `Patch Adams,' doesn't have anywhere near the same
impact.
        From the surface `Patch Adams' looks very promising. It's a story
about a not so young man, Patch Adams (Robin Williams), who finds meaning in
his life through helping sick people. When the film opens, we find Patch,
depressed and suicidal, checking himself into a mental hospital. In a few
scenes, strongly reminiscent of `One Flew over the Cuckoo's Nest,' he ends up
helping the patients through their problems; and it's here that he finds how
much he loves working with people. So he checks himself out of the hospital,
and heads straight to medical school.
        Right from the start, Patch uses comedy to help make the patient more
comfortable. He continuously breaks medical tradition and makes the Dean of
the school angry. Shortly after joining medical school, he meets and falls in
love with Carin (Monica Potter). They, along with Patch's dork friend, Truman
(Daniel London), start a medical clinic for uninsured people. Once the Dean
catches wind of the clinic, he tells Patch he can't graduate and kicks him
out of school. Patch, like what any true American would do, takes the school
to court. It's here where the not so climatic court room battle takes place,
over whether or not Patch can become a real doctor.
        I have never seen a movie with some potential just completely blow
it. It seems more like a series of short sketches, rather than a full-length
movie. Considering it runs almost two hours, much too long for such a light
film, it could have flowed much smoother. Not to mention the fact of how
serious the film takes itself, and manages to cover all the cliches of bad
melodrama. Robin Williams saves the film from being abysmal with several
comic scenes that elevate the movie to entertaining and worthwhile levels. 
But those moments are rare and in the end `Patch Adams' is barely average.
-----------== Posted via Deja News, The Discussion Network ==----------
http://www.dejanews.com/       Search, Read, Discuss, or Start Your Own    

Title
Review for Kissing a Fool (1998)
        What would happen if you best friend sleeps with your fiancée? Would
it make any difference if you asked him too? That's what this new independent
film from second time director Doug Ellin is about.
  Jay(Jason Lee), a depressed young writer, introduces his editor, Sam(Mili
Avital), to his best friend Max Abbott(David Schwimmer). Max and Sam hit it
off and are engages about two weeks later. Max, worried that Sam will cheat
on him, ask Jay to "test" her loyalty. Jay doesn't agree but when Max goes
out of town, Jay falls in love with Sam.
        The script is rather funny but the movie just doesn't fly. The actors
are believable and likable in their parts. Unfortunately the movie is just
cute and pretty entertaining but lacks originality and creativity.
-----== Posted via Deja News, The Leader in Internet Discussion ==-----
http://www.dejanews.com/rg_mkgrp.xp   Create Your Own Free Member Forum

Title
Review for Apt Pupil (1998)
        `I want to know everything.' That's what Todd Bowmen, a sixteen year
old high school student, tells Arthur Denker, a fugitive Nazi war criminal.
What Todd wants to know everything about is the Holocaust. Not only does he
want to know about it; he wants to know every graphic detail and to hear all
about Denker's involvement in the massacre.
        Denker has no choice but to tell him, because he is being
blackmailed. Todd has promised to turn Denker into the proper authorities, if
he doesn't tell him about his crimes. So Denker tells him everything. The
stories seem to be a little too much for Todd to handle and they begin to
affect his life. Slowly, at first, but then sure enough, his grades plummet,
he can't sleep, and he becomes anti-social.
        It is not long before his entire life revolves around Arthur and his
dreadful stories. The plot explores deeply the mentor/friend relationship that
Arthur and Todd have. There is always a veil of distrust between the two,
because they each are holding some secret over the other's head.
        If there was only one reason to see this movie, it would be Ian
McKellen's incredible performance as Arthur Denker. McKellen plays the part to
perfection and he definitely deserves an Oscar nomination for his work here.
The performance is reminiscent of his Oscar nominated work in 1995's Richard
III, but he takes his role in Apt Pupil a step further. Brad Renfo is quite
good as Todd, but he far overshadowed by Ian. The only other performance that
is given any screen time is David Schwimmer, who plays Todd's guidance
counselor. David does the best work of his entire career here; he is great.
        Bryan Singer, known for directing the incredible The Usual Suspects,
does a very good job here. His style matches perfectly with the material. The
film is based on Steven King's novella, but Brandon Boyce, a first timer,
wrote the screenplay.
        Apt Pupil is very dark and disturbing and shows that evil exists
everywhere. The most noticeable flaw is the running time. It ran about fifteen
minutes too long, and would have been better if it was slightly faster paced.
        Overall, the movie is entertaining, thought provoking, and well worth
seeing.
-----------== Posted via Deja News, The Discussion Network ==----------
http://www.dejanews.com/       Search, Read, Discuss, or Start Your Own    

Title
Review for Civil Action, A (1998)
 What happens when a greedy, cut throat personal injury lawyer gets a heart
of gold? This is the simple basis to one of the year's best pictures.
Although nicely written and directed by Steven Zaillian, the Academy Award
winning writer of Schindler's List, `A Civil Action' doesn't rely on its
artistic style or atmosphere, but mainly on the acting power of its
incredible ensemble.
 `A Civil Action' is a true story, based on the best selling novel of the
same name, by Jonathan Harr. The film introduces us to Jan Schlichtmann(John
Travolta), a rich and powerful, personal injury attorney. He has found a
case in which two powerful corporations may have dumped toxins that
accidentally poisoned the water in a small town. The water may have caused
eight children to develop leukemia, and their families want to know the
truth.
 Jan, after much deliberation, decides to take the case against the
companies. So he and his law partners (which include the brilliant William
H. Macy, among others), begin what is to become their most expensive and
trying case. But the corporations are not going down easy, they have their
own cut throat lawyers. Jerome Facher(Robert Duvall) is one of them and he
knows every trick in the book. As they get further along in the case, they
get further and further into debt. They even begin to doubt if they will win
the case at all.
 The film runs brilliantly for an hour and a half but as it nears the end,
due to time constraints I am guessing, they begin to cover too much too
fast. The end happens far too quickly, and leaves you feeling unsatisfied.
If they had added fifteen minutes to the film, this could have been
corrected.
 That being said, the movie is more performance powered than story driven.
Travolta is simply marvelous as Jan. Upstaged only by Duvall's perfectly
executed, heartless corporate lawyer.
 All in all the film is great, terrific performances and for the most part,
great writing and directing. One of the top ten movies of 1998.
My Movie Review Archives:
http://us.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Ryan+Davis

Title
Review for Analyze This (1999)
        Robert De Niro's been in such brilliant films as `The
Deer Hunter,' `Taxi Driver,' `GoodFellas,' and
`Raging Bull.' He usually portrays cold and apathetic characters
that if they show emotion at all, it's rarely, if ever,
humorous. While he remains one of the best actors alive, his attempts
at comedy haven't always worked, remember Mad Dog and Glory? But
more recently he has shown a turnaround, following up the excellent
`Wag the Dog' with this, his newest, `Analyze This.'
`Analyze This' is from talented writer/director Harold Ramis,
the man behind such comedy classics as Animal House, Caddyshack,
Ghostbusters, and many more funny films. He employs a great cast and
leads Billy Crystal, De Niro, and Lisa Kudrow to unusually good
performances for a comedy. The script is not as sharp as it could be,
the material has to be stretched out a little too much, but the actors
cover well for the faults. The film revolves around Paul Vitti (De
Niro), a middle aged mobster who is having trouble dealing with all
the stress in his life. He is having a mob war with a rival family
headed by Primo Sindone (Chazz Palminteri) which is leading to all
this extra stress in his life.  Paul begins to have panic attacks,
which distract him from his work.  Completely by accident Paul bumps
into Dr. Ben Sobel (Crystal), a psychiatrist, whom he recruits to be
his personal `head doctor.'
        While Ben doesn't think this is a good idea, he isn't
given much choice in the matter. He becomes an employee of
Mr. Vitti's. When Ben goes on vacation to Mimi to get married, Paul
packs his bags and follows him to Florida. Ben's fiancée, Laura
played nicely by Kudrow, doesn't like the idea of her soon-to- be
husband having mob ties.  But it's not over yet because Ben is
about to get tangled in the middle of a FBI investigation.
`Analyze This' is a fairly original film and while it provides
only a few big belly laughs it keeps your smiling and laughing most of
the way through. De Niro makes the movie with his overemotional
gangster, stealing every scene he's in. But Crystal holds his own
with his best performance in recent memory. All in all an
entertaining, funny film worth seeing.
-----------== Posted via Deja News, The Discussion Network ==----------
http://www.dejanews.com/       Search, Read, Discuss, or Start Your Own    

Title
Review for Untouchables, The (1987)
To look back at a movie after ten or so years and see how it looks then.
That is a sign of true greatness. The best of movies are the ones remember,
or talked about after 10, 20, 30, 40, or even 50 or more years. I believe
that "The Untouchables" will be one of the movies that last at least 30
years, maybe more. Cause as of now, it's aged like wine.
Many would stand here and praise Brian De Palma, the director, for it's
place in film history. I won't. Sure, De Palma has done movies considered
great, for instance: Scarface and Carlito's Way. But in his greatest films
he has only functioned as director, never writer. And this pattern stays
true in "The Untouchables", which was written for the screen by David Mamet
(Wag The Dog).
The story involves the legendary bootlegger, Al Copone(Robert De Niro). Al
runs the city with his violent and explosive methods. Eliot Ness(Kevin
Costner) wants to stop Capone and put an end to his organization. Problem
is, Capone has people everywhere, and his conspirators are far reaching.
Eliot, not being able to trust his own army of men, turns to three other men
that have not been coerced by Capone. The group includes a trio of fine
actors: Sean Connery, Andy Garcia, and the lesser known Charles Martin
Smith. The rest of the story involves Eliot & Companies struggler to beat
Copone, not matter what they risk even their lives or their families.
All the performances are great. And who else better to play Copone than
Bobby De Niro? Connery turns in a great performance as the older mentor,
which won him an Academy Award for Best Supporting Actor.
De Palma's direction is fine, and he has several great scenes. Including,
a gun fight scene that takes place in slow-motion, and involves a falling
baby carriage.  Its sad to see how he has deteriorated with his latest
"Snake Eyes", in which he feels the need to be ultra stylish and just forget
about the story. The story is really what makes this movie so strong, and
"Snake Eyes" so weak.
All and all a great film. And one that if you haven't seen yet, you better
check out.
-----== Posted via Deja News, The Leader in Internet Discussion ==-----
http://www.dejanews.com/rg_mkgrp.xp   Create Your Own Free Member Forum

Title
Review for Ronin (1998)
        If you have ever seen Fox TV's special car chase programs, you'll
have a good idea about the content of Ronin, the new action "thriller" from
director John Frankenheimer.
        The film involves a mysterious briefcase, that several groups of
terrorist want to get their hands on.  An Irish women, Dierdre (played by The
Truman Show's Natascha McElhone), hires a group of mercenaries to assist her
in getting the briefcase. Among the people she hires are Sam (Robert De
Niro), Vincent (Jean Reno), and Gregor (Stellan Skarsgĺrd from Good Will
Hunting). Dierdre's  groups assignment is too seize the briefcase while the
current owners are transporting it. They accomplish this task, but a traitor
is in the bunch and the briefcase is soon on the run again.
        The briefcase stays on the run, as the movie leads the viewer through
several  plot twists that are badly executed. The writer seemed to be
attempting to make a smart action movie, but failed to understand that just
because there are surprises, it doesn't add too the credibility of a senseless
script. The plot twists get no reaction because they come at a time where no
one cares what is going on, after the apparent climax of the film.
        But to add to the excitement, as I mentioned earlier, there are endless
car chase scenes. They are unrealistic and fail to add anything to the story.
Don't get me wrong, I love car chases, but they were overdone and too long
here.
        We never do find out what's in the briefcase, but I doubt anyone cares
by the time they finish sitting through this two hour long attempted thriller.
-----== Posted via Deja News, The Leader in Internet Discussion ==-----
http://www.dejanews.com/rg_mkgrp.xp   Create Your Own Free Member Forum

Title
Review for U.S. Marshals (1998)
"I didn't kill my wife!" Dr. Richard Kimble shouts to his pursuer Marshal
Sam Gerard, who responds "I don't care!", right before Richard jumps from a
pipe into a river hundreds of feet below. This is a classic scene from a
great movie, 1993's The Fugitive. Now five years later the sequel to that
blockbuster movie comes to theaters, does it measure up to its predecessor?
 In short: NO. 
The plot follows the original all too well. Here we have a innocent man,
Mark Sheridan(Wesley Snipes), who escapes from prison in a plane crash,
luckily left unguarded by the fearless Sam Gerard(Tommy Lee Jones). Since
Sam has a lot of experience in man hunts, he is put in charge of the chase,
with one small addition to his team, Special Agent John Royce(Robert Downey
Jr.). Along the way Sam discovers Mark's innocence and attempts to unravel
a government conspiracy.
The movie's plot is almost laughable, a ex-government agent framed for two
murders? Yea that's realism for you.   Robery Downey Jr. and Wesley Snipes'
performances were conventional and uninteresting. If the movie had
attempted to do something different, like a character study on Sam Gerard
it would have been a lot better. The Fugitive had a nice buffer between the
crime and the escape, we got to know Richard Kimble before he was being
pursued, we didn't know Mark when he escaped so the audience had no feeling
for him. Don't bother seeing this film, just re-watch the original, more
entertaining film. 

Title
Review for Return to Paradise (1998)
Would you give up three years of your life to save a close friend's life?
This is the moral dilemma placed before Sheriff (Vince Vaughn) and Tony
(David Conrad) in Return To Paradise.
Two years previous Sheriff, Tony, and Lewis (Joaquin Phoenix) are three
young guys that meet by coincidences unexplained, in Malaysia. They become
best of friends and live together for five weeks partying and having a great
time. Finally, Tony and Sheriff  decide they have to get back to the states,
they exchange good-byes and go back to their humdrum lives in the states.
Two years later, they find out,  that Lewis, who stayed in Malaysia to work
on environmental projects, was arrested the day after their departure. It
seems that the police had come to their house in search of a missing bike,
and instead found a block of hash. Due to the amount of weed found, Lewis is
charged with trafficking and sentenced to be hanged.
After two years of appeals, in desperation, Lewis  sends his lawyer Beth
Eastern (Anne Heche) to attempt to persuade his two friends to return to
Malaysia and accept responsibility for their portions of the pot.  If they
both return, Lewis' life will be spared and they will both be given three
years and if only one returns he will get six years imprisonment.
The film mostly follows Sheriff, now a limousine driver in NYC, as he tries
to decide if he should return and give up his freedom.  Also featured is
Jada Pinkett  in a small role as an ambitious and deceitful newspaper
reporter, named M.J.
Return to Paradise is beautifully directed by Joseph Ruben, whose previous
work includes "The Good Son".  He does a great job of keeping the pace of
the film, and doesn't let up near the end, but unleashes several great plot
twist.  The script is suspenseful,  and was tightly written by Wesley Strick
and Bruce Robinson, with lots of great dialog.
This is a very powerful, intelligent, and thought provoking film. It
contains great performances by Vince Vaughn and Anne Heche. I was especially
impressed by Heche's performance, as it is so much stronger than all her
previous roles.
It is rare, in the summer, to find a movie that makes the audience think.
This one does. There wasn't one person who didn't leave the theater, who
wasn't thinking to themselves, "Would I do this for my friend." As for the
answer, they probably will have a of  hard time with it as these characters
did.
-----== Posted via Deja News, The Leader in Internet Discussion ==-----
http://www.dejanews.com/rg_mkgrp.xp   Create Your Own Free Member Forum

Title
Review for Man in the Iron Mask, The (1998)
        From the writer of Braveheart (Randall Wallace), comes this middle age
drama starring Leonardo DiCaprio and Leonardo DiCaprio. That's right double
Leo, he plays the mean king (Louis) and the apparently extremely virtuous
Philippe. 
        King Louis is an evil king, he doesn't feed his people and he sleeps
around, to name a few of his transgressions. Guarded by the faithful
D'Artagnan (Gabriel Byrne), who served Louis' father, Louis flaunts his
wealth while his people starve. Seeing the injustice of Louis' reign former
musketeers Aramis, Athos and Porthos (Jeremy Irons, John Malkovich, and 
Gérard Depardieu, respectively) come up with a plan to expel King Louis
from his throne. To do this they must rescue Philippe (Louis' lost twin
brother) who has been locked away in a prison, his face locked in an iron
mask. If there plan goes correctly they will be able to switch the brothers
and no one will know. 
        Its amazing to me how the story is drawn out for close to two and a half
hours, but Randall Wallace manages to do it, although its undeniably slow. 
The cinematography (Peter Suschitzky) and costumes (James Acheson) and
admirable, but not incredible. All four of the musketeers steal the show
from young Leo, who plays the twins very unconvincing. The movie is really
slow, and although attempts to be as stunning as Braveheart, really doesn't
get even close. Bottom Line:  Too long and too watered down to reach the
quality this one is aiming for, although there a few mildly entertaining
scenes. 

Title
Review for Thin Red Line, The (1998)
        It was hard to watch a World War II film without comparing it to
Spielburg's epic `Saving Private Ryan.' Since both films were released in
1998 and both dealt with the horror of war, comparison is unavoidable. While
`A Thin Red Line' is a solid film that has some strong features, it doesn't
touch the audience like SPR did.
        The plot is very loosely strung together; it's like the camera just
follows around a group of soldiers. Sgt. Edward Welsh (Sean Penn) is a tough
as nails career soldier; war is his life. Capt. James 'Bugger' Staros (Elias
Koteas) is a captain who refuses to risk the lives of his troops,
unnecessarily. Lt. Col. Gordon Tall (Nick Nolte) is a officer, who has been
passed over so many times for general that he sees the war as his last chance
at earning his stars. The list could go on and on, but most of the characters
are in and out of the picture so fast you won't even get attached to any of
them. There are also tons of cameos from stars, like John Travolta to George
Clooney.
        That is the main problem with `A Thin Red Line', lack of character
development. There are just too many characters. Since we don't know anyone
well enough to care about them, we don't care what happens to them in the end.
There are other weaknesses as well, including running time and narration. `A
Thin Red Line' is way too long, or maybe it's just the fact that it runs
forever without any development. Then there are the endless voiceovers by at
least four different characters. This becomes tiresome, really quickly.
        Not just to focus just on flaws, `A Thin Red Line' is still an above
average film. It's chock-full of great performances, with the leading standout
being Nick Nolte's Oscar worthy performance.  Also the cinematography is just
beautiful and the battle scenes are outstanding.
        While `A Thin Red Line' isn't the masterpiece that `Saving Private
Ryan' was, it is still a worthwhile film. If you have a good amount of time
and you don't mind spending it in the theater, check it out.
-----------== Posted via Deja News, The Discussion Network ==----------
http://www.dejanews.com/       Search, Read, Discuss, or Start Your Own    
