Authors
Matthias Rackwitz
Number of Reviews
2

Title
Review for Bridge on the River Kwai, The (1957)
Directed by David Lean; Written by Michael Wilson, Carl Foreman, based
on Pierre Boulle's novel; Cinematography by Jack Hildyard; Music by
Malcolm Arnold; Edited by Peter Taylor; Produced by Sam Spiegel;
With Alec Guinness, William Holden, Jack Hawkins, Sessue Hayakawa, James
Donald, Geoffrey Horne
I want to correct what I wrote in a former retrospective of David Lean's
war picture. I still think that it doesn't deserve being the number 13
in the American Film Institute's list of the 100 greatest American
movies. And I think that Lumet's "12 Angry Men", Wilder's "Witness for
the Prosecution" and Kubrick's "Paths of Glory" would have been better
choices for the Best Picture Oscar in 1958. But I can't deny the
importance of "The Bridge on the River Kwai" - cinematically and in its
contents.
The film is set in Burma in 1943. A bataillon of British soldiers in
Japanese war captivity is forced by the Japanese to build a
strategically momentous railway bridge over the River Kwai. But the
British commanding officer, Colonel Nicholson (Alec Guinness), insists -
corresponding to the Geneva Conventions - that his officers needn't work
as simple workmen. Struggling toughly, Col. Nicholson forces the
Japanese commandant, Col. Saito (Sessue Hayakawa), to give way in this
respect. Afterwards Col. Nicholson assiduously commits himself for the
building of the bridge. He considers it an opportunity to raise his
men's morale, and he wants to prove superior British capabilities to the
Japanese. But the British High Command sends a few soldiers who shall
destroy the bridge, among them the American Shears (William Holden) - an
escapee from the Japanese prison camp - and the British Major Warden
(Jack Hawkins) ...
A flaw of the picture is the clichéd characterization of the Japanese
people. They are presented as if they were intellectually inferior to
the British - as if the Japanese were incapable of building a bridge.
And the film doesn't consistently question the military spirit as
Kubrick does in "Paths of Glory". Lean seems rather fascinated by the
military hierarchies. This is also perceptible in the conversations
between Col. Nicholson and Col. Saito. In this regard it is symptomatic
that Shears, who doubts the military logic, is a somehow unpleasant
person in the film. The audience is supposed to applaud Col. Nicholson's
perseverance concerning the question if his officers shall work on the
bridge or not. The spectators are supposed to neglect the risks Col.
Nicholson takes for his men. (The plot by-passes these risks.)
That means, the picture isn't perfect. But it has a lot of virtues as
well. It shows the "madness" of war and what war can produce in people's
minds. It shows how Col. Nicholson becomes possessed by the idea of
being a hero and that others (like Shears) get cynics. And "The Bridge
on the River Kwai" is an interesting study of characters with clashing
interests. These points and the sometimes ironic dialogue make this film
an anti-war film (despite the inconsistencies in the treatment of this
theme). David Lean's effective and atmospherically perfect direction
creates a high suspense, especially in the dramatic (though not wholly
plausible) showdown. 
Alec Guinness does a magnificent job of bringing Col. Nicholson to life
and making him such an interesting character. The other actors deliver
very good performances as well. Jack Hildyard's fine color
cinematography and the apt score are also helpful.
I like this extraordinary film despite its weaknesses.
(C) Karl Rackwitz (Klein Köris, Germany, 1999)

Title
Review for Little Nikita (1988)
A film retrospective by Karl Rackwitz (Berlin, Germany, 1998):
Directed by Richard Benjamin; With River Phoenix, Sidney Poitier,
Richard Jenkins, Caroline Kava, Richard Bradford, Richard Lynch
Here we have just another example of two fine actors wasted in a badly
written and weakly directed film.
The American teenager Jeff Grant (River Phoenix) applies for the
admission into the Air Force Academy. FBI man Roy Parmenter (Sidney
Poitier) examines Jeff's particulars and stumbles on contradictory
information about Jeff's parents (played by Richard Jenkins and Caroline
Kava). At the same time Parmenter works on another case: The former KGB
agent Scuba (played by Richard Lynch), who murdered Parmenter's
colleague 20 years ago, now commits a series of murders of Russian
agents to blackmail the KGB. Then KGB agent Konstantin Karpov (Richard
Bradford), who wants to catch Scuba, is seen in Fountain Grove, the
Grant family's place of residence. That makes Parmenter conjecture that
Jeff's parents are Russian spies. His investigations confirm this
suspicion. Jeff doesn't know of the espionage job of his parents. When
he is told of it by Roy, with whom he has made friends, he gets
thunderstruck. His parents - Russian spies?! Jeff's parents have been
living the life of ordinary American people for 20 years. They run a
garden nursery in Fountain Grove and use the false family name Grant.
Now KGB man Karpov instructs them, who are also potential victims of
Scuba, to become active again. They shall help in a surrender of money
organized to catch Scuba. The Grants don't want to take part. But Karpov
forces them by kidnapping Jeff ...
What may sound like an interesting idea, gets a disappointing film here.
"Little Nikita" doesn't nearly exhaust the opportunities of the subject.
It convinces neither on the level of Jeff's and his parents' identity
problems, nor in its treatment of the Cold War, nor is it a suspenseful
spy thriller.
The main problem of the film is its really weak screenplay (by Bo
Goldman and John Hill). We are told little about Jeff's girlfriend
although she doesn't seem unimportant in Jeff's life. The characters of
the parents aren't paid enough attention. The Russians are degraded to
cartoon characters. In short: The film can't be considered a serious
work. Yet it could have become an exciting film. It hasn't. The
screenplay is overly constructed and full of improbable incidents
leading to a totally unbelievable finale.
Another fatal problem is Richard Benjamin's clumsy direction, especially
in the action scenes of the film. An example is the weakly filmed scene,
in which Scuba makes a woman be run over by a ship. The directorial
flaws in the last 20 minutes of the film are much more serious than in
this scene. Benjamin's direction makes the implausible finale even more
absurd.
It is due to River Phoenix and Sidney Poitier that "Little Nikita" isn't
completely unwatchable. They give the film some interest and a little
bit suspense. Phoenix' performance is solid, partially fascinating,
although he sometimes tends to overacting here. His interpretation of
Jeff Grant hasn't the accuracy of his excellent performances in "Stand
by Me" (1986), "Running on Empty" (1987), "Dogfight" (1991) and "My Own
Private Idaho" (1991). Sidney Poitier is also quite good in the role of
the FBI man Parmenter.
There are some references to the bilateral policy of détente between the
Eastern and Western blocs. But to treat this theme convincingly it would
have needed a serious dealing instead of clichés.
After all "Little Nikita" is a disappointing film with some
entertainment value thanks to the two leads.
To all those who want to see better films starring River Phoenix, I
especially recommend the following film in his filmography, Sidney
Lumet's masterpiece "Running on Empty" (1987) in which Phoenix gives one
of the best performances of his career.
I give "Little Nikita" still a ** rating on the Maltin scale of four
stars.
