Authors
Julia Levin
Number of Reviews
15

Title
Review for Life Apart: Hasidism in America, A (1997)
Legend has it that one rabbi, when coming to America, couldn't fit the
Torah's scrolls into their new covers.  "We can't modify the Torah to
fit America," he said, but "we will tailor America to fit the Torah."  A
Life Apart: Hasidism in America is a thoughtful, compassionate
documentary that illuminates the philosophy behind Hasidism's stubborn
refusal to join the American mainstream.
Even among different denominations of Jewish religion, Hasidism stands
alone, a religion of minorities among minorities.  The invaluable
quality of this film is that it neither critiques nor praises the
Hasidic religion.  For a subject matter as extreme and uncompromising as
the religion itself, A Life Apart is wonderfully even-handed. 
Throughout the film, which starts and concludes with an exuberant
wedding ceremony underlying the significance of ritual for the Hasidic
community, we dig into the mystic philosophy behind the Hasidic refusal
to participate in the contemporary world.
Unwilling to obey societal rules, Hasidic Jews, the majority of whom
came to America in the 40s and 50s, still evoke disdain in mainstream
society.  Described by many as smelly, ugly, and mean looking, they
consider themselves a spiritual elite, thus not mingling with
non-Hasidics.  To keep their Hasidic life style, they deny the very
premise of attaining the American dream.
Narrated by Sarah Jessica Parker and Leonard Nimoy, the film traces the
roots of Hasidic teachings, first introduced by Baal Shem Tov, a founder
of Hasidism who made complex spiritual ideas accessible to less educated
people.  His way of explaining the presence of God by sanctifying
routine activities and everyday occurrences gave his followers deeper
spiritual meaning.
The geographic trajectory of A Life Apart reaches as far as Ukraine,
where the Hasidic movement originated, and Moscow, once an epicenter of
anti-religious destruction and where Hasidism is experiencing an
enormous revival today.  The focus of the film, however, remains
constant: an intimate examination of vibrant, ritualistic Hasidic life
in Brooklyn, a center of the Hasidic world.
In a series of interviews, Jewish theological scholars, community
members, and their families -- as well as non-Jews -- discuss the
struggle between traditionalism and modernism and pose questions about
the central ideas of Hasidism.  Hasidism means giving up a majority of
occupational options and, therefore, subjecting their families to a life
of severe financial restraint.  It means never sending one's kids to
college or a regular school, watching television, or going to the cinema
(which means they won't be seeing this movie).
Against the multicolored, multiracial New York landscape, Hasidim, in
their black coats, sidelocks, and enormous hats, look shockingly
foreign, yet as the film demonstrates, they are American Hasidim.  By
the end of the film, much to my surprise, the same wedding I watched at
the beginning nearly touched me to tears, for it acquired a different
meaning.  I have never been one for sentiment, but I do believe that
this is what good art should be able to do: To give us back to ourselves
and transform our preexisting beliefs or ignorance into something new.
Director: Menachem Daum, Oren Rudavsky
Producer: Arnold Labaton, Menachem Daum, Oren Rudavsky
Writer: Menachem Daum, Robert Seidman
Starring: Sarah Jessica Parker, Leonard Nimoy
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com

Title
Review for Voyages (1999)
Emmanuel Finkiel, the director of Voyages, was once an assistant
director to the late, great Krzystof Kieslowski.  Perhaps from
Kieslowski the French filmmaker learned to portray daily life with such
quiet intensity and deep profoundness.  Voyages reminds us that life is
an ongoing memory, a way of coping with the present by looking into the
past.
The film is composed of three separate stories about people searching
for their relatives, all of whom have had lives forever changed by the
horrors of the World War II.  The first story begins with a group of
French Holocaust survivors who make a pilgrimage to Auschwitz.  On the
way, they stop at an old Jewish cemetery, passing by monuments to the
victims of the Warsaw Ghetto in Poland.  Before reaching the site of the
Jewish death camp, the bus in which they travel breaks down.  In
distress, they argue and reminisce about their past; when they interact,
the lost world of Eastern European Jewry echoes in their intonations,
gestures, and language.
We witness the emotional quandary of one of the passengers, Rivka, but
just when the story picks up the speed, it flows into another one:  A
widow living in Paris receives a phone call from a man in Lithuania who
claims to be her father.  She agrees to meet him, and the painful
exploration of the past begins again.  Is this man, whom she assumed had
died in a concentration camp fifty years ago, really her father?  She
questions him, but the memories they share have been obscured by time
and distance.
In the third and most enigmatic episode an old, Russian émigré, Vera,
travels to Tel-Aviv looking for her distant relative.  To her dismay,
nobody in Israel speaks Yiddish and her cousin's memory is faulty.  (It
reportedly took Finkiel three years to find actress Esther Gorintin to
play Vera, a woman whose round face and beady eyes exude tireless
dignity and determination.)  By a sheer accident Vera, meets Rivka on a
Tel Aviv bus, whereupon the film reveals its delicate psychological
premise.
Unlike many other films that deal with the Holocaust, Voyages is a film
of incredible emotional subtlety.  While it may only be appreciated by a
patient and careful viewer, the film's pace is slow; its elaborate, long
takes thicken the weight of the past.  Set in a contemporary world, the
film lays out the heartbreak of the post-war generation with tenderness
and compassion -- and shows how that tragic legacy separates it from the
rest of the world.
Director: Emmanuel Finkiel
Producer: Yael Fogiel, Laetitia Gonzales
Writer: Emmanuel Finkiel
Starring: Shulamit Adar, Liliane Rovére, Esther Gorintin, Natan Cogan,
Moscu Alcalay, Vladimir Friedman, Maurice Chevit
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!

Title
Review for Diplomat, The (2000)
The Australian documentary The Diplomat gives a nearly complete overview
of the situation in East Timor up to its August 1999 elections.  It
starts with the historical background of this small island's
tribulations: Since the 16th century until 1975, the island was a
Portuguese colony.  Then, with the end of the Portuguese revolution,
East Timor declared its independence and was immediately invaded by
Indonesia, its giant neighbor.
The focus of the film is José Ramos Horta, a political activist who
represents the Eastern Timorese Resistance historic leader, Xanana
Gusmao, who was imprisoned in Indonesia for a 20-year sentence.  Horta
is a 1996 Nobel Prize winner who has been fighting for the independence
of this little-known island for 24 years.
The most compelling aspect of the film is its ability to convey how the
tragic events of East Timor and its desperate struggle for independence
have been largely ignored by the world.  Since East Timor has no army to
support its claims for autonomy, Horta says it must have been an act of
God that his people had survived.
Horta's life is that of a peripatetic fighter who is exiled from the
country the independence of which is his life mission.  The challenge of
Horta's mission is accentuated by the fact that there is no unity among
the leaders of East Timor; some of them are satisfied by living in a
country annexed to its oppressors, others are adamant to fight for
complete independence till the end.  The film follows Horta, almost
always dog-tired, from one conference on the East Timorese crisis to
another and intersperses Horta's diplomatic career with footage of hot
events happening in East Timor: President Suharto resigns, Habibie takes
his place, nothing changes.  Indonesia itself has enough to worry about
and when its economic crisis reaches the bottom of the barrel,
Indonesian Foreign Minister Ali Alatas is sent to deliver to the world
promises of security and protection for East Timor.
While Horta's mother, Natalina, recollects how Indonesian militia
attacked her residence and took the lives of her children, the actual
footage testifies the acts of barbaric genocide that took place on the
island.  The film hits all the appropriate strings by conveying how
murder, torture, rape, all kinds of physical, sexual, and psychological
violations have been the daily life of the people of East Timor.  It
clearly exemplifies the frightening hypocrisy of the Indonesian
government which declares the crisis stable while more and more people
are being brutally executed.
Unfortunately, up until the depiction of the 1999 democratic election in
East Timor, the film more or less plods along.  It is only then that the
film picks up the pace by showing that just four hours after the
official announcement, the defeated militia gangs start to set East
Timor on fire.  There is a moment of almost sublime irony when President
Bill Clinton visits Indonesia with the intention to stop the genocide
and bring UN peacekeeping forces to the country.  He is greeted with a
military ceremony that, in my opinion, signifies the irreconcilable
difference between the East and the West.
Ironically, the portrait of José Ramos Horta, an indefatigable fighter
who broke the silence about East Timor in the (disinterested) Western
press, doesn't come out as memorable or inspiring.  Unquestionably, the
film is very effective and involving due to its subject matter, without
a mawkish triumph-of-the-human-spirit agenda being pushed.  But what
should have been a celebration of human tenacity comes out as an
intelligent film, though with a somewhat insipid portrayal of its hero.
Director: Tom Zubrycki
Producers: Sally Browning, Wilson da Silva
Writer: Tom Zubrycki
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com

Title
Review for Journal d'une femme de chambre, Le (1964)
When this movie was over, I felt frustrated, almost disappointed.  But
the more I thought about Diary of a Chambermaid, the more I came to
admire it.
The themes of obsessive desire, inhibitions imposed by society and
ridicule of conventional bourgeois values dominate Buńuel's work, and
Diary of a Chambermaid is no exception to that.  Unlike some of Buńuel's
most surrealistic films (L'Age d'Or, Un Chien Andalou, Belle de Jour),
Diary is fairly straightforward.  No one but Luis Buńuel can combine so
brilliantly sexuality, perversity, and humor against the backdrop of
fascism's in France in the early 1920s.
Celestine (Jeanne Moreau), a chic, elegantly dressed Parisian, finds a
position of chambermaid in a suburban manor.  Her frustration with
province -- "The countryside is always a little trite" -- soon proves to
be a rather premature conclusion, as she discovers her boss' shoe
fetishism, among his other peculiarities.  Curiously, Celestine finds
Monsieur Rabour's weakness harmless, if not attractive.  Moreau has one
of those sophisticated faces that give away so much yet reveal so
little.  With a wicked flicker in her eyes and a smirk playing at the
corners of her mouth, Celestine learns very quickly how to wrap everyone
around her finger.  She is dignified and calm with frigid and stingy
Madame Monteil, and playfully dismissive of her husband's sexual
flirtations (Michel Piccoli is wonderful at portraying the spineless,
trapped husband).  Her poise, body language, and facial expressions,
especially in the scenes when she discovers Monsieur Rabour's private
shoe stock, are delightful to watch, and the restored B&W print makes
the best of it.
When Celestine suspects Joseph, Monteil's servant and a devoted
right-wing bigot, of a murder, she postpones her return to Paris and
decides to investigate the murder on her own.  Despite the fact that
Celestine goes so far as to frame Joseph, her coming on to him is an
example of a truly Buńuelian touch -- ambiguity and perversity.  Is she
really attracted to the sadist (she was horrified once while watching
him slaughter geese) and a murderer, or is she out for the revenge, or
perhaps even both?  We'll never know, and that's why I adore Buńuel so
much -- for him there is always so much more in people than mere
characterization.
The rise of nationalism and anti-Semitism in France provides Buńuel with
another chance to exhibit his radical, vitriolic, and atheistic view of
the world he finds so decadent and devoid of morality.  After all,
Joseph gets away with the murder and Celestine, an impetuous spirit
anticipating the aroma of justice, turns out to be no more than a shrewd
opportunist selling herself short to become another Madame Monteil -- a
bored bourgeois wife.
Director: Luis Buńuel
Producers: Michel Safra, Serge Silberman
Writer: Luis Buńuel, Jean-Claude Carričre
Starring: Jeanne Moreau, Michel Picolli, Georges Géret, Daniel Ivernel,
Françoise Lugagne, Jean Ozenne, Dominique Sauvage
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com

Title
Review for Une affaire de goűt (1999)
A string of movies emerging from France, including With A Friend Like
Harry, The School of Flesh, and The Taste of Others, represent the "new"
type of French films that American distributors are looking for. 
Partially dark comedies, partially thrillers, they get packaged as
contemporary French noir.  They are also notorious for taking no risks
and being barely skin deep with plot and character.
In A Matter of Taste, Frédéric Delamont (Bernard Giraudeau), an
industrial tycoon apparently at a peak of his success, is obsessed with
two things: food and himself.  At a fancy restaurant, he meets a
temporary waiter named Nicolas, an irreverent young man with the hands
of a pianist and a charming, arrogant smile.  To feed his
self-indulgence, Frédéric hires Nicolas as a personal food taster.  As
we soon discover, he is plotting to get the waiter obsessed with the
same culinary tastes Frédéric has, and, more importantly, to essentially
make Nicolas a living replica of himself.  Nicolas, played by
Jean-Pierre Lorit, best known for his role as a young law student in
Krzysztof Kieslowski's incredible Red, gives his character a touch of
unruly enigma, but that is as far as he can go with the role.
Nicolas finds his new boss an exotic fellow: The businessman is obsessed
with food and is phobic about everything he can't control.  He leads an
empty life, spending most of his time eating lush, exquisitely prepared
culinary masterpieces and lamenting about his childhood -- perhaps real,
but mostly likely invented -- but boring either way.
A Matter of Taste is about obsession and the many different forms it can
take.  However, in this film, the obsessed are far less interesting than
their obsessions.  One of the problems is that the magic chemistry that
is supposed to draw the two men together and change them is painfully
absent.  Frederic and Nicolas don't have much to say to one another, and
aside from their spare, monosyllabic dialogue, the film is full of
homoerotic undertones and creepy suggestions that keep you only mildly
interested in whether something will ever happen between the two.
The doppelganger motif doesn't work here --simply put, the story never
creates the necessary level of suspense or substance.  In addition, they
are ill-chosen players for the thriller genre: Frédéric exhibits no more
energy than the dead fish he is allergic to, and, as the story
progresses, Nicolas's growing dependency syndrome becomes irksome (aside
from being laughably predictable).
It's impossible to call this film seductive or dangerous, or even
sensuous, with the exception of the food tasting scenes.  The thematic
components of the film -- the manipulator vs. the manipulated, rich vs.
poor, victim vs. victimizer -- never develop into anything even remotely
sociologically coherent.  From the beginning, we know what has happened
and who has done it, we are just not sure why.  Is there a symbolic
relationship that unites these two men?  Platonic love?  Sex?  Money? 
Unfortunately, the answer doesn't matter when the characters are as
vacuous as problems they represent.
Director: Bernard Rapp
Producer: Catherine Dussart, Chantal Perrin
Writer: Bernard Rapp, Phillippe Balland
Starring: Bernard Giraudeau, Jean-Pierre Lorit, Florence Thomassin,
Charles Berling, Jean-Pierre Léaud, Artus de Penguern, Laurent
Spielvogel
http://www.pyramidefilms.com/uneaffairedegout/
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com

Title
Review for Pripyat (1999)
The word Chernobyl has become a metaphor not only for the horror of
uncontrolled nuclear power but also for the secrecy and deception of a
collapsing Soviet system, with its disregard for the safety and welfare
of its workers and their families.  When the reactor exploded on April
26, 1986, the explosion instantly killed 30 people.  More than 15,000
died in the emergency cleanup afterwards.  But the real scale of the
catastrophe, which displaced hundreds of thousands of people and
converted villages into ghost towns, turned out to be far greater.
Today, progressive scientists say the effects of that radiation are more
serious than ever predicted.  However, 15 years later, uncertainty still
hangs over the planned closure of the nuclear plant this year, despite
warnings that it is a time bomb.  Of its four Soviet-built reactors,
only number three is still in operation.
For the people who still live in Pripyat, a small town situated next to
Chernobyl, it is both a contamination zone (or a "Zone of Alienation,"
its official title) and a place where they lived, dreamt, created
families, and raised kids.  Prior to 1986, the population of Pripyat was
roughly 48,000.  In 1999, 13 years after the nuclear explosion, the
Austrian filmmaker Nikolaus Geyhalter examines a human face of this
"Alienation Zone" -- the lives of people who returned to town after the
disaster and those who are still waiting to be relocated.
The mood of the remaining elders is grim, but nobody seems to be
particularly shocked.  Although some of them, in the course of several
interviews, clearly understand the initial Soviet cover-up in
acknowledging the tragedy, the majority don't exhibit much knowledge and
choose simply to submit to fate.  One elderly couple shares their family
story -- how they left, got homesick, and returned to Pripyat, where
they live in nearly primitive conditions.  Having nobody to share their
lives with, their days are spent by gathering mushrooms, cooking, and
doing housework.  "The barbwire doesn't stop the radiation, so why be
scared?" they wonder.
Pripyat used to be a lively little town, both a powerful nuclear center
and a conveniently planned city with schools and urban apartments.  It
is now a dead, lifeless stretch of land littered with scraps of the
past: Decaying buildings, gnarled benches of the former sport stadium,
glaring empty spaces.  A solitary lab scientist is the only one in the
film who, when discussing the aftermath of nuclear tragedy, openly
deplores the system for taking measures without also taking social
responsibility and assuring safety.
Other official workers -- the chief operator of the plant's switchboard,
a parking lot foreman, and the checkpoint militiamen -- all appear to be
re-playing half-scared, half-informed pieces of information. 
Technically, the filmmaker's agenda remains objective, if not anonymous:
No voice over or narrator acts as mediator, except when questions are
asked, and no editing juxtapositions are presented.
The film eloquently differentiates the official version of nuclear
tragedy and the meaning of the tragedy for Pripyat inhabitants.  There
is an accidental play on words, a trick I take as a metaphor for the
film's meaning.  One of the interviewees is asked if it makes sense to
guard a huge parking lot containing radioactively contaminated
vehicles.  Perhaps those who surround Pripyat, calling for a
"theoretical renewal of Chernobyl's earth" would know the answer? 
Pripyat is a documentary about a place that officially has ceased to
exist.  It does, however, exist as a living proof of a never-changing
corruption of the Soviet regime, a corrupt legacy which, despite the
fall of USSR, remains omnipresent in this carefully crafted and
deliberately slow-paced documentary.
Director:  Nikolaus Geyhalter
Producer Nikolaus Geyhalter
Writer: Nikolaus Geyhalter, Wolfgang Widehofer
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com

Title
Review for Crime and Punishment in Suburbia (2000)
If you're seeking enlightenment on what you think would be a modern
reverberation on the timeless Fyodor Dostoyevsky's masterpiece, don't be
misled by Crime and Punishment in Suburbia.  While the film opens with a
quotation from Crime and Punishment, which, I suppose, is intended to
lead us to a new interpretation of the book, that's the only (tenuous)
connection.  In the novel, the protagonist, Raskolnikov, rebels against
the morality imposed on him by a society and kills an innocent woman. 
He later discovers that the worst punishment for the murder was the one
his guilty conscience made him to endure.  And perhaps, if you
concentrate hard enough, the suffering Raskolnikov could conceivably
parallel that of a pudgy adolescent Roseanne (Monica Keena ex of
Dawson's Creek), one of the main characters in the movie.
Completed before American Beauty, this artificial little movie resembles
it in every way possible, mainly because it examines the very same set
of stereotypes about malfunctioning wealthy suburbanites.  Vincent
(Vincent Kartheiser), a sallow loner, follows Roseanne everywhere with
his camera.  Given the privilege to provide voice-over for most of the
film, we hope that he is the voice of wisdom, or at least revelation in
the story.  Far from it: His philosophy is one of a self-possessed New
Age spiritual guru who is convinced he can save Roseanne from hell she
is living in.  What Ricky was able to see with his lens in American
Beauty revealed the hidden layers of human behavior.  Vincent, by
comparison, as well as the whole ensemble of characters in Crime and
Punishment, goes through the plot's twists and turns without a single
coherent thought in his head.
The genre of the film is familiar -- using the suburbs as an emotional
terrain where the sense of unwholesomeness surrounds the surfaces of
people's life and threatens their seemingly secure shelters.  In
Roseanne's family, we have a complete set of obvious characters: a
psychopathic stepfather (Michael Ironside) with a face of a bulldog and
a penchant for heavy drinking, a frustrated and suffering mother (Ellen
Barkin), and a vacuous, popular little girl who dates a football player
(James DeBello).  What follows is supposed to be a tragedy of
revelations, in which a gloomy loner Vincent will help Roseanne
rediscover herself and alter her perception of the world forever. 
Supposed to be.
What attracted me the most in American Beauty was how punchy and
derisive -- yet humane -- the film was.  It carried a deep loss for the
human connection, a charge that gave the film its integrity, the weight
of reality.  The humorless Crime and Punishment substitutes this depth
with a slow motion camera, elaborate soundtrack, suggestive visual
themes, and a stupid voice over.
To completely befuddle us, the film switches from Vincent's voice over
to Roseanne's.  In a chillingly dispassionate voice, she narrates from
jail and says how much she enjoys her non-existence.  "I killed
somebody.  I was sorry.  It changed nothing."  When freed, she follows
Vincent as her savior and marvels, "What a strange path it took to find
my heart."  But first, you have had to believe that she even has one.
Director: Rob Schmidt
Producers: Pamela Koffler
Writer: Larry Gross
Starring: Monica Keena, Vincent Kartheiser, Ellen Barkin, Jeffrey
Wright, James DeBello, Michael Ironside
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com

Title
Review for Ciudad, La (1998)
The people of David Riker's The City (La Ciudad) are easily
recognizable: poor destitute Mexican immigrants living in listless
boroughs of New York City.  And the director's careful, patient
examination of their incessant, daily struggle to survive by taking any
job they can get constitutes most of what the film is about.
The City is comprised of four short vignettes, all very poetic in their
open-endedness. In the first one, Bricks, a group of Mexican laborers is
taken to the field of nearly ruined buildings.  They are left in the
middle of nowhere and promised 50 dollars a day for cleaning up bricks. 
When the ruins of a demolished building collapse and kill one of the
workers, the rest can't even explain to the ambulance where they are.
Home, the second story, offers another look at the immigrant dilemma.  A
young man, Francisco, while searching for his distant relatives,
stumbles into a party and ponders about his choice of coming to America
to a woman he meets.  He doesn't know anyone in the city and all his
possessions fit in one bag he carries with him.  The moment of comfort
he obtains by sharing his sorrows with a woman from his native town in
Mexico is fleeting -- he is lost on his way from a grocery store back to
her apartment.
The protagonist of The Puppeteer is a loving father, who lives with his
daughter in a car and survives by performing puppet shows to the local
kids in the neighborhood.  They watch the moon at night while the father
reads fairy tales to his daughter, hoping that some day she will be able
to go to school with the other kids.  She won't, as it turns out,
because he can't provide a receipt proving that his daughter lives in
the city.
The final and the most desolate is the story of Seamstress, a woman who
comes to America to earn money for the family she left behind.  She is
devastated to find out that her daughter is sick, but, as in the
previous three tales, her situation is hopeless: The sweatshop owners
keep promising to pay, but it's obvious that the woman, as well as the
other desperate workers, will not get a cent for their labor.
The stories of this spare, reserved documentary-like black-and-white
film give face to the faceless, to those aspects of urban and, most
importantly, human experience we usually avert our eyes from.  Riker
turns to traditions of Italian Neorealism, a genre whose premise was to
bring real people and contemporary social problems into focus.  Like
most films of that era, The City expresses no hopes for deep social
change and is thus an incredibly inert film.  It is authentic, somber
and tragic, and the poverty it depicts could have been captured anywhere
in the world.  The fatalism that pervades the lives of Riker's
characters calls for a depressing conclusion: that nothing will ever
change for these people.  When a seamstress demands to be paid, other
workers stop working and stare at her breakdown in the agonizing
silence.  Not being paid for weeks, without any security in their lives,
will they express solidarity with her?  Probably not.
David Riker does nothing to pull your heartstrings, which is why the
film is so honest and devastating.  But it is the absence of any kind of
inner force in the film that disturbs me more than its morbid subject
matter.  I remember John Huston's Fat City, about two fighters from
Stockton: one is aging and paunchy, who had his moment of glory but
whose next stop is Skid Row; his young counterpart has chosen the same
fate, despite the living lesson before his eyes.  Stockton is not New
York -- no one in their right mind will ever go there, and Fat City
isn't about immigrants, but about failure and poverty.  It is a brutal
and bleak picture, but the way Huston depicts his characters is
dramatically different from Riker: It is a film about people who are
beaten before they start, but who never stop fighting.  Their despair
has the smell of liquor, unmade beds, and cheap hotels, but they
obstinately bounce back and refuse to take defeat for granted.  It is
perhaps the passivity of La Ciudad, both in content and style, that
makes this film a bittersweet disappointment.
Director: David Riker
Producers: Robin Alper, Andrew J. Hurwitz, Doug Mankoff
Writer: David Riker
Starring: Anthony Rivera, Joseph Rigano, Miguel Maldonado, Cipriano
García, Leticia Herrera, José Rabelo, Stephanie Viruet, Silvia Goiz,
Taek Limb Hyoung, Jawon Kim, Antonio Peralta
http://www.zeitgeistfilm.com/current/the%20city/city.html
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com

Title
Review for J'aimerais pas crever un dimanche (1998)
There is a particular kind of pleasure in seeing a really bad movie --
at least you have the advantage of expressing anger, frustration, or
resentment --a visceral response of some kind, no matter how
unsatisfying that is.
Don't Let Me Die on a Sunday won't even give you the satisfaction of
disgust or hatred; it is simply too dull for that.
After a wild techno music party infused with all kinds of sex, drugs and
alcohol, a young woman named Terese (Élodie Bouchez) arrives at the
local morgue: She is pronounced dead from a drug overdose.  Her
beautiful corpse attracts the attention of a gloomy, violent morgue
attendant named Ben (Jean-Marc Barr), a necrophiliac whose sexual
voracity is so powerful it brings the woman back to life.  With Ben, she
discovers an alternative lifestyle -- a subculture of sex fanatics,
latex, nipple clamps, and other trappings of a supposedly promiscuous
sexual underworld. 
With this premise, the film could have been realized as a farce or at
least black comedy, had it managed to have a drop of humor and panache
in presenting such distasteful material.  Instead, what could have been
a wild quest for endless sexual gratification is realized in boring
series of catatonic sexual gyrations, completely devoid of fun and
pleasure.  The film becomes an odyssey of dead people walking: aloof and
desensitized, they inhabit the world of dark hallways, sex clubs, morgue
corridors, and vast empty spaces.  Their world is a place in which
normal human relationships can't possibly be found: Ben and his fellow
co-workers escape what they call ordinary life in pursuit of orgies,
death worship, petty violence, and emotional vacuum.  The most
unfortunate of all is that the film treats its material with a straight
face and frightening absence of imagination and humor, and -- for those
interested in adventuresome French sexual escapades -- without even a
slight attempt to be daring or transgressive.
Even the wonderful Élodie Bouchez, who won the Best Actress Award at
Cannes in 1999 for her outstanding performance in The Dreamlife of
Angels can't bring life to this utter nullity of a movie.  My feeble
attempts to excavate the meaning of love, life, and death out of this
morgue land have obviously failed ignominiously.
Director: Didier Le Pęcheur
Producers: Fabrice Coat
Writer: Didier Le Pęcheur
Starring: Elodie Bouchez, Jean-Marc Barr, Martin Petit-Guyot, Patrick
Catalife, Jean-Michel Fęte, Jeanne Casilas
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com

Title
Review for One Day in September (1999)
The current crisis in the Middle East, with its painful controversy
regarding the sovereignty over Temple Mount, makes the timing for the
documentary One Day in September (Best Documentary Oscar: 1999)
perfect.  The film presents the historical events of the 1972 Munich
Olympics, when Palestinian terrorists took Israeli athletes hostage and
interrupted the Games.  The filmmakers use actual footage taken at the
time, interviews with German officials and children of the victims,
clips from television news reports, and interviews with the only
surviving terrorist who participated in the attack, Jamal Al Gashey.
The film starts off on a personal note: Ankie Spitzer, a widow of one of
the Israeli athletes kept as a hostage, recalls their happy marriage and
anticipation of coming to the Olympic games.  Giving the tragedy a human
face underlines the message of the film: At the core of every political
game, human life and death are nothing more than a by-product of
political cruelty.  Objectively, it gives a succinct summary of why the
1972 Olympics, besides being as political as Olympic Games always are,
were so particularly important to both Germans and Israelis. 
Subjectively, and understandably so, the film is pro-Israeli: If members
of Israeli team are presented as exemplary citizens -- young, ambitions,
with families and babies -- Palestinians are shown receiving training in
violence, hiding as Zionist refugees in Lebanon and Libya, carrying out
their terrorist acts with anonymous brutality (as they don't even know
the target of their attack until very late).  Thus, in addition and
perhaps without realizing it, the film exemplifies why cinema is such a
powerful and dangerous medium; One Day in September is an adroitly
constructed yet highly manipulative film.
Once the film gets to its point by recreating the actual events that
took place on the day of the attack, September 5, 1972, it tries to
create suspense by applying slow motion shots and stirring music score
punctuated with pounding sounds of a heart beat.  This technique is
powerful and gripping, but the real achievement of the film is in its
detailed reconstruction of the events that led to the atrocity.  It is
almost impossible to believe how it was all allowed to happen -- in a
small apartment in the Olympic Village nine athletes were held hostage,
one was killed and another was left to bleed to death, but the festival
of sport continued as if nothing happened.  Debunking the idea of the
Olympic Games as a festive celebration in peace and harmony, the
filmmakers describe step-by-step how, in the middle of public and media
attention, German officials absolved themselves from the terrorist
attack and resumed the competition.  The film then details exactly how
the police, lacking an anti-terrorist squad, proper security, and
turning down help from the Israelis, ignominiously failed to save
hostages by attempting to carry out an ill-conceived maneuver.  The
result of this drama is devastating and ghastly.
Despite the fact that One Day in September might upset a lot of people
for being manipulative and one-sided, this historical account is
shocking, jarring, and unequivocally worth seeing.
Director: Kevin Macdonald
Producer: John Battsek, Arthur Cohn
Starring: Michael Douglas, Jamal Al Gashey, Ankie Spitzer, Gad Zahari,
Ulrich Wegener
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!

Title
Review for All Forgotten (2000)
The hero of the unlikely British drama Lover's Prayer, based on Ivan
Turgenev's story First Love, is a frail, pale-faced, Russian boy named
Vladimir (Nick Stahl) who stumbles through the movie as if his legs were
stilts, barely finishing five complete sentences.  The son of
middle-class landowners, Vladimir is spending away summer near Moscow,
waiting to go to college in the fall.  He desperately wants to fall in
love but, being very shy and deeply absorbed in his own naďve imaginary
world, he's unsure of himself.  To explain his longings, the director
relieves the actor from acting almost entirely, and, instead, simply
asks him carry his dour face throughout the movie and adds a voice over
of an older Vladimir, his tone so dispassionate one wonders if the actor
took sedatives before taking on the project.
Soon enough, Vladimir becomes acquainted with his parents' neighbors, an
alcoholic and broke princess with a hair like a haystack, who, while
reaching for a bottle, utters banalities in a loud piercing voice. 
Immediately, Vladimir falls for the princess's daughter Zinaida (Kirsten
Dunst) and spends endless summer days in the company of this pug-nosed,
plain looking capricious young woman.  Zinaida adds Vladimir to her
circle of admirers--a group of men of every stripe, age, and rank.  They
all dance around Zinaida, playing charades, eager to fulfill her every
wish.  As it turns out, she seems to have many such admirers--and
Vladimir learns that she is having an affair with his own father.
In Turgenev's "First Love," the story begins on a light romantic note
about a boy falling in love for the first time.  But when he discovers
the identity of Zinaida's lover, the mood turns to one of torment and
despair.  Turgenev, with remarkable sensitivity and honesty, describes
the boy's growth of knowledge as he awakens to the complex nature of the
adult world and discovers the depth of his own tragic passion.
Nothing of this sort happens in the movie: Lover's Prayer is one of
those strange international hybrids in which foreign filmmakers -- in
this case British ones -- entertain themselves with the idea of filming
Russian classical literature without having a scintilla of understanding
about its meaning, its idiosyncrasies, its elusiveness, and its
historical basis.  Unable to convey the depths of any of the characters,
the tone of the film becomes murky, and every time there is a hint at
some sort of hidden layer of mystery, the film stutters as if it
immediately forgets what it was.
Lover's Prayer is mostly hot air -- a strange concoction of haphazard
elements in which nothing really works, a love story that doesn't have a
single character to care about. The actors mispronounce Russian names
horribly, and each in a different way.  As expected, the adaptation of
Turgenev's powerful idiomatic language is substituted for a commonplace
one -- a language without a flavor and weight.
Director: Reverge Anselmo
Producer: Jo-Anne Smith
Writer: Reverge Anselmo
Starring: Kirsten Dunst, James Fox, Geraldine James, Nathaniel Parker,
Nick Stahl, Julie Walters
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com

Title
Review for Sexy Beast (2000)
No, it's not a porno movie.  It's yet another British crime caper film. 
And frankly, we'd rather have the porn.
Gal (Ray Winstone), an old time ex convict, is now retired.  All he does
is sweat by the pool, enjoy his form porn star wife Deedee (Amanda
Redman), and share drinks with a couple of good friends.  The setting is
Spain, the sun is hot, and life is free of trouble... until, of course,
one day when the peace must be disturbed -- and it is, by a guy named
Don Logan.  Presumably the titular sexy beast, Don (Ben Kingsley)
appears on the scene and hell breaks loose as Gal gets back into his
life of crime.
If you remember Kingsley's roles in Gandhi, Death and the Maiden, or
Schindler's List, you'll definitely be surprised.  His Don Logan, with
bald head, goatee, and wiry physique resembles a cobra when he is silent
and a crazed cockroach when he speaks.  Don's years in organized crime
have destroyed anything human he might have once had; he is now spooky,
profane, socially maladroit, and extremely annoying.
And he's anything but sexy.  In one scene, Don furiously leaves the
airplane after refusing to extinguish his cigarette.  Detained by
Spanish officials, he concocts a story of a sexual assault by a steward
-- the most darkly humored and misbegotten story of sexual harassment
one could conceive of.
As an actor, Kingsley has achieved what was required of his beastly Don:
You want to strangle him when he spits out profanities and run away when
he moves toward you.  The rest of the characters -- Gal (as played by
Winstone, who has delivered strong, nuanced performances in Nil By Mouth
and The War Zone), his wife, their friend Aitch (Cavan Kendall), and the
ominous mob boss Teddy Bass (Ian McShane) -- are all second-hand
parodies of cinematic stereotypes.  The film tries to convey Gal's
emotional turmoil in escaping his newfound life of crime, but it is
really only able to rise to B-movie standards.
Sexy Beast marks the directorial debut of award-winning commercial and
music video director Jonathan Glazer.  And I would sincerely hope that
after this film tanks, Glazer will be content, just like Gal at the
Spanish villa, to go back to more familiar terrain.  Sexy Beast,
conceived as a black comedy/thriller and shot as a commercial,
occasionally drips with irony and sometimes gives you pause, not knowing
whether to wince or laugh.  But mostly it just makes you shrug.  Well,
perhaps that was the idea.
Director: Jonathan Glazer
Producer: Jeremy Thomas
Writer: Louis Mellis, David Scinto
Starring: Ben Kingsley, Ray Winstone, Ian McShanne, Amanda Redman, James
Fox, Cavan Kendall, Julianne White
http://www.sexybeast-movie.co.uk/filmReview/filmReview.jsp?id=21890
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com

Title
Review for Goűt des autres, Le (1999)
In The Taste of Others, a wealthy suburban businessman named Castella
gets infatuated with a theatrical actress and becomes a frequent visitor
of her bohemian circle of friends.  The premise might not be very
original but the delicious twist of the story is that it is not so much
about Castella's pursuit as it is about how different social strata are
formed and how they intersect with one another.
Castella (Jean-Pierre Bacri) and his wife have to attend a local stage
production of Bérénice, in which their daughter plays a small part. 
They don't care for the theatre and can't understand the verse, but, to
Castella's own surprise, he finds himself unusually moved by a leading
actress Clara.  The charming point here is that Clara isn't a young
aspiring theatrical diva but an aging, harried, and often unemployed
actress from a small provincial theatre.  Castella, however, doesn't see
her that way: For him, she brings into his dispassionate routine the
whiff of a free-spirited life including cozy, drunken late-night talks
and vibrant gallery gatherings.  Through happenstance, Castella's new
business arrangement requires him to learn English, and Clara (Anne
Alvaro) becomes his teacher.
Despite the fact that Clara's friends are contemptuous of Castella for
his ignorance, plebian tastes, and crass jokes, the businessman shows up
at every reception or theatrical premiere.  His is not a vicious fellow,
not by any stretch, and his homophobic remarks are devoid of malice --
he is simply too unimaginative to go beyond his usual milieu -- and as
long as he is dancing on his toes, Clara is ferociously dismissive of
his courtship.  The film elegantly hints, however, at the fact that even
a small reversal of fortune can bring up a philistine in the most
uncompromising of artists.
The film doesn't shock the viewer in any way, but it is full of
delightful, witty, and keen observations on human behavior, the social
fiber of people's close circles, and those quiet, under-the-breath
moments that capture the essence of people's tastes and choices.  It
also makes a curious observation of the mechanism that brings two people
together and how impossible it is to explain the complexity of
attraction between seemingly incongruent people.
Castella's wife, for example, with the ironic name Angelique (Christiane
Millet), is an easily recognizable type of a rich bored housewife.  An
interior designer by profession, Angelique decorates her house to make
it look like a flower shop, and she herself is always decked out in
unbearably motley dresses.  She is the film's emotional freak, oblivious
to anything but her rabid little dog and a philosophy of the moral
superiority of animals over humans.
The cast's regular bartender Manie (Agnes Jaoui, who also directed the
film) is sleeping with both Castella's bodyguard Moreno (Gerard Lanvin)
and the chauffeur Deschamps (Alain Chabat).  She is accepted among the
artists, for she is uncompromisingly independent and fearless, while
Castella gets laughed at in his face.  An interesting development takes
place when Manie and Moreno discover that they perhaps stumble into a
serious relationship: Moreno's morality doesn't allow him to accept
Manie's selling drugs to supplement her income but does allow for his
own brainless, painfully boring job.
Agnes Jaoui's directorial debut is shot in a plain, well-paced style:
Nothing is rushed or crumpled and, besides following the story, there
are always snippets of other people's life as background, helping you
remember the larger tapestry of life.  Also, the filmmaker uses the
charming device of starting a scene in one place and, nonchalantly,
ending it in another, giving the story a sense of both completeness and
fragmentation at the same time.
The Taste of Others doesn't reach into the deeply-rooted causes of why
people end up having one circle of friends and not another.  It does
show, however, that we tend to be reluctant to accept others into our
established boundaries.  This 112-minute long film has a light yet
precious tinge of the great British writer William Somerset Maugham's
wit and irony, but without his incisive and cynical attitude toward
life.
Director: Agnčs Jaoui
Producers: Christian Bérard, Charles Gassot
Writer: Agnčs Jaoui, Jean-Pierre Bacri
Starring: Anne Alvaro, Jean-Pierre Bacri, Brigitte Catillon, Alain
Chabat, Gerard Lanvin, Christiane Millet, Wladimir Yordanoff, Agnčs
Jaoui
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com

Title
Review for Harry, un ami qui vous veut du bien (2000)
Filled with a tantalizing air of suspense, With a Friend Like Harry is
an unusual yet well-balanced mix of dark comedy, French thriller, and
surreal drama.  As I was watching the film, I found myself groping for
its message at each turn of the plot.  Its ultimate effect is comparable
to Claude Chabrol's La Cérémonie, which, with all its violence and
commentary on class delineation.
In With a Friend Like Harry, two former schoolmates accidentally meet in
a roadside bathroom.  Michel (Laurent Lucas) is on vacation with his
wife Claire (Mathilde Seigner) and their three little daughters.  He is
harried and haggard, far from enjoying this so-called vacation: an
endless ride with whining and screaming kids in an un-air conditioned
car.  Harry (Sergi López) is everything Michel is not: Sleek and
self-contained, he doesn't seem to be burdened by anything except good
memories and a load of money.  Within minutes, Harry invites himself and
his girlfriend, a corpulent, springy bun named Plum (Sophie Guillemin),
to Michel's house -- to reminisce about the good old school days Michel
himself can barely remember.
The success of Harry is held in its odd combination of very real,
down-to-earth elements combined with surreal devices, creating suspense,
disbelief, and intrigue.  The film plays skillfully with a common
knowledge that there is always a potential danger in bringing an
intruder into the family, no matter how stable this family is.  At the
table, Harry recites Michel's adolescent school poem with the
unattractive title The Dagger in the Skin of Plight, as well as an
excerpt from a sci-fi novel called Flying Monkeys.  Leading a life of
constant gratification, Harry is convinced that all Michel's problems --
lack of money and the desire to please other people -- have obscured
Michel's path toward fulfillment as a writer.  Quick and decisive, Harry
is a man of action, and his solutions are very concrete.
It is nearly impossible to fathom the nature of Harry's obsession with
Michel's early poem, which he remembers by heart.  But, as the film
progresses, it becomes obvious that Harry expresses his obsession
through crime.  By the film's end, he is comparable to Ripley from Rene
Clement's Purple Noon (and the American The Talented Mr. Ripley), a
sociopath with an insidious mind learning that he could get away with
just about anything.  However, Harry is a hedonist and a misanthrope,
but his enigma is never as refined as Ripley's is.  The film even treats
him with a slight contempt: There is always something distasteful in
Harry's brisk arrogant walk, in his narrow unexpressive eyes.
The music, with sinister ominous overtones, often diverts our attention
by accentuating superfluous elements, such as the eggs Harry likes to
eat after having an orgasm or the vulgar pink wall pattern in the
bathroom of Michel's house.  It creates a creepy and eerie effect, but,
after a while, these devices become as predictable as Harry's long list
of solutions.  The movie is not a weighty one, yet there is something in
its tension and the way it feeds you its story that attracts you to it. 
The film seduces you into thinking that, at certain moments, you know
where it's headed, and then you realize that you don't.
Acting is crucial to this film's success, and it is impeccable.  Michel
and Claire never get hysterical or grotesquely quarrelsome during their
daily rituals.  The core of their disorganized and turbulent family unit
is established early in the film, and it's clear that no matter what
sacrifices Michel has had to make for his girls, he loves them without
regret or resentment.  There is an interesting comment, however, in the
closing sequence of the film.  Just like at the beginning of the film,
Michel drives his family in the car, only now the car is a present from
the magnanimous Harry.  In a splendid 4x4 sport utility vehicle, with
air-conditioning full blast, the kids are content; no more screaming,
howling, or demands.  Michel smiles -- whatever price he has had to pay
for getting rid of Harry was well worth it.  Does the film suggest we
all have a little of Harry in us?  I think it does.  Whether it is a
point worth making is another question altogether.
Aka Harry, un ami qui vous veut du bien.
Director: Dominik Moll
Producers: Michel Saint-Jean
Writer: Dominik Moll, Gilles Marchand
Starring: Laurent Lucas, Sergi López, Mathilde Seigner, Sophie
Guillemin, Dominique Rozan, Liliane Rovčre, Michel Fau
http://www.miramax.com/mm_front/owa/mp.entryPoint?action=0&midStr=1462
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com

Title
Review for Placard, Le (2000)
In this lighthearted, unpretentious comedy, Daniel Auteuil sheds the
intensity of his previous roles -- in Les Voleurs, Ma saison préférée,
Manon of the Spring, to name just a few -- and plays a shy,
crooked-nosed accountant too boring to be tolerated by just about
anyone.  His François Pignon -- an appropriate name for somebody who is
about to be fired, literally, for being a bore -- is a harmless
placeholder who has no ambitions and no misconceptions about who he is.
Pignon's wife couldn't stand him and left two years ago, yet he still
phones regularly to her and their indifferent teenage son.  After
learning that he is soon to be fired, Pignon, distraught, returns home
and meets that "perfect stranger" we all want to meet someday: The one
who steps into our life and brings magic into it.  From that moment on,
the neighbor, Belone (Michel Aumont), navigates Pignon's life like a
chess game.
Belone easily persuades François to concoct a story about his
homosexuality so his boss will fear a discrimination lawsuit,
superimposes photographic images and -- voila -- produces a shot of
Pignon in a leather-clad embrace with another man in bun-exposed pants. 
The photo gets sent to Pignon's employer, and the events start spinning
like a windmill in stormy weather, eventually changing Pignon's life
forever.
Oddly, for the rest of the story, The Closet flirts with being
politically correct and is as predictable as it only can be.  What gives
the film a tint of pleasure and saves it from being totally grotesque
and improbable is that the movie never aspires to be anything more than
what it is.  Director Francis Veber 
(The Dinner Game) finds a delightful irony in the fact that Pignon has
to lie that he doesn't like women in order to prove he is a man.  We, of
course, will learn that there is so much more to Pignon than he and his
colleagues could ever imagine.
While watching the film, I caught myself feeling surprised that such a
banal movie could actually be off-the-cuff and entertaining.  The most
distasteful thought in The Closet is how little people really care about
political correctness but how diligent they are in pretending the
opposite.  Office politics always reveal people at their most vile:
There is something unquestionably disturbing and familiar in watching
petty little personalities trapped in their small trivial lives as they
entertain themselves with self-made gossip and lies.
Besides Auteuil, the acting, for the most part, is adequate.  Gérard
Depardieu, for example, starts off great as a gauche, self-righteous
macho rugby couch, a racist, and a homophobe.  However, as Pignon gets
his job back, Depardieu's colleagues make him fearful for his own job
for calling Pignon a "fruit."  The situation becomes repetitiously
improbable and Depardieu is annoying and unconvincing as we learn that
he might actually be the one "coming out of the closet."
Michčle Laroque is especially good as Mademoiselle Bertrand, Pignon's
boss, who not only discovers a real Pignon and subsequently seduces him,
but also demonstrates to us how smart women master the most impossible
situations.
Though maybe not quite so impossible as this film.
Director: Francis Veber
Producer: Patrice Ledoux
Writer: Francis Veber
Starring: Daniel Auteuil, Gérard Depardieu, Theirry Lhermitte, Michčle
Laroque, Michel Aumont, Jean Rochefort, Alexandra Vandernoot, Stanislas
Grevillén
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com
