Authors
William December Starr
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Lethal Weapon 2 (1989)
     In answer to someone's query ("Is LETHAL WEAPON II really as bad as that
Starr guy says it is?"), a few people  have more or less recommended it, the
gist of their postings being that it was a lot like the first LETHAL WEAPON
only more so, so if you liked the first one you'd like the second one.
     Well, I sort of liked LETHAL WEAPON back when I rented and watched it
about a year ago.  It was kind of wahoo, but what the hell, the plot mostly
held together and I liked the haunted, desperate, crazed and seriously
depressed Riggs (Mel Gibson) and the contrast between him and the family man
Murtaugh (Danny Glover).
     So why didn't I like -- nay, why did I *detest* the sequel?  Lots of
reasons, most of which I won't go into here because (a) I want to keep this
short and (b) in order to accurately categorize them I'd have to see the damn
movie over again, and I'm not getting paid enough for this to do that.  So, the
bottom line ... by the numbers, I detested LETHAL WEAPON II because:
1. Of all the major events in the movie, virtually *none* of them
   could possibly have taken place in or near the City of Los Angeles,
   the State of California, the United States of America, or the planet
   Earth in or near the year AD 1989.
2. The creators, writers, producers etc. of this movie could not possibly
   *not* have known that the alleged story they were filming was
   completely incoherent, illogical, ridiculous, preposterous and a whole
   lot of other words too, yet they went ahead and shot it (not
   literally, alas), edited it, made thousands of copies of it, promoted
   it, distributed it and then -- and this is the part that's gotten me
   angry -- they foisted it off on me and conned me into paying them six
   dollars and investing two hours of my life under the mistaken
   impression that I was going to be cinematically told a *story*
3. The bottom line, and the reason I'm so ripped about this, is that the
   bastards *ripped me off*.  The promised me a *movie*, a story told
   in moving pictures and sounds. . . but all they gave me was a
   collection of about a hundred and fifty thousand pieces of 35mm
   celluloid spliced together and wound up on a reel.
[And, Special Bonus Point #4, Free With This Flame. . .]
4. The scum are *getting away with it*  If this was some dumb
   who-cares "The Deathstalking Blademaster Vs. The Lost Barbarian City
   of Glort-Splert, Part VII" flick that shows up in the city's
   lowest-grade theaters, plays for about a week and then goes
   straight into the video market, I wouldn't be so upset.  But this
   cinematic abortion is raking in money hand over fist, professional
   critics who should know better are giving it thumbs up instead of
   reserving it a place on their Ten Worst Films of 1989 lists, and
   the bastards who made this film, and everyone else who's in the
   movie business for no reason other than the love of money, are
   learning the Golden Lesson of LETHAL WEAPON II: 
--> Throw enough flash and glitter and slo-motion stuntwork and
--> cardboard villains -- the scummier the better -- at the audience
--> and they won't *care* whether it's garbage or not; they'll just
--> *beg* you to take their money away.
   And the film industry will move another step away from quality and
   innovation and another step towards recycled garbage and Lowest
   Common Denominator movies and. . . oh hell, you've already heard
   all this from people who really *care* about cinema, from Siskel 
   and Ebert (on their good days) and from Harlan Ellison, who on his
   worst day can outwrite and outreview anyone in the business, and
   from lots of others, and none of it makes any difference when the
   Fakers and the Takers (as opposed to the Makers) crank up their
   magic publicity machines and start harvesting the money.
   Look, if you want to see LETHAL WEAPON II, go see it.  Just don't
   say I didn't warn you.
-- 
William December Starr, Northeastern U. Class of '90 (Poly Sci/pre-law)
wdstarr%charon.local@charon.mit.edu  (If that doesn't work, try either
wdstarr%lynx@northeastern.edu or wdstarr@lynx.northeastern.edu)
