Authors
Allan Jenoff
Number of Reviews
15

Title
Review for Limey, The (1999)
Wilson (Stamp) is a career criminal who learns his
daughter Jenny has died while he was in prison.  He goes to
Los Angeles to learn the details of her death.  He contacts
the man who wrote to him (Guzman in a great supporting role),
a woman who befriended her (Warren) and finds her lover
Terry Valentine (Fonda).  He suspects Valentine was involved
in the car accident that killed Jenny.  Valentine is a music
producer with a bodyguard (Newman) who seems to know a lot
of lowlifes.  Valentine does not want to meet Wilson.  Wilson
is not the kind of man who takes rejection well.
What follows is a revenge drama with Wilson working his way
through a series of obstacles until he can have his highnoon
style showdown with Valentine.  There is lots of violence and
a little humour.  Stamp gives a restrained performance that some
might see as too laid back.  Fonda has a surprisingly small
role that he performs well in.  The supporting cast is strong.
The directorial technique of constant flashbacks and flashforwards
and fantasy scenes gets boring quickly.
Soderbergh made Sex, Lies and Videotape, Kafka, and Out of Sight.
That list should make it clear he is not a director trapped
in a formula.  I made the mistake of expecting this film
to be similar to Out of Sight.  It's not.  The emotional
intensity of that film is completely lacking here.  No one
steams up the screen in The Limey the way Clooney and Lopez
did.  But that's not what Soderbergh is going for here.  I
won't call this film an unqualified success - you never
make an emotional connection to any of the characters - but it
does work and is worth seeing.

Title
Review for Dogma (1999)
Loki (Damon) and Bartleby (Affleck) are angels who have been 
expelled from heaven and sent to Wisconsin.  All they want to 
do is go home.  They find a loophole in the divine punishment.  
Cardinal Glick (Carlin) is offering absolution to the first 
people to walk through the rededicated St. Michael's church 
in New Jersey.  Loki and Bartleby forsake the cheese state for 
the garden state and a chance to reenter heaven.
Only if God is proven wrong, then the very fabric of creation 
is destroyed.  So, to prevent them, Bethany (Fiorentino as a 
Catholic abortion clinic worker suffering a crisis of faith) 
is given the mission of stopping them by Metatron (Rickman as 
the angelic voice of God).  Helping her are the prophets Jay 
(Mewes) and Silent Bob (Smith) who functioned as Greek chorus 
in Smith's first film Clerks.  Along the way, she encounters the 
13th apostle Rufus (Rock) and Serendipity a muse now working as 
a stripper (Hayek).  Meanwhile, a demon from Hell and three 
rollerblading, hockey stick wielding demonic thugs try to stop 
her and her motley crew from completing their divine mission.
This film has been the victim of a boycott campaign launched by 
people who feel it mocks the Catholic faith.  I'm not a Catholic, 
but I know a fair bit about Catholic theology.  I also saw this 
film with a fairly devout Catholic.  Neither of us saw anything 
objectionable in this movie.  Some characters say and do things 
which the Church might disapprove of.  But the characters who 
are presented as angelic or saints always stay within established 
Catholic doctrine.  In fact, this is one of the few movies I have 
seen which correctly identifies angels as a separate order of 
creation (as opposed to the It's a Wonderful Life belief that 
dead people become angels).  It comes down firmly on the side of 
the virgin birth, the miracle of the incarnation, the absolute 
power of God, and the authority of the Church.  In fact, I can't 
think of a movie made this half of the century which so strongly 
affirmed the power and authority of the Church.
Having said all that, I understand why people feel the need to 
complain about this film.  It suggests one can be a good Catholic 
and yet disagree with Church policy (Bethany is prochoice but is 
found to be righteous by Loki).  The prophets (who are genuinely 
good at heart and clearly instruments of God) are drug dealers.  
But the key issue is that God is depicted as having a sense of 
humour.  And religion, as we all know, is a very serious 
business.
I think those people are wrong.  I like the idea that one can be 
a good person but sometimes do bad things.  That suggests we all 
have some chance at being good.  I like the argument that God is 
about redemption, salvation, and hope (all happy things) but all 
we focus on is sin, damnation, and punishment.  And if Smith's 
God acts in incomprehensible and bizarre ways, well what do you 
expect of a divine being so awesomely powerful that humans cannot 
even hear Him talk without being killed by the force of His voice.
I think Smith takes religion pretty seriously and incorporates it 
into his everyday life.  And I think he took that view with this 
movie, trying to bring out the spiritual aspects of mundane 
activities and mundane people.  I think he has some interesting 
things to say about religion and he's gathered some interesting 
actors to say it.  Rickman is great as the voice of God.  Damon 
and Affleck have a great time as the two desperately unhappy 
angels yearning to return home.  Rock is superb as the apostle 
with a mission, playing his part perfectly.  And Smith may be 
the world's only genuinely funny mime as the brilliant and 
insightful Silent Bob.  The rest of the cast never sink below 
good, although they rarely achieve excellence.
The problem in this movie lies not in the cast nor the idea, but 
in the general lack of jokes.  I did laugh.  I enjoyed the 
Catholicism Wow movement and the not so subtle attack on the 
Disney corporation.  Everybody in the theatre laughed at times.  
But there was no hysterical laughter, no uproarious moments.  
There were moments with decent laughs and no more.  As comedy, 
this film is average at best.  As a movie to make you think, 
it score a little above average. It's worth catching at matinee 
prices but I don't think I could recommend full price for it.

Title
Review for Dogme 1 - Festen (1998)
This is the perfect film to see before a family gathering.  Whether it's
Christmas, an anniversary, a birthday party, whatever; see this movie
first.  Your dysfuntional family will look perfectly happy and
functional in comparison to the folks who make up this movie clan.
Michael, Christian, and Helene have returned home for their father's
60th birthday party.  Also at the party, held in a hotel owned by the
father and closed for this occasion, are assorted grandparents, uncles,
aunts, cousins, children, spouses, and significant others.  Christian,
the eldest, is asked to say a few words at dinner about his twin
sister, who committed suicide earlier that year.  Michael is at first
not wanted, because he failed to come to his sister's funeral, but his
father later offers to put him up for membership in the Freemasons.
Also at the party is a German associate of the father who is to be
toastmaster.
What follows are a series of revelations that would keep Jerry Springer
in business for years.  Everything from affairs to abortions to
pedophilia to insanity to lesbians.  Christian kicks things off by
accusing his father of abusing himself and his sister.  But that's just
the tip of this family iceberg.  The partygoers are uncertain how to
react.  Some think he is drunk, some think he is joking, some want to
leave.  But they can't because the cook has stolen all their car keys.
They are stuck there and they try to make the best of it.
Michael, the youngest of the surviving children, desperately wants to
impress his father.  He tries to keep the party going.  He gets violent
with Christian and he drinks far too much, losing what little self
control he has.  Helene, meanwhile, is staying in her dead sister's room
and hiding a big secret.
Things just get worse when Helene's boyfriend finally shows up.  He is
black and Michael reveals his racist side.  First he tries to get rid of
the boyfriend, later he gets everyone singing a racist song.  Through
all this, the poor German toastmaster tries to keep things going.
And that's just touching the surface.  I haven't even touched on the
strange marriage and stranger sex of Michael and Mette.  Or of the
mother's bizarre and spiteful speech.  Or the maid who seems to have
slept with every available male and possibly one female.
Just in case I've misled you, this isn't a comedy.  But, while it deals
with some pretty heavy stuff, it isn't nearly as bleak as you'd expect.
And while it does read like a Springer wish list (I think they even
throw chairs), it's a lot more insightful than anything you'll see on
tv. It's closer to Ibsen meets Babette's Feast.  Well worth paying full
price for.
This is the Danish entry for foreign language Oscar and I give it a good
chance of making the short list.

Title
Review for Dog Park (1998)
A young couple have split and are fighting over custody of their dog,
Mowgli.  Another, seemingly perfect, couple have two dogs.  A lonely
woman who hosts a children's tv show has a dog called Peanut.  They 
all take their pets to the dog park.  They all take them to the same
obedience instructor.  And pretty soon they have all met.
This is a film about relationships and how they do and don't work.
Andy misses Mowgli.  And his exgirlfriend Cheryl gives up custody
whent their pet's therapist says Mowgli's sudden unhappiness is due to
witnessing Cheryl and her boyfriend have boisterous sex.  Since Andy
isn't
having any sex, his house is a better home.  But Andy meets Lorna
(Peanuts
owner).  They meet in a bar where she picks him up and they go to his
place where she promptly throws up.  Despite this less than best 
first date, Andy likes her and sends her flowers - against the advice of
his friend Jeri (the female half of the perfect couple).  But Lorna
throws out the flowers and vows never to see him again.  
Jeri then convinces Andy to participate in a bachelor auction for
charity.
He's purchased, for $100, by a vegan physical therapist who starts 
causing real problems for Mowgli when she and Andy start having some
very energetic sex.  But Andy doesn't really love her, he's just
terrified
of not being in a relationship.  Something shared by almost everyone in
the film.
The dogs may be in obedience school (and some of the comedic highlights
come from their instructor who firmly believes dogs are better than 
children) but it's the owners who need training.  They lack any self
control and are driven by their passions and fears.
Of course, we all know how a romantic comedy like this ends, but it is 
fun getting there.  The dogs are cute, the relationships close to real,
and the dialogue reasonable.  If you liked movies like Ed's Next Move,
you'll love this.

Title
Review for Being John Malkovich (1999)
Craig (Cusack) is an unemployed puppeteer married to animal 
loving Lotte (Diaz).  Their house is a menagerie.  Craig is a 
good puppeteer, but his choice of material is bizarre and gets 
him beat up.  He finally caves in and looks for a job, 
following up on a peculiar ad for fast fingered, small 
statured people.  He reports to the 7 1/2 floor of an office 
building (the explanation how it got to have 7 1/2 floors is 
one of the film's funnier moments) and, after a bizarre 
conversation with a receptionist (Place) who can hear nothing 
correctly, gets the job.  In a few days, he makes two 
discoveries:  Maxine (Keener) with whom he falls desperately 
in love with and a door in his office which is a portal into 
John Malkovich's brain.
Things get increasingly complicated as Maxine wants to cash in 
on the portal, Lotte meets and also falls in love with Maxine, 
and Malkovich catches on to what is happening.  And then 
there's Lester (Bean), the mysterious businessman who hired 
Craig and may know more about all of this than anyone suspects.
The first half hour or so of this film is full of sly wit.  Not 
laugh out loud sight gags, but really funny moments that you 
have to pay attention to enjoy fully.  They range from Craig's 
bizarre puppetry, to the story behind the animals in Lotte's 
menagerie, to the story of the 7 1/2 floor, and finally to 
Maxine's very funny first date with Craig. But the final hour 
and a half is quite a disappointment.  Oddly, the film slows down
when we get into Malkovich's head.  It stops being a wacky comedy,
and that's certainly what this film should be, and tries to be 
a philosophical film with moments of humour.
Even that might have worked had the movie hit the right
philosophical note.  But it errs there.  Craig briefly discusses
the significance of having access to another person's brain and 
the responsibility of having such access.  Maxine ponders the
issue of being loved by two people and yet attracted to neither
alone and one only when within Malkovich.  Issues of gender
identity are briefly touched upon.  But the most interesting
issue that could have been raised, the issue of whether it is
right to sacrifice one person to save many others, is never even
mentioned.
I know many critics have praised this as one of the best movies
of 1999.  But I cannot understand why.  This is a moderately
funny film that never gets as surreal as its topic would allow
it to.  It's a film with a strong point to make which it never
makes.  It's a film with good actors giving good performances
for a failed cause.  It's worth watching, but not worth all the
hype.   

Title
Review for Very Bad Things (1998)
Very Bad Things
Directed by:  Peter Berg
Starring: Christian Slater, Cameron Diaz, Daniel Stern, Jeanne
Tripplehorn, Jon Favreau, Jeremy Piven, Leland Orser
Running time:  111 minutes
My rating (5 star scale): No stars
You're a young actor who wants to be a young director.  You know a
bunch of other young actors who want to be young stars.  You
haven't any real ideas, but you figure that if you put all those 
young actors in one movie, it will be just as good as having a real 
star.  And if you move the camera around a lot, it will look as if you
were a real director.  And if people shout all the time, it will look
as if you have a real script.  And if your movie is dark and everyone
in it hateful, it will look as if you are really deep.
I don't know how many drugs or how much liquor you have to take to 
believe all that, but somebody involved in this movie does.  Very Bad
Things is about a stag party gone bad.  A bunch of guys, middle class 
white collar type guys, head to Vegas for a stag.  They gamble, snort
coke, get drunk, and hire a stripper to entertain in their hotel room.  
Unfortunately, she ends up dead.
For most of us, this would be a good time to sober up, call the cops,
and pray to God they will hush it all up.  Given that Vegas is a tourist
town and dead hookers aren't a big tourist draw, the odds are in your 
favour. And the cops are likely to believe it's an accident. After all,
they have the word of a bunch of nice middle class guys and only a dead
hooker on the other side.  But these guys don't take that chance.  Even
though they are in Vegas, gambling capital of the world, they aren't
ready to roll the dice.  Instead, they start an elaborate coverup.  
And it just gets more elaborate, more complicated as things go on.
People start dying left and right, but apparently no one notices.  No
one investigates, and the most important event in the movie, the wedding
goes on as planned.
For a movie like this to work, you have to like somebody in it.  You don't
like anybody in this film.  These aren't people like you and me, these
are people like characters in a bad screenplay.  One dimensional cretins
with just enough wit to further the plot.  Not that there is much of a
plot.  Just one death after another.
Berg leaves no cliche unturned in his fruitless attempt to become a real
director.  The movie could have been a learning experience for him. but
I doubt it.  At the screening I attended he spoke and told us all how 
wonderful the script was and how great the film.  I got the feeling he 
felt that if the AFI had waited another year, he would have beaten out 
Citizen Kane for the number one spot on the top 100 list.

Title
Review for Me Myself I (1999)
Pamela Drury (Griffiths) is a successful career woman.  She is an award
winning journalist.  But years earlier, she turned down a 
marriage proposal from her high school sweetheart, 
Robert Dickson.  But a magical moment changes all that.  
Pamela suddenly finds herself in an alternate universe 
where she said yes.  
But there is a big difference between the dream of a marriage
and the reality.  Pamela finds herself saddled with 3 children:
a boy who calls her dumbhead, a girl who asks questions like
'if you haven't had your period yet do you need to use 
condoms', and a small boy who can't go to the bathroom by
himself.  She has a husband who is often away on business
and is up much of the night reading for work.  
She overcomes these initial difficulties.  But she learns
that the perfect marriage and the perfect life really weren't
that perfect.  And things really come to a head when she
discovers what has happened to her career.
This is a film about the danger of getting what you wish for.
It's a serious theme but a lighthearted movie.  The depictions
of the reality of married life are dead on.  The humour
arises naturally from the subject matter and Griffiths does
a great job in both her roles.  Plus, it has some good
performances from the children who act like normal kids,
not the disgustingly sweet children we usually see in film.
This film fell short of 5 stars because I didn't find myself
making an emotional connection to any of the characters.
Possibly married people might find it easier to make that
connection.  But regardless of your spousal status, you
definitely should see this film.  Well worth theatre prices.

Title
Review for Breakfast of Champions (1999)
Breakfast of Champions
Directed by:  Alan Rudolph
Starring: Bruce Willis, Albert Finney, Nick Nolte, Vicki Lewis,
Barbara Hershey, Glenne Headly, Lukas Haas, Omar Epps, Buck Henry,
Ken Campbell, Jake Johannsen
Running time:  110 minutes
My rating (5 star scale):  ****
This film is based on the novel by Kurt Vonnegut.  Since Vonnegut's
novels don't have straightforward plots or easy to understand
characters, the movies made from them are complicated and not
exactly mainstream.  Which makes the appearance of so many big stars
in this film very surprising.
Fresh from his success in The Sixth Sense, a film in which
he rarely spoke above a whisper and had no action scenes, Willis comes
to a film where he is often shouting and engages in a lot of action.
But it still isn't a typical Willis movie.  There are no terrorists,
no bombs, no bad guys.  Instead, we have a town full of people who
are going mad.  Some have already gone there.  Dwayne Hoover (Willis)
is a successful car dealer whose family life is a shambles. His wife 
is clearly ill and popping pills. His son goes by the name of Bunny
and was a big disappointment at military school.  His mistress is
more interested in getting a chicken franchise than having sex.  His
sales manager (Nolte) is a secret cross dresser.  And coming to see 
them is Kilgore Trout, hack writer deemed genius by Elliot Rosewater.
The movie follows Hoover's search for the meaning life. A question
he hopes Trout can answer.  It does a good job of emulating the 
inchoate style of Vonnegut's books.  Willis and Nolte do a great 
job of portraying their psychologically damaged characters.  And
Albert Finney is exactly what I imagined Kilgore Trout to be.
I've seen some negative reviews of this movie and I think it is one
you will either love or hate.  I've also seen some people claim it 
is a ripoff of Brazil.  You can only reach that conclusion if you 
have never seen a movie other than Brazil.

Title
Review for Ninth Gate, The (1999)
Corso (Depp) is an unscrupulous dealer in rare books, hired
by Balkan (Langella) to track down the remaining two copies
of The Nine Gates of the Kingdom of the Shadows.  Balkan owns
the third copy but believes two of the books are fakes.  He 
wants Corso to compare them.  First Corso visits the widow (Olin)
of the former owner of Balkan's copy - a man who commits suicide
after giving up the book.  And things start getting complicated.
Corso doesn't trust Balkan, who may be following him.  He's 
definitely being followed by a mysterious woman (Seigner), who
seems to have supernatural powers.  And people keep turning up 
dead.  Meanwhile the not so grieving widow seems to be lurking
in the background.  And Corso is beginning to wonder whether the
legend of the book, that its coauthor was Satan, is true.  And 
he begins to fear what will happen when his mission is completed.
Polanski likes making movies about morally ambiguous people 
who find themselves slowly drawn into evil.  So slowly, that it
becomes difficult to determine exactly when the irreversible
step was taken.  Characters like that can be seen in films like 
Chinatown, Death and the Maiden, and Macbeth. Corso is one of 
those characters.  No one would mistake him for a saint, he 
begins the film by cheating a family on the value of a rare 
book, but he does have some morals.  He says he loves money, but
at times he is willing to give up the chance at big money just
to get out of this macabre deal he has struck.  But something
keeps pulling him back.  Curiosity, lust, the desire for revenge, 
maybe even fear - there's always something. 
Depp is excellent, always stopping just this side of the brink 
of parody.  Langella and Olin are both suitably mysterious and
frightening.  Seigner gives a surprisingly strong performance.  
The direction is reasonable (weak for Polanski).  A few scenes, 
like the opening sequence and the titles stand out.  But compared
to most horror films, this is brilliant stuff. Unfortunately,
the story is the weak point.  While the characters are 
interesting, the story verges on dull.  Not much happens and
nothing is resolved.  I don't need to be spoon fed a resolution,
but this film doesn't even give you any decent hints.
I paid full price for this film and didn't feel cheated.  Horror
fans (and fans of Depp or Polanski) will find it well worth the
price.  For the rest of you, wait for the video.  

Title
Review for Happy, Texas (1999)
Harry, a con man, (Northam) and Wayne Wayne Wayne, a car thief, 
(Zahn) are prisoners working on a chain gang in Texas.  They 
fight with a third prisoner and all three find themselves 
free due to a freak accident.  Harry and Wayne steal a van
belonging to a gay couple, David and Steven.  Soon they find
themselves in Happy, Texas and mistaken for the gay duo by
the local police chief (William H. Macy).  David and Steven 
specialize in little girl beauty pageants.  The citizens of 
Happy are desperate to win the Little Miss Fresh-Squeezed 
Beauty Pageant and have hired David and Steven to prepare 
their girls.  
Harry and Wayne decide to stick it out when they discover
how much money there is in the local bank.  They intend to
rob it.  The bank is run by Josephine (Ally Walker of 
Profiler fame).  Things get a little complicated as Harry 
falls for Josephine, the police chief falls for Harry, and
Wayne finds himself trapped with in a room full of little 
girls who expect him to teach them a winning number.
This is the kind of film that could easily be over the top
and not funny.  Instead, it is very funny.  It's directed
with a light touch and the performances are excellent.
Some of the best scenes are of Wayne trying to teach his
girls - who respond surprisingly well to his tactics.  Also
great is the date Harry has with the chief.  Macy gives 
his usual outstanding performance (when will he get the
lead role he deserves) and Walker is surprisingly good given
her mediocre performance on tv. There's even a small role
by Ron Perlman who always makes a movie for me.
I laughed throughout this film.  It's well structured and 
makes the premise work.  The laughs come fast and frequent 
and the plot loopholes are easily overlooked.  If you want
to see a funny film that doesn't focus on bodily fluids,
see Happy, Texas.

Title
Review for Guinevere (1999)
Harper is the younger daughter of a family of lawyers.  She is
about to head off to Harvard law school and is attending her
sister's wedding.  She meets the wedding photographer who is the
only person there, including her family, to pay any attention to 
her.  Although he is 30 years older than her, soon she is spending
time with him and secretly moves in with him, after telling her parents
she didn't get into Harvard after all.
Connie, the photographer, insists she learn to do something 
artistic and decides to teach her how to take photos.  Harper soon
learns that she is not the first young woman Connie has educated
in this fashion.  And she doesn't seem to mind.  But this is the
kind of relationship doomed to failure and how it fails is what 
interests us.  As Harper says, if you learn from your mistakes,
this was a great learning experience.
Polley is brilliant in this role, playing a naive girl who grows 
into a self-confident woman.  Rea does a great job as the fragile
older man who seduces younger woman not merely for the obvious
physical reasons but for much deeper psychological purposes.  And
Jean Smart gives a staggering performance as Harper's mother, who
can't really do anything to stop her but who knows exactly what is
happening and why.  Her confrontation with Connie is the highlight
of the film.
This is a movie packed with strong character development and 
great scenes.  Funny scenes like the fortune cookie reading at
Harper's birthday dinner at her home, to tragic scenes like
the final parting between Harper and Connie.  Unfortunately, some
of the minor roles (Gina Gershon as an exlover of Connie's) are
rather weak.  And it seems unlikely that Harper would be so 
artistically talented. But this is compensated for by the 
insights into Harper's family, who bring new levels of meaning
to the word dysfunctional, and into Connie's psychology.
The age difference between Harper and Connie has you seeing Connie
as a dirty old man.  And he is.  But by the time the movie ends,
you've come to forgive him his seductions and realize he is as
much a victim as anyone.  The young women he seduces will leave him
and go on to greater things.  But he is stuck with who and what he
is.
This is not as great a film as Polley's previous film The Sweet
Hereafter.
But it does give her an opportunity to stretch further as an 
actress and to play a complex and interesting character.  I'm 
really looking forward to what she does next and even if you're 
not a fan, you should see this film.

Title
Review for Big Kahuna, The (1999)
Larry (Spacey) and Phil (DeVito) are salesmen for an industrial
lubricants company.  They are hosting a hospitality suite at a 
convention and they desperately need to make contact with a
potential customer, the big kahuna of the title.  With them is Bob 
(Facinelli) who is from the engineering department and there to
be the technical guy and mostly to tend bar. Unfortunately, Larry
and Phil miss the big customer, but Bob talks to him and gets an
invitation to a private party afterwards.  For Larry and Phil this
is the big chance and maybe their last chance.
By their nature, good salesmen must be good psychologists.  And
Larry and Phil reveal that they know a lot about human nature.  We
learn this as they analyze each other for Bob's benefit and even
more so as they start to analyze Bob's motives.  
All this talk is very interesting and I'm sure the play the film
is based on is very good.  But the movie is claustrophobic (with a
few short exceptions it takes place in one small room) and it fails
to make us interested in any of the characters with the exception
of Phil.  The writing reminds one of Mamet, but second rate Mamet.
And the acting, with the exception of DeVito who seems to find 
some depth in his character, is two dimensional.
Spacey is a hot commodity these days and this film is getting a lot
of hype.  Don't be fooled.  

Title
Review for Blair Witch Project, The (1999)
The Blair Witch Project
Directed by:  Eduardo Sanchez and Daniel Myrick
Starring: Heather Donahue, Joshua Leonard, Michael Williams
Running time:  88 minutes
My rating (5 star scale):  **
I have a confession to make.  I scare easily.  I can be scared
by an episode of Charmed.  I can be
scared by books, tv, and movies.  I've read Lord of the Rings a
dozen times and parts of it still spook me.  The Blair Witch 
Project has been touted as a truly scary movie.  A movie which
scares you with your imagination and not expensive special fx.
Now, I agree that kind of scare is the best, but I didn't see
it here.  At most, I found myself occasionally amused and often 
bored.  But never, not for an instant, really scared.
Heather, Josh, and Mike are three would-be documentarians.  They
are making a documentary about the Blair witch, a mythical 
character who haunts the woods near Burkittsville (formerly Blair).
They start by interviewing some locals.  They hear stories about
the witch, a child killer, the mysterious deaths of several men 
and the disappearance of their bodies.  It's all vague and in 
the past and mostly from pretty unreliable sources.  
They head into the woods to camp for a couple of days and film 
some of the sites mentioned in the local legends.  And things
start going wrong.  None of them is very good at reading the map,
which may not be accurate anyway.  There are mysterious noises
in the night.  They find strange piles of rocks and bundles of 
sticks.  They fall behind schedule and start bickering amongst 
themselves.
Since the movie starts by telling us the film footage was 
recovered a year after the events and the three filmmakers 
disappeared, we aren't exactly surprised by the ending.  But 
lots of movies start off by telling you the ending (Sunset 
Boulevard and DOA are two great examples).  They work because
you want to see how the characters get to that point.  That's 
where Blair fails.  
Blair attempts to scare you by convincing you the story is true.
The actors don't recreate events - they are actually living and
filming what you see.  This means some of the scenes are poorly
lit and poorly framed - just as you would expect.  Many of the
events staged were done without the actors' knowledge - so their
reaction is genuine.  All this works, we get a film that looks 
like what it pretends to be.  
Unfortunately, realism isn't enough.  Even documentary film makers
realize they need to have a story as well.  There is an attempt
to create a story here by having us hear the legends and by
having mysterious and unexplained things happen in the woods.  
I think that's where the directors made their mistake.  The 
movie gets closest to scary when the characters squabble 
amongst themselves - not when they think they are confronting 
supernatural beings or rednecks out of Deliverance.  It's that
internal conflict that should have been the focus and that 
might have made this a truly scary film.
Instead, we get a movie with an interesting style.  I can see
why so many critics have praised it.  The directors had an idea 
and followed through well.  And what they have is a well executed
idea that falls short of success.  I saw this at a matinee 
discount and still felt like asking for my money back.  You 
will miss nothing by waiting for this to be available on video.

Title
Review for Happy, Texas (1999)
Harry, a con man, (Northam) and Wayne Wayne Wayne, a car thief, 
(Zahn) are prisoners working on a chain gang in Texas.  They 
fight with a third prisoner and all three find themselves 
free due to a freak accident.  Harry and Wayne steal a van
belonging to a gay couple, David and Steven.  Soon they find
themselves in Happy, Texas and mistaken for the gay duo by
the local police chief (William H. Macy).  David and Steven 
specialize in little girl beauty pageants.  The citizens of 
Happy are desperate to win the Little Miss Fresh-Squeezed 
Beauty Pageant and have hired David and Steven to prepare 
their girls.  
Harry and Wayne decide to stick it out when they discover
how much money there is in the local bank.  They intend to
rob it.  The bank is run by Josephine (Ally Walker of 
Profiler fame).  Things get a little complicated as Harry 
falls for Josephine, the police chief falls for Harry, and
Wayne finds himself trapped with in a room full of little 
girls who expect him to teach them a winning number.
This is the kind of film that could easily be over the top
and not funny.  Instead, it is very funny.  It's directed
with a light touch and the performances are excellent.
Some of the best scenes are of Wayne trying to teach his
girls - who respond surprisingly well to his tactics.  Also
great is the date Harry has with the chief.  Macy gives 
his usual outstanding performance (when will he get the
lead role he deserves) and Walker is surprisingly good given
her mediocre performance on tv. There's even a small role
by Ron Perlman who always makes a movie for me.
I laughed throughout this film.  It's well structured and 
makes the premise work.  The laughs come fast and frequent 
and the plot loopholes are easily overlooked.  If you want
to see a funny film that doesn't focus on bodily fluids,
see Happy, Texas.

Title
Review for Mumford (1999)
Mumford
Directed by:  Lawrence Kasdan
Starring: James Adams, Ted Danson, Hope Davis, Loren Dean,
Jason Lee, Mary McDonnell, David Paymer, Martin Short, 
Robert Stack, Pruitt Taylor Vince, Alfre Woodard
Running time:  111 minutes
My rating (5 star scale):  ***1/2
Mumford (Dean) is a psychologist who has recently opened a
practice in the town of Mumford.  He is highly successful
and it seems every citizen of prominence in the town comes
to him.  Among his patients are the local pharmacist with
a rich fantasy life in which he never appears, a high 
school girl suffering from anorexia, a housewife who can't 
stop buying things, a young divorced woman with chronic
fatigue syndrome, and a billionaire who just isn't happy.
Everything seems ideal on the surface.  But there are problems.
Mumford isn't quite what he seems to be.  A rejected patient,
Short playing the sneaky annoying guy he always plays, tries
to create problems for Mumford.  The local billionaire has
some unusual requests.  And Mumford finds himself falling in
love with one of his patients.
I watched this film with a friend who took umbrage at the 
underlying message, that serious illnesses like anorexia
and chronic fatigue syndrome can be cured by having a friend
or getting a date.  Of course, this film isn't a serious 
attempt at espousing a treatment and Mumford's methods are
not to be taken seriously.  But I suspect some people will 
be upset at this depiction.  
This is a funny movie.  It's also pretty obvious.  You are 
never surprised at any of the revelations or at the final
turn of events.  But it does make you laugh.  And what more
can you want from a comedy?
