Authors
David Hines
Number of Reviews
3

Title
Review for Starship Troopers (1997)

Reposter's note: this review was written by SF writer David Gerrold, 
and was originally posted on his web site at http://www.gerrold.com or 
http://www.gerrold.com/people/gerrold/ (the URL is a little glitchy).  
It is reposted to Usenet (rec.arts.sf.movies, rec.arts.sf.written, 
rec.arts.movies.current-films, follow-ups to rec.arts.sf.movies; and 
separately to rec.arts.movies.reviews and rec.arts.sf.reviews) with 
Gerrold's permission.  
For those who are unfamiliar with David Gerrold's work, he's a nine-
time Hugo and Nebula nominee whose novella "The Martian Child" won him 
one of each.  His works include the alien invasion series WAR AGAINST 
THE CHTORR, the time-travel novel THE MAN WHO FOLDED HIMSELF, the 
analysis/criticism THE WORLD OF STAR TREK, and a whole bunch more 
fiction and non-.  He'll always be stuck with the label of "the guy 
who wrote 'The Trouble With Tribbles.'"  (Yes, *that* episode of STAR 
TREK.)  He is one of only a handful of writers to have been nominated 
for the Hugo award for prose and screen work.
He was also a friend of the late Robert A. Heinlein.
*Please,* if anyone follows up to this article, make sure the 
attributions are correct: that is, "David Gerrold wrote:"
In 1962, Robert A.  Heinlein, the undeniable "dean of science 
fiction," published the best novel of his career: STARSHIP TROOPERS.  
Many critics regard this novel as the single most influential novel 
ever published in the science fiction field.  Other authors wrote some 
of their best works in response to it -- either in agreement, or as an 
argument against.  There's no question that STARSHIP TROOPERS is not 
only Heinlein's best novel, it's also his most controversial.  In many 
ways it is far superior to his philosophically flawed STRANGER IN A 
STRANGE LAND.  (But that's a different discussion.) 
The novel details the adventures of Juan (Johnnie) Rico, a wealthy 
Filipino youth who graduates from high school and joins the Mobile 
Infantry to earn his citizenship.  In this particular Heinlein future, 
citizenship is earned by a term of service to the nation.  Only 
citizens get to vote.  This carries with it the implied assumption 
that only graduates of federal service are qualified to know what's 
good for society, that those who have not served are parasites who 
have made no other valuable contribution to society, and who are 
therefore not entitled to a voice.  
On the surface, the novel is structured like BATTLE CRY, the post-WWII 
recruiting movie, following the adventures of several young men and 
women through their training and through their various battlefields -- 
but first it stops to takes a few pages from ALL QUIET ON THE WESTERN 
FRONT.  If you'll remember that novel, it starts with a teacher 
extolling the glories of war and defending the fatherland to a 
classroom of eager German youth.  In Heinlein's classroom however, 
Dubois, the instructor is far more realistic and charismatic.  Instead 
he talks about personal responsibility, morality, and ethics -- the 
obligation one owes one's society for accepting its protection.  The 
class is a required course, part of the necessary preparation for the 
choice presented to every high school graduate -- whether or not to 
earn citizenship through service.  
Juan Rico's parents are shown as shallow non-citizens, who oppose his 
military service; but Juan enters the service over their objections 
because his best friend, Carl, and his girlfriend, Carmen, are also 
signing up.  Carl is going into strategy and tactics, and Carmen wants 
to be a starship pilot.  Unfortunately, Juan's aptitudes show that the 
only thing he's good for is "cannon fodder," the Mobile Infantry.  Uh-
oh.  It is obvious from the text that the Mobile Infantry has already 
been involved in quite a few wars -- and at least two of the veterans 
we meet (Dubois and the enlistment officer) are missing limbs.  But 
Heinlein is making a point here -- ultimately all wars are won by the 
infantry, the guys who go in on the ground.
Heinlein's portrayal of boot camp shows that military training in the 
future will remain essentially the same -- drill the trainees to 
exhaustion, break down their identities, and rebuild them with 
unflinching commitment to the task at hand.  Rico makes a couple of 
mistakes along the way, earns some lashes (flogging is legal in this 
society), learns his lessons, and gets over the hump.  He becomes a 
soldier.  
One of the most interesting parts of the book is Heinlein's projection 
of future military ordnance and equipment.  The Mobile Infantry are 
equipped with "Power Armor" -- nuclear powered suits which greatly 
expands the ability and strength of the individual.  The armor makes 
each and every soldier a one-person tank, able to leap tall buildings 
in a single bound, faster than a speeding locomotive... etc. etc.  
Juan Rico in his power armor has enough ordnance to topple a small 
government.
It's just about this time (of course) that war breaks out with the 
bug-world Klendathu.  The bugs start it by dropping a large rock on 
Buenos Aires, wiping out the entire city and killing Rico's mother who 
is visiting at the time.  (This is the first of several interesting 
oversights in the book.  If the bugs can drop a small asteroid on a 
single city to wipe it out, why not drop a very large asteroid and 
destroy ALL life on the planet?) 
So Juan and his fellow soldiers are off to battle.  As with BATTLE 
CRY and ALL QUIET ON THE WESTERN FRONT, we see Rico changed by his 
experiences in actual combat.  The death rate is distressingly high.  
This one buys the farm, then that one buys the farm.  Sooner or later, 
everyone buys a farm.  You learn to stop caring so much about the 
characters....  
The bugs are a particularly interesting alien species.  They are 
evolved from hive-dwelling insects.  The soldiers are mindless 
warriors, bred for only one purpose -- kill and keep on killing.  The 
Klendathoids(?) breed different types of workers for different kinds 
of jobs; only the warriors are dangerous.  There are probably queen-
bugs and brain-bugs too, but we don't see them in the book.  
And it is here, in the design of the aliens that Heinlein reveals what 
his book is really about -- what kind of a species are we?  What does 
it mean to be a human being?  He has begun his book with several 
pertinent discussions of personal responsibility; then he demonstrates 
how it works.  Everything that Heinlein portrays here is about taking 
a large bite of responsibility and then growing the jaws to chew it.  
As Rico gnaws his way up the food chain, to squad leader, to corporal, 
to sergeant, and finally to lieutenant, we see that what is really 
happening is the expansion of his domain of responsibility.  
This is contrasted with the bugs, whose individuals are mindless.  
They are bred for a single task only.  They are not adaptable and they 
are not capable of operating outside of the specific domain for which 
they were bred.  A warrior will kill and do nothing else; it cannot 
negotiate,it cannot surrender, it cannot even honor a truce.  A worker 
can only work, it cannot fight.  Etc.  etc.  There is no 
responsibility among the bugs.
(While this makes for a particularly horrifying enemy, it actually 
presents a serious story problem that Heinlein has conveniently 
glossed over by simply not addressing it.  How does an essentially 
mindless species achieve faster-than-light travel?  Heinlein 
postulates brain-bugs, but we never really see any bug technology.  
There is a hint that there is some bug technology, but we don't see it 
in the warriors.  Heinlein also postulates that the bugs have an 
alliance with the "skinnies," a humanoid species who later switch 
their allegiance to our side, but ...again, the question of bug 
technology is still not addressed.
Never mind.  Heinlein isn't world-building here.  He's trying to make 
a different point.)
Heinlein is using the contrast between human and bug to force us to 
focus on the question at hand -- are we mindless bugs?  Or are we 
reasoning beings?  And if we are reasoning beings, then what is our 
responsibility in the matter?  If we are capable of individual 
rational thought, then how can we justify behaving like mindless bugs?  
Regardless of the military setting for the story, Heinlein is asking a 
very pertinent question.  It is the same question he asks in STRANGER 
IN A STRANGE LAND.  In both books, he stacks the deck for the answer 
he prefers.  But that is always the prerogative of the author, and the 
questions that Heinlein has asked have proven to be more important for 
the asking than for the particular answers that Heinlein has offered.  
Thirty-five years later the arguments are still raging.
Now, Paul Verhoeven, director of ROBOCOP and TOTAL RECALL, has adapted 
STARSHIP TROOPERS into a movie...and I feel confident in predicting 
that it will trigger a new round of even more intense arguments.  
There's no question that STARSHIP TROOPERS is one of the most 
intensely anticipated movies of the year, perhaps the decade.  
Millions of Heinlein's readers are waiting for this one.  In one 
respect, they will not be disappointed.  The picture has some of the 
finest action sequences ever seen in a science fiction movie.  The 
battles with the bugs are astonishing.  The movie is undoubtedly going 
to be a big hit -- especially among 13-year old boys.  My son thought 
it was the best movie he'd ever seen.  It's big, it's long, it's loud, 
it's gory.  What more could a boy ask for?  The special effects are 
truly this picture's strength.  
That's the bad news.  There is little good news.
To start with, the scriptwriter should probably be taken out and given 
ten lashes for presumption, and another ten for doing a lousy job.  
The dialogue is uniformly unimaginative, jingoistic, and in some 
places downright stupid.  The story structure is sloppy.  The 
character of Dubois is dropped/combined with Lieutenant Rasczak.  
Juan's family lives in Buenos Aires, so both of his parents are killed 
when the bugs attack; this eliminates the reconciliation scene between 
Rico and his father so important to the book.  A new female character, 
Dizzy, is added.  She joins the M.I. because she's in love with Rico.  
And for someone native to Argentina (in the movie), Johnny Rico has a 
decidedly anglo look.  Hmmm.
Heinlein's greatest strength -- his thought-provoking conversations -- 
have been reduced to jingoistic one-liners.  The picture is punctuated 
with satirical newscasts from the future.  This is a device that 
worked very well in both Robocop and Total Recall; it doesn'twork 
here.  Because so many of the news stories are laugh-out-loud 
caricatures, they send an implied message: Don't take this movie 
seriously.  But then we cut back to the classroom or the training 
ground or the Lieutenant and what we're hearing is something else 
entirely: take this very seriously, it's about your humanity.  
The really bad news is that much of the best of Heinlein's novel has 
been gutted in the script.  The power armor is gone.  Instead, our 
brave young men and women are outfitted as if (the late) Gianni 
Versacci were sending them off to take the beach at Normandy.  The 
technology portrayed is already obsolete in 1997.  This is a humanity 
that has faster-than-light starships, and is still sending the troops 
in armed only with gunpowder and grenades -- and the occasional hand-
held nuke.  Huh?
We saw napalm carpets laid down in Vietnam.  Why not on Klendathu?  
We've seen our soldiers using flame-throwers in the Mekong Delta, why 
not on Klendathu?  We've seen our planes dropping "daisy-cutter" bombs 
(fuel-air explosives, they work like baby nukes), in Vietnam (and in 
the opening sequence of OUTBREAK), why not on Klendathu?  We've seen 
how snipers can use laser-beams for precision targeting, why not our 
infantry on Klendathu?  Our local motorcycle police have their radios 
built in to their helmets, why do our troops on Klendathu have to use 
hand-held flip-open communicators?  Where is the weaponry?  In the 
next three hundred years, will we not see development of beam weapons, 
improved flame-throwers, rail-guns, and other technologies of mayhem?  
Even more disturbing is the portrayal of the military mind-set here, 
from the cowardly general, all the way down to the hard-assed Sergeant 
Zim, the D.I.  There isn't a single one of these folks who isn't a 
caricature of something we've seen in six other movies.  And 
everywhere else, we've seen it better.  This script needed a John 
Milius or even an Oliver Stone -- someone who's seen actual combat.  
There's nothing on the screen to suggest real knowledge of military 
situations or the people who have been trained to deal with them.  The 
troops are not spread out properly, they don't move through the 
terrain properly, and in fact they walk unconcernedly through canyons 
where they KNOW bugs are watching from above.  
The biggest failure is that the picture makes little attempt to 
address the central issue of Heinlein's book -- personal 
responsibility.  Instead, the last act turns into a melodramatic 
mishmash with Juan Rico violating orders to go running off down a bug-
tunnel to rescue his long-lost love Carmen Ibanez (Dizzy having been 
conveniently disposed of earlier).  It's here that we finally get to 
meet a brain bug, with a face that looks something like a hyperactive 
rectum with teeth.  Our retreat back up the tunnel is covered by the 
courageous wounded fellow with theportable nuke -- just like Ripley's 
escape in ALIENS was covered by Vasquez and the Lieutenant triggering 
a grenade as those bugs came down the tunnel too.  
The directing is spectacular during the battle scenes -- and barely 
adequate almost everywhere else.  The cast is also adequate with no 
one bumping into the furniture.  Casper Van Dien is a likable 
(although anglicized) Johnny Rico.  Fortunately, none of these 
attractive young people are too hard on the eyes.  And just to make 
sure we get an eyeful, there's a coed shower scene that is enjoyably 
gratuitous.  Rico's best buddy, Carl, is played by Doogie Howser all 
grown up now -- who shows up at the end of the movie in Gestapo 
trenchcoat and cap, just like Halloween.  Are we supposed to like him 
or not?  Even the director isn't sure.  He careens between cynicism 
and affection, leaving us emotionally adrift, so most of the deaths 
here are meaningless.  
While I'm at it, I don't want to overlook the other cheesy production 
values.  Too many of the sets and props look like painted cardboard, 
hastily-designed and unconvincing.  They flash by too fast for 
examination, nothing registers on the viewer's consciousness with the 
kind of A-ha! experience we had when we first saw the Pan-Am flight 
boots in 2001: A SPACE ODYSSEY.  
Oh yes, and let's talk about the space technology.  We see Carmen 
Ibanez piloting a shuttle boat recklessly through a space station that 
is built as a ring around the moon.  We see her backing a starship out 
of its moorings like a teenage driver who has forgotten to release the 
emergency brake, and she damn near but not quite collides with 
everything she gets near.  And they say she's one of the BEST pilots?!  
I'll walk, thanks.
When the starships arrive on site...  ohboy, there's almost too many 
errors here to deal with.  First of all, they're all in formation so 
tightly packed that you couldn't set off a cherry bomb without 
destroying at least six of them.  Didn't anybody learn their lesson at 
Pearl Harbor?  You NEVER put your planes, ships, tanks, whatever so 
close together that they make a terrific target for the enemy.  Even 
during WWII (the big one), our convoys were never this closely 
grouped.  So of course, it's a disaster.  We get to see these 
monstrous starships, bursting into flame -- FLAMES in space?!!  -- 
bumping and colliding into each other like drunken elephants, and 
finally SINKING downward out of frame like the Titanic.  Excuse me?  
It doesn't work that way in space.
There's also an error of serious orbital mechanics.  The starships are 
shown in a stationary position over a single spot on the planet -- 
which makes them a terrific target, but is so wrong it's ridiculous.  
A geosynchronous position is approximately three planetary diameters 
out.  For an Earth-sized planet, that's 24,000 miles above sea level.  
That's impractical for a military mission.  What's wanted and needed 
here is a very low, very fast orbit which lets the mother ship drop 
its landing craft and be in position to pick them up again at two-hour 
intervals; it also makes the mother ship an extremely difficult target 
to hit from the ground.  But again, the filmmakers went for big, loud, 
and inaccurate because they assumed it would look better on the 
screen, and who would notice the difference anyway?
The bugs are interesting -- but other than the six legs, it's hard to 
figure out how the rest of the critter is put together.  And when we 
get to Klendathu, or any other bug planet,we're left with two 
questions: 1) Nothing's growing here.  What do these things eat?  And 
2) How are these critters throwing rocks at the Earth from half a 
galaxy away?  Faster-than-light rocks?  What are these bugs using for 
technology?  (And again, if the bugs can throw a small rock, then why 
can't they throw a large rock and wipe out the Earth altogether?)
The strength of STARSHIP TROOPERS is its digital effects, which are 
employed on an epic scale never seen before.  There is Oscar-winning 
work in this movie (which makes the failures of the script all the 
more depressing.)  As I said above, the battle sequences are 
unmatched.  It's the use of the technology that fails, not the 
technology.  For example, there is no dust on Klendathu.  No matter 
how much you blow up, every shot is clear all the way out to the 
horizon.  You would think with all those house-sized critters stamping 
their way across the landscape, you'd see some dust clouds rising on 
the other side of the hills...?  
Despite all this, I suspect audiences are going to enjoy themselves 
enormously.  There's room for a sequel, and as the second hundred 
million bucks rolls in at the box office, I'm sure the producers will 
begin planning STARSHIP TROOPERS II: THE REVENGE OF THE BUGS.
There's a lot to admire in STARSHIP TROOPERS, the movie.  
Unfortunately, there's not a lot to like.  STARSHIP TROOPERS, the 
book, was written with passion.  STARSHIP TROOPERS the movie has 
sacrificed passion and thoughtfulness for big digital bugs.  

Title
Review for Fifth Element, The (1997)
I have a very special place in my heart for the late Dorothy Parker.  
"Who the hell is Dorothy Parker, and why should we give a damn?" I 
hear the masses cry.  Mrs. Parker was a writer, fellas.  She was a 
pretty good one, in fact, although today she's best remembered for 
her doo-dad poetry.  There was a decent movie made about her life in 
the past year or two called _Mrs. Parker and the Vicious Circle_ -- 
oh, dammit, I shouldn't have said that, because now people will go 
rent the movie instead of going to the trouble of actually reading 
some of her work.  Go to the library, will you, folks?
Anyway, the reason I mention Mrs. Parker here is that she was also 
a reviewer of the highest caliber: that very rare thing, a *good* 
critic.  And in her review of A.A. Milne's play _Give Me Yesterday_ 
(in the _New Yorker_ of March 14, 1931) she describes how she coped 
with a particularly bad moment:
When I read that passage, I thought to myself: "What a terrific idea!"  
So I went to the movies this weekend with a .32 caliber revolver in a 
shoulder holster.  And a cyanide capsule hidden away in an extra tooth.  
And a Sinclair molecular chain in my shirt collar, and a .22 gun in my 
pocket for fun, and a razor in my shoe.  And, just in case, I took a 
tomato.  I'm allergic to tomatoes.
And then I sat down and watched _The Fifth Element_.
Thinking back on it now, I can't recall when I first attempted suicide 
during the film.  I think it was just after the opening credits, when 
the archaeologist Dr. Exposition explained that the universe was divided 
into Good Guys and Bad Guys, and that the Bad Guys, who come every five 
thousand years to attempt to destroy All Life, can only be defeated by 
people who combine the powers of Earth, Wind, Water, Fire, and... you 
guessed it, boyos, Heart, the eponymous Fifth Element.  When I realized 
Luc Besson was proudly presenting to us "Captain Planet: the Motion 
Picture," I pressed that .32 revolver to my head and pulled the trigger 
till the gun was empty.
Unfortunately, my aim is poor and I missed, and then the theater's 
emergency restraints kicked in and shackled my limbs and propped my eyes 
open -- and I was stuck, unable to get to my instruments of self-
destruction.  I resolved to use the cyanide tooth as a last resort, and 
screwed up my courage to watch the flick.
And if watching was all I'd been doing, I probably would have found it 
fairly enjoyable.  Visually, at least, _The Fifth Element_ is pretty 
cool.  As far as the writing and direction goes, it's trite, laughable, 
sub-moronic, pathetic, offensive, execrable, overdone, and dopey; it may 
induce vomiting, headache, dizziness, sterility, and hatred for almost 
everyone involved with the flick... but _The Fifth Element_ is a very 
pretty film.
But then again, _The Fifth Element_ cost ninety million dollars.
For that much money, it had better be pretty.  And it is; it really 
is.  Jean-Paul Gaultier did the costuming, which is very interesting to 
look at.  The sets are large and well-detailed, and effects are 
digitally composited with the sets to terrific effect.  The aliens are 
really alien-looking, which is nice, and although there are few 
different kinds of aliens, there are a *lot* of each species; the 
animatronics bill alone must have been sky-high.  The spaceships look 
good, and the flying cars are nothing short of flat-out terrific: 
beautiful individual design, and the multi-level traffic flow is a 
thing to behold.  I like to watch lots of things moving around, and 
the effects people on _The Fifth Element_ did some great work with 
that, especially in a great series of shots in which Bruce Willis's 
character drives his cab downwards through several layers of traffic.  
I also particularly liked the flying restaurant that makes door-to-
door (or rather, window-to-window) service.
Unfortunately, movie theaters don't come with mute buttons.
Visually, _The Fifth Element_ is tasty.  Its plot, dialogue, and 
direction, however, are utter crud.  Not only is it tripe, it is 
pretentious tripe.  It is an unceasing barrage of moronic cliches that 
were outdated when its star was still in utero.  It is offensive.  It 
is yecchy.  It shines, all right -- like a dead mackerel.  Squirming 
there, in the dark, I longed for _Independence Day_ -- yeah, ID was 
a dumb-as-rocks movie, but at least it was unpretentious.  _The Fifth 
Element_ is an example of the kind of crud that we can get when a 
movie director thinks he's some sort of artistic genius -- Besson is 
not, and his efforts to prove he is only hurt his film.  In vain 
efforts to prove his artistic merit, he piles symmetry on top of 
symmetry, cuts from one location to another several times in the 
course of scenes to track parallel conversations, sets the action of 
one scene to the soundtrack of another... and in the end, it's 
pointless.  The effect is more grotesque than effective: a plainitive 
cry of "Look, Ma, see how *nice* I'm directing!"  
And when I say grotesque, I mean it.  Besson's idea of humor is to 
give us a simpering, prancing, effeminate stereotype as a talk-show 
host, and to then juxtapose scenes of pre-flight and take-off of a 
spaceliner with scenes of the said fop's seduction and bringing to 
orgasm of a stewardess.  Nor is Besson content to limit his use of 
the nauseating beast to one scene; he has him prance and flounce and 
pout and lisp and whine his way through the rest of the film, and 
latch on to Bruce Willis's character to panic and roll his eyes and 
provide a little comic relief.  _The Celluloid Closet_ points out 
that one common Hollywood tool is to have bad things happen to people 
outside mainstream gender boundaries -- that is, they're there to flaunt 
themselves, to vex the audience's sense of propriety, and then give the 
audience joy by dying in nasty ways.
Does it say anything about the degree to which this creation annoys that 
I, who deplore both stereotypes and political correctness, was hoping 
Besson would kill him off and get it over with, instead of rubbing our 
noses in idiocy?  Does it say anything that I, an SF fan of impeccable 
taste, found the fop more annoying than _Star Trek: Voyager_'s 
Neelix?  Does it say anything that I, an MST3K fan who ordinarily would
welcome the opportunity to make jokes about Dennis Rodman getting his own 
talk show, curled up in pain and whimpered?  
The plot is laughable.  Really laughable.  The deal is that these Bad Guys 
come around again, and zap things, and will blow up earth if they're not 
stopped.  So the Good Guys have this weapon, right, in a temple in 
Egypt: combine the McGuffins, er, I mean, stones representing each 
element, open 'em, stick the Fifth Element in the center, and Captain 
Planet zaps the Bad Guys to kingdom come.
Only, see, the aliens who are Good Guys took the stones out of the temple 
for some damn reason.  So they have to get 'em back to Earth.  And the 
alien they send to tell people how to fix the situation gets scragged by 
some of the Bad Guys' lackeys before he lands.  So scientists clone him, 
and the clone turns out to be this chick Lee-Eluukulaniromanadvoratrelundar 
or some stuff like that, who goes by Lee-Eluu for short.  She's played by 
Milla Jovovich, who says she dedicated herself so seriously to the role 
that she even took the drastic step of giving up pot for the duration of 
filming -- which is ironic, because she looks like a junkie.  Anyway, 
Lee-Eluu, being no fan of confinement, escapes the unescapable cell in 
her Jean-Paul Gaultier bandage dress and takes a suicide plunge.  Only 
she doesn't die, see, 'cause there's this cabdriver, played by Bruce 
Willis, whose cab conveniently breaks her fall.  She doesn't speak 
English (hey, she's just a clone), but she speaks at ninety miles a 
minute in an alien language and reads English.  She convinces him to 
take her to this priest of a sect that understands her, and they find 
out the stones are on this far-off pleasure planet and they go there 
with the priest and this disk jockey and have to fight to get the stones.
Only there's this other guy Zorg, played by Gary Oldman, who wants the 
stones 'cause he's with the Bad Guys, for no reasons that make sense.  
Zorg says he's pro-chaos because it creates jobs, but the bad guys don't 
spread chaos; they just make people dead.  No potential for being an 
evil megabusinessman there.  But anyway, Zorg wants the stones, not
to mention the heads of Our Heroes.  And Zorg has a whole lot of ugly
lackeys, some of whom want to kill him too.  And Our Heroes fly around
and fight Zorg and his henchmen and listen to opera and have some wacky 
good times and kick butt until Lee-Eluu finds out about war and wonders 
whether humanity is really worth saving, but then Bruce Willis's 
character kisses her so she decides what the heck and stops the Bad Guys
from incinerating Earth.  He must be a good kisser.
You think that reads stupid?  Imagine what it's like *watching* it.
_The Fifth Element_ can't even beg off on the grounds of being 
intentionally low-brow, like _Independence Day_.  The flick is a 
wretched mixed bag that tries to be too many things -- and ultimately 
is none of them.  It's too trashy to be taken seriously, but too 
pretentious to be enjoyed as comic-book camp or as guilty pleasure.  
The stunning images, too, are a mish-mash, one that's almost entirely 
referential:  images, effects, and costumes are derived from from 
_Blade Runner_, _2001_, _Star Wars_, _Brazil_, you name it.  _The 
Fifth Element_ is an extravagant and ugly hodgepodge, a chimaera of 
skiffy films and 1930s pulps.  It is a patchwork quilt stitched by an 
idiot, full of light and color and signifying nothing.  It is a waste 
of ninety million smackers and of time and of talent and of however 
damn much you pay for a ticket.
My recommendation: don't waste your time.
Oh, and the cyanide tooth turned out to be defective, but after I got 
out of the movie, I did kill myself messily with about everything I had: 
the backup pistol, the razor blade, the Sinclair molecular chain.  But 
I'm saving the tomato.  

Title
Review for Star Trek: First Contact (1996)
[Note that followups are directed to rec.arts.movies.current-films and
rec.arts.movies.startrek.current only, not to rec.arts.sf.movies.  -Moderator]
(Previously posted to rec.arts.sf.tv and rec.arts.startrek.current.)
_Star Trek_, like all science fiction and skiffy, requires a certain
amount of suspension of disbelief.  In the best of _Star Trek_, the
only requirement is that the viewer accept the somewhat improbable
universe that the Franchise presents: one in which socialist ideals
reign true; one in which people strive to better themselves and
humanity, as well as all the little fuzzies out there; one in which
poverty and crime and bad luck are things of the past.  In the world
of _Star Trek_, everyone is healthy and happy (or as near either of
those things as possible), and things always work out in the end.
That's a lot to swallow, but provided the viewer can choke that down,
a good time may be had by all.  That is, assuming that we're talking
about good Trek.  Bad Trek tries to get the viewer to swallow too
many horse pills; witness the typical episode of _Voyager_, wherein
we're expected to accept clumsy technobabble, miserable plotting,
and characters who are supposed to be capable doing no end of stupid
things.
_Star Trek: First Contact_'s (hereafter: FC) greatest flaw
is that it has too many horse pills.  That's a pity, because otherwise
it's a surprisingly well-done film: well-acted, well-directed, and
(of course) well-effected.  The devil, as always, is in the writing;
and while the writing is good enough to make FC better than
_Generations_ by roughly an order of magnitude (and does something
interesting below the surface -- I'll get to *that* in a minute),
it's not good enough to make me stand up and cheer the movie as a
complete success.  It's decent, in the neighborhood of two and a
half to three stars out of four, but it would require more work to
make it stand tall.  Well worth your time at a matinee; don't spend a
gazillion bucks on a night ticket, unless you have access to a theater
with a mega-huge screen and great sound system.
Spoilers follow 30 blank lines and a ^L.
Thankfully, most of the painful swallowing takes place at the
beginning.  If the Federation can't trust Picard, why isn't he safely
behind a desk?  If the situation was so critical, why didn't the admiral
order *Riker* to take command of the Enterprise?  Didn't the Federation
even try to make a stand outside the Sol system?  Why didn't the Borg
travel back to the twentieth century before attacking Earth (it would've
been much easier, and wouldn't have resulted in the loss of the cube)?
Why did Picard's trick work?  Why did he know about it, and not tell
anyone else in Starfleet before now?  Why was the Enterprise
able to hang around for a minute or so before zapping back in time
with the Borg's hole in time?  Why were they able to follow the Borg
at all?  I could have swallowed one or two of these problems; coming
in so quickly, and so closely on each other's heels, they were utterly
indigestible and made the opening of FC almost entirely unwatchable.
That's not to say there's not more swallowing to be done elsewhere
in the film; there is, a mixture of bitter pills small (such as the
Borg assimilation time being reduced to a few seconds, "inoculation"
against radiation poisoning) and large (such as Picard's fight with Worf,
which I'll get to).  It's just that the beginning forces the viewer to
swallow a lot of horse pills in very little time.  The effects are
beautiful, but the medicine that gets the movie going is *very*
bitter, and needs more than a generous spoonful of eye-candy to
help it go down.
Once the pills are choked down, however, a people-oriented plot
takes over.  Thank Cthulhu, because that's where Trek is strong, and
because the caliber of the actors is such that it can smooth over
rough spots, provided the spots are *relatively* far apart.  The cast
members deliver fine performances, particularly James Cromwell,
Alfre Woodard, Alice Krige, and Patrick Stewart.  (It's a bit annoying
that most of the best roles went to non-featured players; I get
the feeling that Sirtis and McFadden would have killed for an eighth
of the screen time Alfre Woodard got... then again, neither of them
is as good an actor as Woodard.)  There are wobbles, from time to
time; however, once the godawful beginning is left in the dust,
FC begins to move and becomes a pretty enjoyable movie, largely
because of the performances and direction.
There are, however, two major exceptions to the rule.  Both of them,
oddly enough, have to do with Picard.  The first is Picard's fight with
Worf, his refusal to down the ship, followed by an argument with Lily
and a sudden reversal.  The acting is fine; I don't have a problem with
it (Woodard, especially, shone in that scene).  The problem is that it
comes out of nowhere.  Picard hates the Borg; we know that.  But his
sudden lunacy doesn't feel right.  Stewart acts it well, but the script
doesn't give us enough of a reason to buy it.  It has set us up to
see Picard as a Borg-hater, but one who has some reason to believe he
can defeat the Borg where no one else could.  Until the scene in
question, we haven't seen Picard as seriously unstable; we've seen him
as strongly affected by what the Borg are doing, yes, but no reason
to see him like this.
I'd easily have been able to accept the scene if Picard was shown to
have an over-inflated view of his own capabilities; if he *knew* he
was going to win, and didn't scream about it, then I'd buy it.  It
would have worked largely as staged; the crew could have bought in,
with only Lily disbelieving him.  Ahab wasn't a screaming lunatic;
although he did rant on occasion, he was passionate and strong enough
to convince his crewmen, to win them over with strength of personality.
Picard came off like a spoiled child.
The second problem comes just after this:  Picard goes to get Data,
but he doesn't seem to give a rat's ass about the *other* Enterprise
crewmen who've been assimilated?!?  I find that creepy, to say the
least; while I realize that Data is the only regular threatened by
the Borg, you'd think Picard would feel a bit sorry for all those
Ensigns Throwaway.  Just for a second.  Maybe even try to do something
for *them.*  Just a thought, y'know.
I realize that my review up to now has been largely negative, so here,
without further ado, are some Things They Got Right:
Although the Picard-as-Ahab scene didn't work for me, I was delighted
that they *tried* it.  A *fallible* character is a zillion times better
than an infallible one; Trek has been rightly criticized for its
unbelievably infallible characters -- and for its fallible characters
whose dumbest screw-ups never get more than a mild rebuke -- and
the fact that the Trek folks realized this error, and tried to correct
it, pleases the hell out of me.  Now, if they'll just start taking
this attitude on the series more often...
The zero-g fight pleased me.  Not just because it was pretty accurate,
but because it took place on the *underside* of the Enterprise hull.
Three-dimensional thinking, *at last!*
Direction, direction, direction.  Here's hoping Frakes gets more
mainstream directing gigs, so he doesn't have to host any more of those
goddamned UPN paranormal shows!
The fact that they went to an honest effort, instead of just going
through the motions.  Of course, now that I've *seen* that even Brannon
Braga can make a try, I'll be even more harsh on their miserable flops
from now on. *grin*
And, last, a funny subtext.  Trek has made social commentary on many
things before, but FC saw Trek commenting on Trek... and doing it in
a very interesting way.  I don't think anyone else has commented on
this, but when it hit me during the film I doubled up and came close
to ROTFL.
Here, I'll tell you when it hit me; see if you can get it.  It hit
me *hard* in the scene in which Zephram Cochrane, Riker, and LaForge
are sitting in the little cockpit, and Cochrane discusses his reasons
for building the ship.  He's not building it for hope, for the future,
or for any of the reasons the history books suggest.  Cochrane's motive
is money (although how he expects to become filthy rich in a world whose
infrastructure has been largely devastated is a *really* good question).
He doesn't have a vision.  He just wants cash, naked women, and a nice
strong drink.
The funny thing is that posterity idealizes Zephram Cochrane.  They
build statues and monuments to his memory.  They write him up as a
great man, as being just shy of the Second Coming, as being a hero.
But Zephram Cochrane is none of those things.  He's a lecherous, drunken
reprobate who did what he did for purely material reasons.
Zephram Cochrane is *Gene Roddenberry.*
I haven't seen anyone comment on this interpretation yet -- and that
surprises me; I'd think someone would have.  For me, Trek's spoofing
of its creator's own unlikely pop-culture icon status was probably
the best part of the movie.  It gives the film a bit of a subversive
bite for the viewer who looks below the surface, and I think it redeems
some of the surface's flaws.  FC still isn't a perfect movie, and you'll
note that it shies away from spoofing the problems that plague Trek
today... but the fact that it goes back to its roots and pisses on
them in the same movie is *really* delightful.
And that, in a nutshell, is that.  Nicely-made, well-done movie; flawed
but still very enjoyable.  If it weren't for the inept beginning, I'd
give it three stars out of four; as it is, I'm giving it two and a half
for being an honest effort with a sprinkling of some really nice stuff.
Here's hoping the next one is better, and - more importantly - that
Brannon Braga learned something from this movie and brings the fruits
of his knowledge onto _Voyager_.
Well, I can dream, right?  Anyway, FC is a good start; let's see Trek
start cranking out more good stuff.  Maybe the next Trek movie will
be even better.
