Authors
Dave Gross
Number of Reviews
2

Title
Review for Malcolm X (1992)
     Spike Lee has moved decisively from the ranks of "promising up-and-
coming filmmaker" to "great filmmaker" with his terrific three-and-a-
half-hour epic retelling of the Malcolm X story.  This film demanded a
scope and a gestalt far beyond anything Lee had attempted before -- and
Lee has responded by reaching new heights in respectfully translating
this myth to the screen.
     Malcolm X was a human being, though his legend is so powerful and
compelling that future generations will probably be skeptical and call
his life fiction.  Like a similar epic film, "Gandhi" (from which Lee
almost certainly took some inspiration), "Malcolm X" had to be
translated from an already powerful myth into a compelling film.
     But a myth is more emotional than visual.  To tell a myth with
actors and film threatens to debase the spiritual, faith-like grandeur
of the story and replace it with vulgar biography and journalism.  Spike
Lee's triumph (and his improvement over "Gandhi") is that he preserved
both Malcolm the myth and Malcolm the man.
     He has help from Denzel Washington, who plays Malcom X in the film.
Washington plays a number of roles in the film -- Malcolm Little,
drowning in the excesses of drugs and crime; Malcolm X, the upright
disciple of Elijah Muhammad, converted in prison; and Malcolm, changed
and enlightened after his pilgrimage to Mecca.  Washington has the range
to play all of these men within a man, and he shades the transitions
between them with care.  There are probably many academy awards in this
film, but this actor has a lock on one.
     What the critics and the press will be wagging their tongues about
in the coming weeks will probably be Lee's Oliver Stone-like retelling
of the assassination.  The orthodox take on the killing is that Malcolm
X was assassinated on the order of the Nation of Islam, a group which he
had recently broken ties with and which was jealous of his influence and
power.  Spike Lee has included the U.S.  government in the conspiracy --
a theory that is plausible, though it is a textbook violation of Occam's
razor.  All in all, this new theory constitutes an unnecessary
distraction from the myth, and its inclusion was a temptation Lee should
have fought.
     Another point of interest is the cameo appearance by none other
than Nelson Mandela (can you think of any other director with the
international stature and respect it would take to get someone like
Mandela to appear in their film?)
     Also, the opening sequence, in which a burning American Flag
alternates on the screen with scenes from the Rodney King beating will
be seen by many as unnecessarily inflammatory.  It is clearly Lee's
attempt to make the case that the story of Malcolm X is current events
-- not history -- and by this standard, the inclusion of the King
beating footage is not only justified but necessary.
     But the more important revelation about this film is that Spike Lee
has clearly bought into the moderate line about Malcom X -- that his
redemption as a hero came when he returned from his hajj filled with a
new spirit of interracial brotherhood and respect, and conciliation with
more moderate civil rights leaders.  The Malcolm X who appears in
posters and whose speeches are excerpted on rap albums is almost always
the earlier, angrier, racist Malcolm X.  The Malcolm that Lee
sympathizes with is a Malcolm who has moved beyond this, demanding
respect without lowering himself to racial hatred.
     That this moderate version of the Malcolm X myth is the one that
made it to the screen is the real news.  In this video age, the Malcolm
X myth fashioned by Spike Lee may well replace in importance the myth
told to Alex Haley in THE AUTOBIOGRAPHY OF MALCOLM X.
     And, aside from the cinematic triumph of Spike Lee, it is this fact
that will be the legacy of MALCOLM X the film.

Title
Review for Thelma & Louise (1991)
     I'm willing to let a lot of things I disagree with slide for the
sake of art.  For instance, I despise racism, but I won't overly
criticize a joke that depends on racial stereotypes -- as long as the
joke is funny.  Most of those sort of jokes aren't funny at all, though,
so rarely to I have this opportunity to rein in my social conscience.
     This was the attitude with which I approached THELMA AND LOUISE.  I
had heard enough about the film to know that it quite possibly would
violate quite a bit of the men's movement's version of politically
correct thought.  I was willing to let these considerations take a back
seat to the art of the movie.
     For a while, that worked out fine.  The movie wasn't too cerebral,
but sort of fell into the old suburban action fantasy Walter Mitty
thing.  You know ... the "Gee my life is boring, wouldn't it be exciting
if ..." sketch.  Not at all foreign to film.  Ad executive finds himself
in the middle of a terrorist plot; Housewife gets mistaken for daughter
of millionaire, madcap adventure erupts upon being snatched by Keystone
Kidnappers; Ordinary caring father dons super-hero garb to take
vengeance on criminal element.  We've seen this sort of thing before.
     And certainly there have been a number of movies about men who have
gone beyond the law, using violence to terrorize the countryside and
cash in on macho derring do.  ROBIN HOOD, coming out this summer, will
probably fall into this mold.  Look for enough murder and armed robbery
in this one to far outshine the criminal mayhem in THELMA AND LOUISE.
     But, unfortunately for the film's fate in this review, the quality
just isn't very good, which meant that I had time to start thinking
politics.
     It's true, I noticed right away, that the men in the film are
mostly reeking of the slime from the depths from which they have
crawled.  I didn't immediately fault the film for this, since the only
real female roles in the film were the title characters, and I didn't
think they represented wonderful examples of the species, either.
     I could talk about some of the reasons why I didn't think the film
or the story were very good.  One of the main flaws, I thought, was with
the characters.  It seemed to me that the plot wasn't something that
they did, so much as something that happened to them.  And their
epiphanal sayings every time they committed some violent act made me
wonder if these wonderful things they were discovering about themselves
or about life didn't really add up to much more than an adrenaline rush
-- explanations didn't get much deeper than that.
     But seeing as this is soc.men, not talk.movies or whatever [well, it
was soc.men before  -Moderator], I won't go into my ideas of what made
the film flawed as a film.  I will talk a little about the images of men
and women in the film.
     As I mentioned before, there are few truly heroic figures in the
film, unless you count Thelma and Louise themselves (I don't).  There is
one boyfriend who isn't entirely seedy, at least as far as we can tell
through his cold exterior.  And there is the Good Cop (tm) whose
motivations for his understanding behavior are left completely
unexplained by the film.  The incidental men in the film are all scum,
from the rapist at the bar to the leering men at the rest stops to the
repulsive cardboard-cut-out chauvinist pig truck driver to the idiot
repressive husband to the sloppy restaurant boss to the guy who was a
good lay but robbed them blind when they turned their backs -- They
drool, cackle, bully and generally act like stereotypes throughout the
film.
     This is not such a horrible crime in itself, since as I mentioned
before, the two main female characters are also not the sort of people
I'd choose to spend time with.  I can't think of any other female
characters in the film who even warranted speaking roles (other than
maybe "Some more coffee?"), so it's hard to say whether this was just
equal opportunity misanthropy.
     So for a while, the film is pretty fair-minded.  Then about
two-thirds of the way through, things start getting preachy.  If you
didn't realize that this was supposed to be a women's liberation film,
you learn fast.  The preachy stage reaches its peak when Thelma and
Louise manage to get the aforementioned truck driver to pull over.  He
expects that his frontal assault of sexual innuendo has miraculously done
the trick, but is stunned to be confronted by two women who castigate
him for his sexist behavior ("How would you like it if somebody said
that to your mother?") and then, when he refuses to apologize, blow up
his truck.
     It gets spread pretty thickly at this point, and drove the nails in
the coffin for the film, in my opinion.  But don't decide not to see the
film because it is anti-male and a poor representation of liberated
women.  Decide not to see the film because it isn't a good film.  Or I
suppose you can find out for yourself, but go on bargain night :-)
