Authors
Dorothy Pomerantz (Dorothy Pomerantz)
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for My Life's in Turnaround (1993)
     It seems like there's a definite trend nowadays towards making TV
shows and movies about nothing.  Yes, I do think Jerry Sienfeld helped
this along--but for some reason this nothingness has been associated
with the 20 something crowd.  Maybe it's because of SLACKERS, I don't
know.  But MY LIFE'S IN TURNAROUND takes nothing and makes it about
something.  Not about something so much as about getting off your ass
and doing something.  In SLACKER and REALITY BITES , the kids never
actually do anything.  The movies end and we are content knowing that
maybe they found love or maybe they found something to do with their
days, but they didn't reall accomplish anything.  At the end of MY
LIFE'S IN TURNAROUND, you know they actually did something, created a
piece of art, because you're watching it.
     MY LIFE'S IN TURNAROUND is about two guys (the authors, directors,
producer, stars) who decide to make a movie.  They have no ideas, no
script and maybe no talent.  They seem to think that they don't need
any of this stuff though, people will want to watch what they do,
though we're not exactly sure what that is.  They're only guidance is
their friend Sarah who runs a talent agency and puts up with a lot of
shit from them.  She tries to "get them meetings" with various
producers but they manage to mess them all up with their lack of
direction.
     Everyone says they need a star attached to the project.
Miraculously, they run into Phoebe Cate and Martha Plimpton
(separately) and charm them into starring in their film (for which they
have no idea or script).
     If this sounds boring and weird, it isn't.  You are compelled to
watch what it is these guys do, although they don't do much of
anything.  They're just really funny.  It's a pleasure to watch.  I and
most of the rest of the audience laughed the whole way through.  They
are like your funniest friends entertaining you for an hour and a
half.  Their language is complete with words not found, casual
obscenities and "like"s and "umm"s.  They charm Martha Plimpton into
joining the film by relating some truly gross but somehow funny
stories.  It's hard to know if these guys really understand what
they've got.  It's easy to confuse their screen personalities with their
real personalities because the movie seems so autobiographical.  But
they both end up with beautiful girl friends and its all very neat.
     The  film does lapse into unnecessary sentimentality at some
points.  Jason (who is always surrounded by fourteen-year-old models)
is dealing with the fact that his father was more successful them him
at that age and that he ultimately killed himself.  It's a useless plot
device to give the character a little more depth, but it doesn't come
in to much.  And when it does, it's accompanied by corny piano music
which also fades in the background mercifully quickly.  The rest of the
soundtrack is pretty good stuff though.
     The other problem I had with this film is that they were pretty
shitty to women but they got the girls in the end.  It was a little
like they said, well, our methods don't work in real life, lets make
our film personalities live out that dream.  Although they are charming
and funny--they're guy-guys to the worst degree and I was a little mad
about that.  Also, they treat their friend Sarah terribly and she just
goes--oh, you guys.  They are cute, but I don't know how many thinking
girls out there would want to date them.
     The two guys were actually at this screening which was a
surprise.  They're a lot fatter in real life then they appeared on
screen which I thought was strange.  But they were pretty down to earth
about the whole film making thing.  I hope they get the opportunity to
do more stuff, because I really enjoyed this movie and I think they
might have potential.
