Authors
Samuel Stoddard
Number of Reviews
2

Title
Review for Short Cuts (1993)
Set in the bustle of Los Angeles, this star-studded Robert Altman
cinematic tapestry tells the interlocking stories of a host of
characters.  Tapestry is precisely the right word.  Each
character is a thread in said tapestry, who contributes to the big
picture, interacts with other characters who also contribute to the
big picture, but really have no conception as to what the big
picture looks like.
We do.  We see everything that happens to each of the characters in
the few days the film spans.  This omniscience gives us, the audience,
a unique perspective.  We can see the series of accidents and chance
that change the course of people's lives forever.  The characters
persevere, try hard to make their lives work.  Sometimes they do,
sometimes they don't.  Usually it's a mix of the two and often dictated
by happenings completely out of their control.  If each of the
characters knew everything there was to know about all the others,
how much more compassionate, less angry, might they all be, and how
much simpler their lives?  All the characters are linked to all the
others in some direct or indirect way, but no one knows everybody.
Roger Ebert surmised in his review how much things might change if
they did.  One character might never meet another character throughout
the course of the film, but has plenty of precisely what the other
needs.  Maybe some of these perfect pairs will one day meet up --
several, undoubtedly, will not.
"Real life" films rarely interest me.  This one fascinates me.  I was
not expecting to love it so -- I expected fine filmmaking, but not
necessarily fine entertainment.  Short Cuts does several
things with smashing success:  it is an upstanding example of
cinematic art, it is engrossing entertainment, it is hilariously
funny, it is poignant and moving, and it inspires an awe rarely
evoked by every day life.  Within the days that the film takes place,
there are momental events that take place, which the characters will
never forget as long as they live, and there are the routine events
that occur and are forgotten.  All of these are somehow made
fascinating in some way.  Frances McDormand's story, for instance,
about her affair with a married man and a malicious ex, borders on
hysteria.  There are no punchlines -- it's pure situational humor,
in the uncorrupted sense of the term -- and induced greater laughter
in myself than most pure comedies can do.  Andie MacDowell's story,
on the other hand, evokes our utmost concern and compassion, more so
than most pure dramas can.  Short Cuts is surprising,
shocking, and unpredictable in this fashion -- true to life, just
when things seem settled and ordinary, something happens that snaps
you attention.  And it's a different kind of thing each
time.  It might be a sudden moment of humor or horror, or a facet of
a character abruptly revealed that shows us that they're all real
people after all, not the stereotypes that a few of them seem like at
first.
Rare indeed is a film that runs over three hours yet leaves us wanting
more.  Most of the stories have resolutions of some sort, enough to
provide a necessary level of satisfaction a viewer expects from a
film.  But the end of the film isn't the end of the stories -- no
more so than the beginning of the film was the beginning of the
stories.  In real life, episodes in people's lives never really end --
they shape the people they happen to, are often recalled in sporadic
moments, and always affect their futures.  The film's open-ended
conclusion is appropriate and necessary, but it is admittedly
disconcerting to see the credits roll so soon.  It takes some
thought and reflection afterward to bring the film to a close in our
own minds.  Viewers put off by the seemingly abrupt end may not be
inclined to do so and will therefore not fully appreciate it.
But the characters must get on with their lives, and we must get
on with ours.
Visit the At-A-Glance Film Reviews page at:
 http://pubpages.unh.edu/~ss1/movies/
1500+ ratings, 600+ reviews, on films from all eras, 1918-1997.

Title
Review for Blondie (1938)
The first entry in one of the longest running film series in
all of movie history (in terms of number of entries) introduces us
to the screen incarnations of the famous characters of what may be
the longest running comic strip in all of comic strip history.
Part of what makes this film series so endearing is the perfect
casting.  Penny Singleton and Arthur Lake fit the Blondie and Dagwood
characters so perfectly, they could just as easily have been Chic
Young's inspiration for the comic strip instead of the other way
around.  Better yet, consistency strengthens the series, as Singleton
and Lake star in every last one of the twenty eight "Blondie"
films made over the course of thirteen years.
Larry Simms as Baby Dumpling (later known as Alexander) also
reprises his role in all the films; Danny Mummert plays his friend
that lives next door in all but four episodes.  Throughout the
series, we watch them grow up, and we become pleasantly familiar with
their personalities -- were they replaced every few films, we would
not.
Irving Bacon stars as the ill-fated mailman, Mr. Crumb, that
Dagwood was forever crashing in to on his way to work.  Crumb was
transferred to a new route mid-way through the series, opening the
door for other mailmen to take the falls.  (One of the most
consistently funny gags in the series was the inevitability of
Dagwood's collisions with the mailman; curiously, right through to
the twenty-eighth film, the writers found enough twists on it
to make it fresh and hilarious every time.)
Jonathan Hale stars as Dagwood's tempermental boss J. C. Dithers in
sixteen of the first eighteen films, bringing a surprising depth to a
role that might have easily been a stereotypical cardboard caricature.
Dithers is a stern, hot-tempered boss who runs a tight ship and has
little patience for the trouble Dagwood continually finds himself in,
but in certain moments, he surprises us with his compassion,
understanding, and the ability to laugh in a bleak situation.  The
Dithers character works because those moments exist but are rare.
When Jonathan Hale left the series, Dagwood got a new boss, George
Radcliffe, played by Jerome Cowan, who had different quirks but was
essentially the same type of character.
Rounding off the cast is Daisy, the family dog, used to great
advantage, every bit as expressive, funny, and adorable as the human
stars.  She was played by a male dog, and the _same_ dog in
all twenty eight pictures.
Faithfulness to the comic strip was always a major concern with the
makers of the film series -- the little touches, like the appearance
of Bumstead sandwiches and Dagwood crashing in to the mailman in a
flurry of letters, are simply delightful.
Plotwise, the appealing characteristic of the "Blondie" films
is Dagwood's knack for getting himself in to trouble.  Just when you
think he's gotten in to enough trouble for one film, and the rest of
it should be spent getting out of it, he gets in still more trouble.
And more trouble.  And then some more.  And still more.  Sometimes
Blondie pulls him out of it, sometimes blind luck does the job, but
regardless, we can't help but laugh and sympathize, laugh and
sympathize.  Through it all, one thing is certain:  the Bumstead
family will hang together through thick and thin; their blatant
refusal to accept defeat is a quality that can only be admired.
Their characters are reflections of ourselves; perhaps another element
of the series' appeal rests in how we identify with them and cheer
when they pull through in the end.  And it helps, of course, that most
of the films are outright hilarious.
This first film in the series is one of the best.  Dagwood loses his
job (for the first of a great many times) just when money is tight;
he must close a deal with an elusive client on his own to get it back.
Visit the At-A-Glance Film Reviews page at:
 http://pubpages.unh.edu/~ss1/movies/
1600+ ratings, 700+ reviews, on films from all eras, 1916-1997.
