Authors
Jeff Pidgeon
Number of Reviews
20

Title
Review for Men in Black (1997)
        "Men in Black", this summer's wildly anticipated, big-budget offering
from Amblin Entertainment and Barry ("The Addams Family") Sonnenfeld, is a very
entertaining (if somewhat familiar) genre picture that aims to please and does
so consistently.  Will Smith plays James Edwards, a New York cop who stumbles 
across "level 6 agents of the INS" while attempting to apprehend what he thinks
is an ordinary felon.  It turns out (as it has in "Stargate", "ID4" and many
episodes of "The X-Files", I imagine) that the Roswell cover-ups were indeed
real and all of those UFO stories that we've heard over the years are true.
In fact, aliens are still visiting Earth, and the main job of those who
become the Men in Black is to monitor the aliens who are kept hidden on Earth
and make sure that their existence remains undetected by the general 
public.  "It's just like 'Casablanca'", says Smith's mentor K (played by Tommy
Lee Jones), "except without the Nazis".
        Much of the feel of this film is similar to "Ghostbusters" in its pre-
mise of a fantastic extraterrestrial subculture within the framework of a cas-
ual, everyday job.  The film is at its best when milking that contrast for 
laughs, often depicting the aliens as having little patience with humanity's 
persistently backward ways.  The audience is introduced to the world and its
characters, as well as the antagonist who wishes to bring about the end of the
world (again, similar to "Ghostbusters").  Herein lies the main weakness of the
script, as much of the climactic showdown between the villain (whose main mo-
tivation seems to be to cause destruction in that movie-villain way) and our
heroes is not so much a climax as another event in the film -- a plateau rather
than an inspired capper.  The film is so much fun, peppered with plenty of 
funny, smart dialogue, that it's a shame that the final sequence isn't one of 
the stronger gags in the film (as the marshmallow man was in "Ghostbusters").
Still, Lowell Cunningham & Ed Solomon's script is well structured aside from 
these problems, with clear set-ups which pay off pleasantly later.  Predicta-
bility is also a problem, but not to a point where it sinks the film.  It simp-
ly makes it less surprising than it could have been.
        It's clear that everyone involved here was enthusiastic about the pro-
ject, and to its benefit all of the elements were mixed in good proportion to
one another.  Computer animation, make-up, practical and miniature effects are
all used in concert here (each to its respective strength), and the results are
exceptional.  Kudos to the various effects teams for some terrific work!  
Danny Elfman has whipped up an especially versatile score for this picture, 
brash and agressive at times, subdued and tense at others.  Jones and Smith 
(even the anonymity of their names seems intentional) work very well together
here; rather than attempt to out-act each other, Jones plays the straight man
(along with Rip Torn, who echoes a similar role in "Defending Your Life") to
the film's loopiness.  Both make the most of their roles and successfully cre-
ate nicely contrasting characters.  When the villain snatches a cab for his
getaway, Smith bolts for the street, frantically searching amidst a sea of 
taxis, while Jones calmly descends the stairs toward their own car.  Linda Fi-
orentino plays Dr. Weaver (a morgue doctor who gets caught up in the proceed-
ings) with her usual panache that has served her well elsewhere and makes her
stand out in an otherwise limited role.  It's a shame that she has little else
to do but lay the foundation of the upcoming sequel franchise (what will they
call the sequel?  "People in Black"?).  Vincent D'Onofrio is also quite unnerv-
ing yet hilarious as the disguised alien antagonist, who nicely communicates
the qualities of one who is clearly not used to a human form.  Bo Welch contin-
ues the visual snap he has brought to many of Tim Burton's films with produc-
tion design that is beautiful, but with a sense of fun that compliments the
picture.  A design highlight is MIB headquarters, a silver-and-white spoof of
sixties spy pop.
        This is clearly Sonnenfeld's best picture to date, one where the excep-
tional efforts of a strong team help to offset the formulaic structure of a 
genre picture.  How can you not like a film where an alien race apologizes for
starting the process of Earth's destruction?  With a terrific final shot.
Recommended.

Title
Review for Godzilla (1998)
a review by Jeff ("spoilers") Pidgeon
        If you've never seen "Close Encounters of the Third Kind", "Jaws",
"Jurassic Park", "Aliens" or "The Professional", you might be find the latest
remake of "Godzilla" tolerable.  For me, Roland ("ID4") Emmerich and Dean Dev-
lin's latest super-production was yet another patchwork quilt of lifted shots
and scenes from several other films.  One might expect a certain amount of
old familiar feelings -- this is after all, a remake; but it's mostly that 
and only that; a huge bundle of predictable moments delivered with plenty of
carnage but not much excitement.
        It starts out promisingly -- creepy titles of video nuclear testing
footage all shot in a nasty toxic yellow color over David Arnold's ominous
score (the credits grow as we watch them) -- but almost from the moment the 
film gets underway (with an attack on a Japanese fishing trawler), everything
feels trumped-up and cloned, as if the sole motivation for the film was to
out-do every other film in existence: "Oh, so the shark in 'Jaws' attacks a
little boat?" "Well, we'll have Godzilla attack a BIG boat!" "The shark drags
one boat around?" "We'll have our beastie drag THREE!!" "Terrific!!"  A couple
of these Spielberg-esque attacks, and we're on our way.  Using this "Close 
Encounters" technique of hiding The Big Surprise from view for the first
half hour or so works well when you're not really sure what you're going to
get at the end (i.e. little ships and -- whoa! -- the mothership!), but here,
since we do know, it mostly builds impatience to see The Monster in The City.
        Like "ID4", "Godzilla" has a number of plots running at once: Nick
Tatopoulos (Matthew Broderick) tries to save New York from getting completely
squashed while seeing if he really is still estranged from his one-time
-fiancee/aspiring reporter Audrey Timmonds (Maria Pitillo, who plays one of 
those characters that you frequently pray will get stepped on or eaten). 
Audrey is trying to decide between Love and Her Career, having stolen a video-
tape of Godzilla's exposition and leaked it to the press.  Animal (Hank Azar-
ia) and Lucy (Arabella Field) seem to exist to round out a "Twister"-esque
band of characters with cartoonish Noo Yawk accents thrown in for flavor.
Philippe Roche (Jean Reno) plays a sinister member of the French secret ser-
vice who at first works against, then alongside our main characters to defeat
the creature.  Apparently, French atomic tests were responsible for the darn 
thing, and they want to cover it up.  Good luck convincing everybody that 
those crushed buildings were just swamp gas, guys!  New York mayor Roger Ebert
(Michael Lerner) -- yes, he has a balding assistant named Gene and they fight
all the time -- butts heads with the the Main Army Guy (Kevin Dunn) and with
Nick over whether or not Godzilla is actually Goddess-zilla, or Godzillette;
are eggs being laid somewhere on Manhattan?  Of course!
        We're even nudged to empathize -- her rampage is actually just Mommy
trying to raise her vicious, blood-thirsty little chicks in peace.  Aww!
Sorry folks, I thought they should have soaked that whole "Lost World" island
in nerve gas.  I mean, these aren't spotted owls we're talking about here --
these are HUGE, CARNIVOROUS MONSTERS THAT BREATHE RADIOACTIVE FIRE!  Kong and
Frankenstein clearly weren't violent unless provoked, and they were certainly
happy left in their own territory.  They didn't go building nests in Madison
Square Garden!  Sorry!  No sympathy!
        This is spectacle on such a grand scale that the quality is stretched
pretty thin.  Most of the technical work in the film remains firmly in the 
middle ground -- not pie-plate awful, nor ground-breaking innovation.  Most
of "Godzilla"'s effect's work feels at best uninspired and at worst rushed to
completion.  Much like "Lost In Space", the overall effect that the filmmakers
seem to be reaching for is a benumbed awe rather than any sort of suspenseful
rhythm or build.
        To be fair, a couple of the effects sequences are built on entertain-
ing ideas -- Godzillette isn't invulnerable in this film, she's just really
fast -- fast enough to evade surface-to-air missiles and underwater torpedoes
(Whether you want to buy this is another thing, but it makes for a nice vari-
ation, as opposed to the our-weapons-don't-seem-to-hurt-it stuff).  I liked 
the way the fire-breathing was suggested rather than blatant, and the cab 
chase in Manhattan (culminating on the Brooklyn Bridge) caught my eye as de-
cent spectacle.  Vicki Lewis plays a cute scientist that I was hoping to see
more of, but was squashed beneath the wheels of the central romance. 
        Most of these moments, though, are glints on a two-hour-plus stretch
of asphalt.  The film's sense of humor falls flat the vast majority of the 
time, and its attempts to connect you with its characters induce wincing.  
Most of my friends who are Godzilla fans say that it isn't a Godzilla movie.
Others say it's more of a remake of "The Beast From 20,000 Fathoms" than "God-
zilla".  Not being all that familiar with those films, I can't say.  But 
there's a lot of books I would recommend you start reading with those two 
hours that you'll save by not seeing "Godzilla".  Not Recommended.

Title
Review for Mask, The (1994)
        If you want to see ILM's latest resume entry in terms of effects, "The
Mask" is a nice addition to their already impressive body of work.  On just
about any other level, though, it's pretty disappointing.  It's an improvement
over the comic book that inspired it, but the comic was barely a premise, much
less a story.  I was hoping the screenwriters could expand the basic idea --
geek finds mask, becomes "cool", wreaks havok -- into something that could en-
gage and entertain for a couple of hours.  Nope.
        Jim Carrey plays Stanley Ipkiss, a nebbish-y bank teller who is 
jerked around by everyone in sight -- until he finds the mask, a sort of magni-
fying glass for the wearer's personality.  Since Stan is a big-time animation
fan (like most other film protagonists these days), after donning the mask, he
becomes a Tex-Avery-style force of nature, zipping about, generally doing
whatever he damn well pleases.
        If this sounds like fun, it could be -- but Carrey doesn't know what to
do with the nebbish side of the equation to make it empathetic or funny.  We 
should be on Stanley's side as much as the Mask, but I found
myself waiting for more effects because he was so uninteresting.  The acting
and writing are strictly from dishwater -- only the manic Carrey, shored up by
ILM's rubbery visuals, gives the film spark.  The script sets up most the rules
the plot needs to work, but how the mask comes on or off -- either in terms of
a parasite-mask that "wants" a host, or an increasingly addictive temptation to
the wearer -- is poorly dealt with.  "Beetlejuice" is a similar concept (with
similar problems) that managed to be quirky and lively enough to leap the plot
gaps.  There's a fair amount of slack here, and the direction, while not with-
out verve, isn't up to the task.
        It's interesting to see cartoon physics applied to real actors this way,
but it's mostly an excuse to trot out the same gags that were old in "Roger 
Rabbit".  The great thing about the Tex Avery cartoons was the feeling that you
never knew what you were going to get -- they were so chaotic that you went
away feeling that if you saw them more that once, they might be different the
next time.  Here, you pretty much know what's on your plate, and (aside 
from the live-action application) oftimes they're even in the same context.
As for the supporting players, Peter Riegert has a couple of moments as the po-
lice detective, and the fellow playing his simple sidekick manages to eke a few
laughs. Cameron Diaz has presence, but is required to do little but stand 
around in tight dresses while the camera leers up and down her frame.  The vil-
lains are forgettable, and this really hurts the picture.  Randy Edel-
man's score neither hurts nor helps much.  Someone looked at "Ace Ventura" and
decided that there had to be another cute little dog -- although he is quite
important at several points in the plot (almost as much as the Mask himself).
Generally, Carrey was a funnier cartoon character in "Ace Ventura", and we got
to see him be funny all the way through, instead of having to wait for laughs.

Title
Review for Spawn (1997)
        I like comic books, and occasionally that causes problems.  The prob-
lem these days is that the affection leads me to see movies that most people can
see coming for miles.  They hide in concrete bunkers until the danger has pass-
ed, and see films that are more worthwhile.  How can you say that, you say.
There's plenty of movies out there, and there's probably plenty that are an
equivalent theft of two hours.
        "Spawn" starts out as a low-grade blend of "Darkman" and "The Crow",
and goes downhill rapidly from that modest goal.  I've rarely seen a movie 
with as much exposition as "Spawn" has, and yet almost NOTHING makes any sense.
"Spawn" seems to be the story of Al Simmonds, some sort of hired gun working 
for some sort of CIA variant.  The group assassinates political enemies of the 
U.S. in elaborate, supposedly covert ways that require a lot of special ef-
fects.  Well, Al being the Caring Family Guy that he is, can't take his job any
more, and wants out.  No way, says group leader Jason (Martin Sheen, sadly),
well, all right -- as long as you do this One Last Job for us.  Well, all
right, says Al, and being the Good Team Member that he is, goes out to blow up
a chemical weapons plant with agent Priest (Mindy Clarke, who is costumed dif-
ferently than everyone else in the film) smirking portenteously in the back-
ground.
        Of course, it's a double cross, and Jason blows up the plant with Al
still in it (though he and Priest are there too, so I don't know how they es-
caped meeting the same fate).  Al dies, and is sent to some place that I still
don't understand -- a set that's clearly been lifted from "Blade Runner" -- 
that isn't Hell, or Earth, either.  Here he meets Count Cogliostro (Nicol Will-
iamson, even more sadly) and The Violator (John Leguizamo), his Hellmates who
attempt to fill us in on why all this is happening.  Seems that the Violator is
playing both Al/now Spawn and Jason for suckers -- he's trying to wipe out ev-
eryone on Earth using greedy Jason's plans for power through his chemical 
weapon devices, and enlist Al/Spawn (using Al's devotion to his wife as lev-
erage) to lead his army of the newly-dead to storm the pearly gates once the
Earth is destroyed.  Of course, the Violator is the right hand man for ol'
Scratch himself, so this is a Conflict of Epic Proportions Between Good and 
Evil.  Spawn is given a CG glop suit that can do lots of cool things, but it's
never clear what the limits of it are, and the Count doesn't even get around to
telling him (or us) about it 'til well past the halfway mark.
        Most of the first half is flashbacks, and that gets redundant fast.
The middle is Spawn coming to terms with his angst, and learning a little about
what's going on -- he has a run-in with Jason and Priest, who despite being set
up a some sort of awesome assassin, is dispatched by Spawn in his first appear-
ance almost immediately.  She doesn't come back as an undead superhero, like 
Al.  She's just dead.  Of course, to say that "Spawn" is target marketed as a
"guy thing" is something of an understatement.  The rest of the film deals with
him rebelling against his manipulators.  If there is a message to "Spawn", it
might be that we all are in control of our destinies, which isn't bad, but the
amount of violence required to present it renders it somewhat ineffective.
The Violator can turn into some sort of monster that intially seems pretty
threatening, but winds up getting dispatched (after much frenetic editing) by
getting its head chopped off.  Well, not really -- it's just sort of killed in
that sequel-promising way.  The Devil is not only incapable of stopping Spawn
from doing anything, it can't even move its mouth to its own dialogue.  Most
of the effects here aren't all that good, but the Devil (ostensibly a potential
effects higlight) is particularly lackluster.  There are a few decent shots in-
volving Spawn's prehensile chains and cape, and some effective wallcrawling 
shots, but the editing weakens even these.  Heck, half the time Spawn isn't ev-
en masked.  The Violator has a few passable lines out of hundreds.  The pro-
duction design is derivative, and Graeme Revell's score goes for moody goth --
some Danny Elfman energy would have been welcome here.  Even the credit sequence
is reminiscent of "Seven".  It's difficult to imagine anyone, even fans of the
comic, enjoying this.  But then, "Heavy Metal" has been inflated to cult sta-
tus, so who knows?  Aggressive aversion recommended.

Title
Review for Jumanji (1995)
        "Jumanji", ILM's latest effects-soaked extravaganza, is yet another 
example of how important story really is.  Taking a visual cue from ILM's 
magician logo, the screenwriters seem to be content with pulling set pieces
from out of thin air.  One can imagine the pitch meeting for this film sound-
ing something like, "it'll be like the T-rex attack in 'Jurassic Park' -- for
the whole movie!!"
        Where "Jurassic's" story wasn't exactly material for "Masterpiece 
Theater", it did make the initial premise -- a dinosaur game preserve/theme
park -- seem initially wonderous and exciting, to the characters and the aud-
ience.  Only later do we realize, "Oh, right, unless everything went perfectly,
not only would it not be great, it would probably be extremely dangerous."
The majority of "Jurassic" is a pretty exciting illustration of that realiza-
tion.
        In "Jumanji", however, not only do we have no idea why the game was
ever created, we additionally have no convincing reason given to us why anyone
would want to *play* it.  The squares are conveniently blank -- if anyone were
actually aware of the tropical travails generously strewn along the game path,
as well as the fact that each square's caption will really happen to you --
most folks would blow the game into a million pieces and scatter the remains
amongst the four corners of the globe. 
        Ostensibly the main character begins playing to escape his uncaring
parents and bullying peers. The script, while furnishing needs for its hero,
apparently forgot that the game doesn't ever fufill any of them.  One would
think that initially the game would make his life better, and later reveal a
deadly price. "Jumanji", however, is one nasty, powerful game; giving anyone
who plays it nothing but abuse.  Still, three sets of children fall prey to
its seductively hand-carved board and jungle rhythms that (apparently) only 
they can hear.
         Additionally, there's no evidence given that any of the threats re-
leased by the game can only be resolved by the game's finish.  We're left with
that sinking feeling that the only reason the game continues is that it is the
sole force of motivation in the plot, and not a paticularly strong one at that.
         The characters aren't paticularly strong as written, and the perform-
ances can't take up the slack.  Most of the gags in the movie are of the post-
"Gremlins" variety of people freaking out over the goings-on, and various jun-
gle beasts creating chaos.  An odd response to the havoc is that the majority
of the townsfolk begin looting once the game's effects are felt.  The computer-
generated effects, while polished and lively, aren't always very convincing 
when presented as real animals.  I got the same feeling here that I got when I
saw "The Mask" -- enjoyment of a lively effects sequence, followed by impa-
tience for the next effects sequence as I sat through a rather arid plot.
        As the film (and game) reached a conclusion, the viewer is thrown a
curve ball -- the game resolution is of a back-to-square-one quality that, 
while appropriate for a board game, was unsatisfying for me as it allowed more
than one character to fix mistakes made earlier in the film.  I've never liked
this device all that much, and coupled with the generally uninvolving proceed-
ings, really ended the film poorly.  I felt the film was ultimately saying 
that you have to meet your parents more than halfway when things aren't going
well; after all, they love you even if you never see it.  Not recommended.

Title
Review for Pulp Fiction (1994)
     If you're pressed for time, I'll start by saying that PULP
FICTION is the only one of the three that I recommend.  It has many of
the classic Tarantino trademarks--the climactic multi-pistoled
stalemate, the period pop soundtrack, the multitude of junk-culture
references both verbal and visual, a clever sense of story structure,
and of course ... the violence.
     The level of on-screen violence is up a little from RESERVOIR
DOGS, but in general I didn't feel that it was a gratuitously violent
film, as I did with NATURAL BORN KILLERS or TOTAL RECALL.  In
general, the level is about what you would expect of a "hard-R" film
these days, although there are two se- quences--one involving a pawn
shop, another an accidental overdose--that I don't think anyone
(whether they like the film or not) will forget anytime soon.  I
recommend talking to a few viewers if you're unsure ... if you can trust
them not to reveal plot points.
     PULP FICTION is a three-part story, each of the parts working
their way back together (to a degree) towards the finish.  As with
RESERVOIR DOGS.  I really enjoy how Tarantino messes with flashback and
foreward to achieve some interesting results.  This is used more
effectively in RESERVOIR DOGS, but it works well again here.  It's also
surprising how Tarantino keeps PULP FICTION from seeming stale in spite
of the many similarities with his first film.  The characters and
situations are consistently amusing or tense (or both).  The dialogue,
if a bit larded with pop culture references, is clever and entertaining
(one of my favorite things about Tarantino films is the small talk).
The performances are strong across the board--Bruce Willis is fine even
if he is leaning on his washed-up-fill-in-occupation-of-your-choice
thing.  Delivery and timing of dialog is great, with more quotable
lines in a single screenplay than I've heard in a long time.
Particlarly strong is Samuel Jackson, who seems delighted to be away
from JUASSIC PARK.  The running time (2:40) is long, but it comes just
shy of wearing out its welcome--I came out well sated, but not fed up.
The surf-pop score supports the film nicely and gives it an additional
energy to add to the, uh, fun.  A minus is the constant stream of
racial epithets, which made me uncomfortable after a while.  One might
come out of this wishing that Tarantino would knock off the Madonna
lines and do something a little more mature.  Hey, give him time.
Hopefully, he's got a whole career ahead of him.  Recommended.

Title
Review for Judge Dredd (1995)
     JUDGE DREDD seems to be another example of what can happen when a
Big Star attaches him/herself to a project.  The Big Star begins to
bend the content and tone of the project to better suit what he/she
thinks the audience wants or expects from them, and before you know it,
it's just another vehicle, the content reduced to a candy coating
around the same old gumball.  I've never read a single issue of JUDGE
DREDD, but I can't imagine fans of the comic enjoying the film very
much.  I've heard tell of JUDGE DREDD fans boycotting the picture ,
though if this is so, I don't know what they intend to accomplish.  I
can't imagine there can be enough JUDGE DREDD fans to make a box office
dent one way or another, though the character has been around for a
while, so who knows?
     One of the oddest things about the film is the central idea.
We're in another one of those futuristic societies where everything has
gone to Hell in a bullet train.  This society's solution was to gather
most people up into great big huge cities policed by Judges--who are
judge, jury and executioner in one tight-leather,
golden-eagle-shoulder-pad package.  Most of the denizens of the
Mega-cities spend most of their time rioting, and the judges spend most
of *their* time shooting them or getting shot.  The Judges are presided
over by one of those High Councils that sit around in rooms that look
like they were designed by fascist architects.  They argue a lot about
how many Judges are getting greased, and discuss what a
maverick-type-legend Dredd is.  Considering how much authority the
Judges are given, it's unclear what Dredd is doing that's considered
outside the bounds of good judgement.  Further, it's more than a little
odd that we're supposed to accept this society as normal.  In MAD MAX,
for example, it's pretty clear that everything's pretty messed up, and
the people involved with the story would definitely like things to be
much better.  Here, however, most of the plot concerns itself with
whether or not some nasty fellow will take over what is a pretty
fascist set-up in the first place.  Dredd himself seems to be an
"upholder of the Law," but has little problem with the system he works
in.  I've heard that the comic's intent was satirical in asking us to
accept the Judges in the first place, but here it seems to come off
more like, 'Oh No!  That villain almost took control of our police
state!  Thanks goodness Dredd was here to prevent it from becoming a
*really bad* police state!'
     Most of the rest of the film is accomplished but derivative.
Everything feels familiar and tired.  The pacing is decent and the
effects are shiny but not especially diverting.  The production design
feels like Albert Speer, Ralph McQuarrie and Syd Mead teamed up to
re-make BLADE RUNNER.  Stallone feels inappropriate for a role that
would seem to require more steely fanaticism that his usual lovable-lug
bit.  The comedy relief sidekick comes off as rather irritating most of
the time, and every single line written for him punctures the reality
of the world we're supposed to be in with lots of pizza delivery and
ATM gags, with no adjustments made to remind us that we're in a
different culture.  There are sequences that (like CASPER) seem to be
footage for an upcoming simulator ride at Disneyland.  Max Von Sydow
dignifies this effort with a performance that rises above the
script-by-numbers.  Joan Chen looks good but is wasted in a supporting
role.  Alan Silvestri's score has a moment or two but mostly overplays
its hand.  The main villain in the piece seems to be doing an extended
Anthony Hopkins imitation.  Overall, I didn't find JUDGE DREDD as
irritating as BATMAN FOREVER, but I doubt if I'll remember much about
it at all a month or two from now.  Not recommended.

Title
Review for True Lies (1994)
        "True Lies", the latest effort from James ("Aliens") Cameron, certain-
ly has its (reputed) $120 million on the screen.  Cameron seems to spent a few
weekends watching Jackie Chan films while muttering to himself, "Aww, I can do
that!"  And as spectacle, "True Lies" is indeed hard to match.
        The film starts off well enough with a James-Bond-like escapade --
Arnold flirts with Tia Carrere, (a corporate antiquites dealer) acesses some
computer files upstairs to get some dirt for the plot, and escapes with dozens
of armed guards in various pursuit vehicles.  It's great fun, and the action
and light dusting of humor works well together.  Then the problems start to 
surface.
        We soon learn that Arnold's marriage (to Jamie Lee Curtis, in another
engaging performance) is on shaky ground -- being a super-spy takes up a lot of
your quality time, and the opening escapade made him miss his own birthday
party with his wife and daughter.  We're told that this happens quite a bit,
since Arnold's buddy (Tom Arnold) seems to be in constant backup/support mode,
both in his professional and personal life to a degree.  The marital strain
comes to a head when Arnold discovers that his wife is having an affair with a
used-car salesman (played foot-to-the-floor by Bill "Game Over" Paxton) who is
pretending to be a spy to attract her interest.  It seems Jamie Lee is bored
and wants some excitement in her life.
        What would seem to be a terrific premise -- Spy loses wife to fake spy,
but can't win her back by telling the truth without endangering her life --
begins to unravel in the middle of the film.  Arnold, now in a jealous tiff,
uses the agency's personnel and technology to tail his own wife and discover
who his rival is.  This seems reasonable (since being a spy is what he does for
a living), if excessive (even being as open as he seems to be, he refuses to
confront her with it at the dinner table -- it's more "fun" to break out the 
helicopters, men in camoflage and eentsy-teensy cameras).  He then breaks into
the rival's trailer (an understatement -- it's torn in two by automatic       
weapons' fire) and, "disguised" as a terrorist group, kidnaps both of them.
The car salesman is carted out in the middle of nowhere and threatened -- this
guy is such a scumbag that it does work as comedy -- while the wife is brought 
to an interrogation room (presumably back at the agency) and pumped by the two
Arnolds in order to find out just what has happened in this affair and what
state his marriage is in.  This is also played for laughs, but it comes off as
more manipulative (almost cruel) than funny.  If you're concerned that your
wife doesn't love you any more, jerking her around in such a flamboyant manner
seems like an odd way to show it.  When Arnold asks her if she loves her husband
 and she says she always has and always will, we're supposed to be touched.
It's just hard not to wonder how she would feel if she knew who the interro-   
gator was.
        The charade doesn't stop there -- Arnold basically forces his own
wife (since she's entangled in this situation, she has to work for the agency or
go to prison) into working on a "mission" -- step two of his plan to win her 
back.  The set-up is a "La Femme Nikita" type deal where she is to play the 
part of a prostitute in order to bug the client's hotel room.  Arnold is really
 the client, but she doesn't know that.  Using a recording as a surrogate voice,
he orders her to strip and dance in her underwear.  This is supposed to be ro-
matic (at least in terms of 'spicing up her life'), but it comes off as another
bizarre control game.  Fortunately, the terrorists who have been playing Mum-
bledy-peg during all of this decide to get things underway and capture the two
of them.
        Arnold finally tells Jamie Lee the truth (now that it's mostly unnece- 
ssary), but he's high on truth serum, so any hope of character development is
dashed.  The two of them manage to shoot, stab and flame-thrower their way out
of the enemy camp.  For some odd reason, Arnold can do all the violence he     
wants (odd after his latest attempts to be PC -- "T2" and "Last Action Hero"),
while Jamie Lee's killing is mostly accidental.  This is especially odd after
the strong female leads in Cameron's other films.  Unfortunately, the bad guys
have nabbed the remaining warheads (smuggled to their destination inside 
Persian antiquities -- hence Carrere's role in the plot) and bolted.  The remain
der of the film involves stopping the terrorists with a Harrier air attack on
a bridge, capping off with arnold snagging one of the Harriers to stop the
Crazed Terrorist Guy Capable Of Anything to Keep The Plot Going.  This culmin-
ates in Arnold's daughter being kidnapped, a fight atop the Harrier (which is
truly miraculous) which itself ends with a helicopter, some police cars, the 
villian and at least one floor of a high-rise being destroyed.
        The film as it stands with its bravura action set-pieces is entertain-
ing and funny in spots.  Tom Arnold makes a great sidekick, and I wouldn't be
surprised to see them together again in Arnold's next one.  Overall, though,
the film is just as loud and obnoxious as funny -- there's quite a parade of 
dick/piss jokes, as well as a lot of women-bashing jokes that wear thin.
The script in general is pretty juvenile and not terribly intricate considering
the good premise underneath.  Bill Paxton has one good freak-out.  This is the
third movie to try aggressively mixing action and humor, and it falls somewhere
in between "Demolition Man" (which I felt worked) and "Last Action Hero" (which
was a total wipe-out for me).  Not recommended.

Title
Review for Truman Show, The (1998)
        "The Truman Show", the latest in an intriguing series of films by
director Peter ("Witness") Weir, is a thought-provoking fantasy about a fic-
tional television program.  In it, Truman Burbank (Jim Carrey)'s life has been
broadcast since birth on a hermetically sealed island town called Sea Haven.
Truman goes through his daily routine, completely unaware that everyone around
him are paid performers who mold his fate.  It's a great concept, one that can
be interpreted differently by viewers of different ages.  Children (albeit old-
er or sharp ones) could find a compelling conceit in the idea that everything
in existence revolves around you, and if you're alert enough, you'll be able to
spot the seams in the deception.  Teenagers could see it as an escape picture,
rebellion from the opressive misconceptions of the previous generation.  Older
viewers may see it as a call to re-examine their lives, to challenge the com-
fortable patterns that may be smothering crucial needs still unfufilled. Even if
you remain on the surface level, it's still a pretty clever escape picture.
        Weir does a terrific job setting up the concept visually, letting the
audience get a significant distance into its running time before throwing back
the sheet on Truman's make-believe world.  Almost every shot is staged to feel
clandestine, the camera placed again and again in convincing locations to put
the viewer in between the television audience and the show's creators.  We see
how someone can be filmed all day long without the shot angles feeling gimmicky
or forced.
        The film opens as Truman's world begins to unravel -- as thoroughly
as Sea Haven's island community seems to be orchestrated, events continue to
build to his ultimate discovery of his lifelong deception by the show's crea-
tor, Christof (subtly played by Ed Harris).  It's really entertaining to see
the lengths that the production team will go to in order to preserve the illu-
sion -- young Truman shows an early interest in exploration, only to have it 
immedately squashed by his teacher.  We also gain sympathy for Truman as the 
methods for maintaining his limited life become crueler and more stringent --
he is molded into a frightened, unambitious man in order to prevent him from
desiring life beyond what has been created for him in the huge dome that sur-
rounds his world.  When Truman falls in love with a woman other than the act-
ress slated to be his wife, she is summarily removed from the show.  
        Many of the mistakes and accidents that do occur are explained away by
cast members or radio broadcasts or other factors, but eventually, as Truman 
becomes more suspicious and acts less and less predictably, making him harder
and harder to control, he discovers the ghosts in the machine -- or at least 
sees enough to provoke further testing of the show's defense mechanisms, which
in turn provoke a stronger desire for escape, to explore the world that has al-
ways fascinated him.  The struggle is great drama, and the ratings are terri-
fic -- audiences all over the world, initially attracted to watching a 'real'
life progressing in time yet permanently static, become tranfixed with Truman's
efforts to discover what lies beyond the life he's always known.  Some in the
audience feel that Truman's life is cruel and unusual punishment, and protest
for his release.
        The film's story is essentially simple -- Truman discovers the maze 
and struggles to solve it and take his place in the real world.  Will he ulti-
mately find freedom, or be crushed in an enviroment where every element -- even
the weather -- conspires to contain him?  Weir uses many striking visuals to
dramatize the concept.  The population of Sea Haven wait motionless early in the
morning, awaiting Truman's entry like the robots from "Westworld".  The towns-
people, discovering that Truman is missing, link arms and sweep the entire town
to flush him out and continue the show (a truly creepy and terrific sequence).
The figurehead of Truman's stolen boat, a golden eagle, thrusts out above the 
water as he pilots it out into the unknown.  Christof tenderly stroking a huge
video image of Truman as he lies asleep.
        The latter image brings another dimension to the creator/creation con-
flict.  We are clearly encourged to think of humanity and God in conflict (as
a last resort, "Christ"-of broadcasts to Truman directly, his voice booming 
down from a dawn-lit sky), yet on another level, we can see creator/creation in
less philosophical terms as a parent-child conflict, with the central theme
as maturity, forming one's own perspective through a partial rejection of the
imparted parental world.  Christof can be seen as the ultimate overprotective
parent, literally creating for his surrogate son an entire world safe from the
(ironically) lies and pain of the real world.  As in some of Weir's other films,
the protagonist is privy to an experience that isolates him from others (as in
"The Mosquito Coast" or "Fearless") and forces him to put himself at risk.
        Andrew ("Gattaca") Niccol wrote the script for "The Truman Show", and
like that film, its merits are primarily conceptual -- its emotional themes are
to a degree in shorthand, but still effective: Truman creates a composite por-
trait of his first love with pictures torn from fashion magazines, Truman re-
unites with his dead father when (dissatisfied with how he was dispatched from
the plot) the performer unexpectedly returns on the set.  If we had seen and
felt a stronger bond between them, this reunion could have been extremely pow-
erful in highlighting the emotional cruelty that lies beneath the placid sur-
face of Truman's life.  Similarly, more could have been made of the performers
who support Truman, but feel powerless to help him.
        The technical efforts here are fine -- Dennis Gassner's production de-
sign clearly defines the real world versus the television show; Peter Biziou's
cinematography also attractively supports the concept.  The score sports a var-
iety of styles -- Philip Glass and Chopin among them -- yet it coheres and 
more than embellishes the film's emotional impact.  The editors might have used
this concept as an excuse for showy effects, but William M. Anderson and Lee
Smith keep things clear and on an even keel when appropriate.  Look for Harry 
Shearer in a well-used cameo.  Recommended.

Title
Review for Wyatt Earp (1994)

        This is a paticularly frustrating film to watch.  It's not a complete
failure on the level of "Heaven's Gate", nor is it the focused, involving ex-
ample of storytelling that "Unforgiven" is, either.  It is three hours plus of
filmmaking that more often than not fails to live up to its pedigree.  No sin-
gle level of the film is severely deficient -- the acting, directing, score,
production design, costumes and editing are all well executed.  The script has
many memorable lines and moments, although they are fewer and further between
than previous Kasdan efforts.  Kasdan still has a strong eye for composition,
and since "Unforgiven" seems to be the goal here, the pacing and character 
shadings seem appropriate.  Randy Quaid comes out of this the best...his Doc
Holliday is visually unsettling and flamboyant.  Flamboyant enough, in fact,
to seem somewhat out of place -- a sort of "Silverado" character in an "Unfor-
given"-toned film.  Still, he provides most of the film's best moments, al-
though the supporting cast delivers their share as well.  You can tell where
you're supposed to be cheering, where you're supposed be tense,  where you're
supposed to emotionally peak and valley along with the protagonist.  But you
don't connect as well as you should, the result being a well-crafted but ultim-
ately ineffectual.  Not recommended.

Title
Review for Godzilla (1998)
a review by Jeff ("spoilers") Pidgeon
        If you've never seen "Close Encounters of the Third Kind", "Jaws",
"Jurassic Park", "Aliens" or "The Professional", you might be find the latest
remake of "Godzilla" tolerable.  For me, Roland ("ID4") Emmerich and Dean Dev-
lin's latest super-production was yet another patchwork quilt of lifted shots
and scenes from several other films.  One might expect a certain amount of
old familiar feelings -- this is after all, a remake; but it's mostly that 
and only that; a huge bundle of predictable moments delivered with plenty of
carnage but not much excitement.
        It starts out promisingly -- creepy titles of video nuclear testing
footage all shot in a nasty toxic yellow color over David Arnold's ominous
score (the credits grow as we watch them) -- but almost from the moment the 
film gets underway (with an attack on a Japanese fishing trawler), everything
feels trumped-up and cloned, as if the sole motivation for the film was to
out-do every other film in existence: "Oh, so the shark in 'Jaws' attacks a
little boat?" "Well, we'll have Godzilla attack a BIG boat!" "The shark drags
one boat around?" "We'll have our beastie drag THREE!!" "Terrific!!"  A couple
of these Spielberg-esque attacks, and we're on our way.  Using this "Close 
Encounters" technique of hiding The Big Surprise from view for the first
half hour or so works well when you're not really sure what you're going to
get at the end (i.e. little ships and -- whoa! -- the mothership!), but here,
since we do know, it mostly builds impatience to see The Monster in The City.
        Like "ID4", "Godzilla" has a number of plots running at once: Nick
Tatopoulos (Matthew Broderick) tries to save New York from getting completely
squashed while seeing if he really is still estranged from his one-time
-fiancee/aspiring reporter Audrey Timmonds (Maria Pitillo, who plays one of 
those characters that you frequently pray will get stepped on or eaten). 
Audrey is trying to decide between Love and Her Career, having stolen a video-
tape of Godzilla's exposition and leaked it to the press.  Animal (Hank Azar-
ia) and Lucy (Arabella Field) seem to exist to round out a "Twister"-esque
band of characters with cartoonish Noo Yawk accents thrown in for flavor.
Philippe Roche (Jean Reno) plays a sinister member of the French secret ser-
vice who at first works against, then alongside our main characters to defeat
the creature.  Apparently, French atomic tests were responsible for the darn 
thing, and they want to cover it up.  Good luck convincing everybody that 
those crushed buildings were just swamp gas, guys!  New York mayor Roger Ebert
(Michael Lerner) -- yes, he has a balding assistant named Gene and they fight
all the time -- butts heads with the the Main Army Guy (Kevin Dunn) and with
Nick over whether or not Godzilla is actually Goddess-zilla, or Godzillette;
are eggs being laid somewhere on Manhattan?  Of course!
        We're even nudged to empathize -- her rampage is actually just Mommy
trying to raise her vicious, blood-thirsty little chicks in peace.  Aww!
Sorry folks, I thought they should have soaked that whole "Lost World" island
in nerve gas.  I mean, these aren't spotted owls we're talking about here --
these are HUGE, CARNIVOROUS MONSTERS THAT BREATHE RADIOACTIVE FIRE!  Kong and
Frankenstein clearly weren't violent unless provoked, and they were certainly
happy left in their own territory.  They didn't go building nests in Madison
Square Garden!  Sorry!  No sympathy!
        This is spectacle on such a grand scale that the quality is stretched
pretty thin.  Most of the technical work in the film remains firmly in the 
middle ground -- not pie-plate awful, nor ground-breaking innovation.  Most
of "Godzilla"'s effect's work feels at best uninspired and at worst rushed to
completion.  Much like "Lost In Space", the overall effect that the filmmakers
seem to be reaching for is a benumbed awe rather than any sort of suspenseful
rhythm or build.
        To be fair, a couple of the effects sequences are built on entertain-
ing ideas -- Godzillette isn't invulnerable in this film, she's just really
fast -- fast enough to evade surface-to-air missiles and underwater torpedoes
(Whether you want to buy this is another thing, but it makes for a nice vari-
ation, as opposed to the our-weapons-don't-seem-to-hurt-it stuff).  I liked 
the way the fire-breathing was suggested rather than blatant, and the cab 
chase in Manhattan (culminating on the Brooklyn Bridge) caught my eye as de-
cent spectacle.  Vicki Lewis plays a cute scientist that I was hoping to see
more of, but was squashed beneath the wheels of the central romance. 
        Most of these moments, though, are glints on a two-hour-plus stretch
of asphalt.  The film's sense of humor falls flat the vast majority of the 
time, and its attempts to connect you with its characters induce wincing.  
Most of my friends who are Godzilla fans say that it isn't a Godzilla movie.
Others say it's more of a remake of "The Beast From 20,000 Fathoms" than "God-
zilla".  Not being all that familiar with those films, I can't say.  But 
there's a lot of books I would recommend you start reading with those two 
hours that you'll save by not seeing "Godzilla".  Not Recommended.

Title
Review for Wolf (1994)
        "Wolf" is the first film I can recommend unconditionally that's been
released this summer.  It's got a great script with a fair number of memorable
lines.  The performances are uniformly strong, and Michelle in paticular plays
one of the most interesting characters I've ever seen her do.  Jack is as 
nasty as he needs to be, but the rest of the time he delivers a subtle, con-
trolled performance.  Mike Nichols directs the whole thing with his usual re-
straint, but with more visual flair than you might expect.  By playing the fant
sy element down and working with well-written characters and situations, he
manages to ground what would ordinarily be an out-and-out ridiculous plot.
The plot turns are set up well in advance, but I didn't see them coming (ex-
cept for perhaps the last one, and it didn't bother me).  Morricone's score is
moody and supports the film well in general, even if it isn't totally compel-
ling on its own.  This isn't a paticularly scary film (it slow pacing and short
climax may irritate some), but it is compelling and suspenseful.  Rick Baker's
makeup is well-executed, though it may be disappointing to those expecting
another "American Werewolf" or "Howling" high-water mark in effects work.  Low
key is definately the idea here, which I think works just fine considering 
what was needed.  Kudos go also to James Spader who may take the "Slimy Shit 
of the Millenium" award away from the Company fella in "Aliens".  The blood
level is fairly high, but not anything that anyone who's seen "Bram Stoker's
Dracula" can't handle.  The sex scenes are quite low key as is the rest of the
film.  It definately makes you sit up and notice when the action gets going.
An extra bonus is the trailer for the Coppola/Branaugh "Frankenstein"...similar
to "Dracula" in its visual voluptuousness and sexual emphasis.  Not quite as
capital-G Gothic or as capital-D Designed, though.  Still, very cool looking
and shows promise.  Can't wait for November 4th...or was it September?  I for-
get.  Anyway, check out "Wolf".  As the saying goes, you'll be glad you did.

Title
Review for Batman Forever (1995)
It's Not "Batman Forever"--It Just Feels That Way
     I wholeheartedly admit up front that I didn't like either of the
first two "Batman" movies very much.  This sequel, on the other hand,
was created by an entirely new team--nobody (except the fellow who
plays Alfred the butler) was carrying over from the other two.  Tim
Burton's executive production credit didn't worry me much as I had
heard initially that he wasn't very interested in doing the third
installment, so I figured his involvement would be limited at best.
I've since heard that Warners actually didn't want Burton to direct
again, because BATMAN RETURNS was too dark for the huge mainstream
audience Waners was aiming for.  Possibly, but I have trouble believing
they shooed away the director of one their most successful films of the
decade, not to mention of all time.  At any rate, I was curious to see
what fresh perspective Joel (FLATLINERS) Schumacher would bring to THE
FRANCHISE.  I've never liked any of his films either, but FALLING DOWN
showed promise, and like the saying goes, "Nobody Knows Anything."
     After the first fifteen minutes had passed, I wanted to leave.
Usually, if I'm not into it after thirty minutes, it's not gonna
happen.  There are exceptions, but that sort of thing is pretty
rare.  Basically, it's a mess--a loud, confused, ugly heap of color
and noise that occasionally draws into focus only to rend itself apart
with the next action sequence.  The editing is so rapid fire I found
myself longing for a sequence with the love interest (and those are
generally the worst things about the "Batman" series--if I hear one
more speech about 'duality' or 'darkness and light'...!) to give my
eyes a rest.  Val Kilmer is generally a better Batman--he's more
physical than Keaton, which I think is more appropriate.  They even
attempt to make him more of a detective by giving him The Riddler's
puzzles to solve.  That would work if solving the puzzles had a bearing
on the plot, but by and large, they don't really seem to.  The Riddler
and Two-Face keep such a high profile in the film that they never seem
particularly difficult to track down.  The majority of the time, they
seem to be throwing themselves in Batman's face.
     Nicole Kidman is attractive and generates more screen heat than
Kim Basinger, but how difficult is that, really?  Generally, her time
is spent mooning after Batman/Bruce Wayne, or hiding the fact with that
swordplay-type banter that's all the rage in romantic comedies.  Both
Kidman and Kilmer are given more to do than Keaton, Basinger and
Pfeiffer had, but that's not saying a lot.  Their portrayals don't
bring any dimension or empathy to the characters, so it's mostly two
hours of quipping between them.  Tommy Lee Jones has worked with Oliver
Stone, so he knows what it's like to be acting over the art direction.
Sadly, the script focuses more on The Riddler, so his role is lost in
the din--we find out how he became Two-Face later in the picture, on
that Exposition News Network Bruce always seems to be watching.  Carrey
has his moments as The Riddler--he's a gifted comedian, maybe the best
physical performer since Steve Martin--but he has to shriek most of his
lines just to make his presence known.  His sense of timing and
delivery carry him through the wake of the film without getting pulled
under.  Chris O'Donnell and Michael Gough are the two, as Dick Grayson
and Alfred, who come out of this the best.  Neither are given much in
the way of script (as opposed to screen time), but they were the only
two who created believable, empathetic characters out of virtually thin
air.  Although most of their scenes together are the same, they work,
both (to a degree) as performances and as a respite from the action.
     The script is a tangle of flashbacks, one-liners, clues that
ultimately seem pointless, a smeared xerox of the
does-she-love-the-hero-or-the-man conflict from SUPERMAN, another
take-over-Gotham plot, the origin of the Riddler, the origin of Robin,
and the Batman-Robin conflict, the most interesting fragment but mostly
a case of too-late-in-the-picture-to-care-anymore.  We've heard all of
it before, and it wasn't too robust in the first place.  The climax
seems lifted straight from the TV show, only amplified beyond all
comprehension.  It's not something that's built up to as much as
wandered upon.  Much like the previous installments, all the props and
vehicles are destroyed in order that new ones may be designed (and a
new toy line prepared) for the successor.
     The art direction consists mainly of 'put searchlights and neon on
it'.  The main problem with comic books being turned into live-action
movies is that the director seems to feel that since it's a comic book,
he/she can *play* *it* *up* visually, which usually results in clutter
(like THE FLINTSTONES).  It's sad to say, but as time goes on, FLASH
GORDON looks better and better.  The huge sets and CG models are
covered with so much crap in BATMAN FOREVER that it still feels cramped
in spite of the scale.  I've never seen so many lasers and black light
in my entire life.  The new Batwing looked spiffy for its brief stint
on screen (I especially like how it was stored in the Batcave), but
overall, it's the worst looking film of the series.
     I don't remember hearing many of Danny Elfman's themes in Eliot
(ALIEN 3) Goldenthal's score, so he gets credit for striking out on his
own and not coasting (like SUPERMAN II), but to be honest, I hardly
remember music at all.  Most of the score was totally lost in the
onslaught.  I remember hearing brief patches that reminded me of ALIEN
3, but that's all.  Granted, the sound system in the theater I was in
was poor to say the least, so I think the only thing left to do is to
hear it on its own, or see the film in a better theater.  For me at
least, the latter isn't really a desirable option.  So far, CRUMB is
the best film I've seen this summer, and I have this feeling APOLLO 13
and WATERWORLD aren't going to change that.

Title
Review for Blues Brothers 2000 (1998)
Almost twenty years ago, John Landis directed a feature-length "Road Runner"
cartoon called "The Blues Brothers", a delightfully anarchic introduction to
various and sundry musical forms that were all a part of what has come to be 
known as Rhythm and Blues.  The plot was simple enough -- the orphanage where
Jake and Elwood were raised needs money.  Jake and Elwood want to help.  Since
Sister Mary Stigmata (Kathleen Freeman) opposes many of the ways that the duo
could potentially raise the money, they decide to get their old band back to-
gether and hold a benefit concert.  This they do, but in the process they make
many enemies, some of which were in pursuit before the film begins.  Evading
said enemies, Jake and Elwood throw a successful concert, sign a recording con-
tract and repay the orphanage's debt -- all this while barely evading the teem-
ing hordes that would see them destroyed.  The original film had terrific comic
timing (from both the performers and the director), great musical numbers and
insanley excessive stunt work (which contributed much to its correspondingly
then-large $40 million price tag).  The film did well enough (despite a less-
than-warm critical reception) that a sequel, "The Blues Brothers meet the Zom-
bie Queen", was in the works.  The death of John Belushi, however, seemed to 
end any possibility of future films.
Aykroyd and Landis have now re-teamed to create a sequel, but much of the ori-
ginal energy seems missing.  The film starts well with a gag (Elwood waiting 
outside for hours after being released from prison) that turns a bit somber as
we learn that he was waiting for Jake to return.  The film soon loses focus,
though, and it's not all that clear why this trip is being taken -- the only 
conflict seems to be that Elwood doesn't have any money himself.   Many seq-
els feel unmotivated, and this one is no exception.  One begins to wonder why
any of the band members want to join Elwood in his goal of winning the "Battle
of the Bands" in New Orleans.  Little is made of the careers of the various
characters -- Elwood, Mighty Max (the bartender from Willie's strip club -- a
particularly gratuitous skin display -- who soon joins up) and Buster (an orph-
an who tags along with Elwood after being introduced to him by Mother Mary)
simply show up, a musical number ensues, and everyone continues on their way.
The new numbers -- Aretha Franklin performs "R-E-S-P-E-C-T", Wilson Pickett 
sings "634-5789" -- are fine, but the enviroments -- a Mercedes-Benz dealer-
ship, a phone-sex establishment -- while intended to be as incongruous as 
those in the first film, simply come off as awkward film sets.  Few of the new
locations feel like the places that they're supposed to represent in the 
story, nor are they effective stylizations (like Cab Calloway's "Minnie The 
Moocher" performance).  The original film has a grittiness that is sorely miss-
ed here; often the performing extras felt like passersby who happned to know 
how to dance and sing perfectly; in "2000", however, everything feels contri-
ved, an attempt at reviving a potential franchise property.
This new film is additionally weakened by an attempt to atone for any slights
that the first film might have caused.  Performers are piled on, but in neglec-
ting fewer artists, everyone winds up with extended cameos.  Few of the new
numbers equal Ray Charles' or James Brown's solo pieces in the original film.
A piece by the group Blues Traveler is one of the best in the film, but it has
the least to do with the narrative, and (as I recall) isn't complete.  Having
four Blues Brothers means everyone gets less to do here, as well.  Joe Morton's
character is particularly unappealing and not terribly funny, while John Good-
man is given even less to do -- most of his jokes stem from how "un-hip" he is.
J. Evan Bonifant plays the orphan Buster, and while his addition is superfici-
ally the least defendable (none of the characters that I knew in the first film
would have been seen anywhere near a child), he earns his keep with some great
dancing and singing, which was also severely truncated in the final cut.
Other returning characters -- Steve Lawrence, Frank Oz, Kathleen Freeman --
mainly come off as grace nods to their original roles.
It's amazing how unfamiliar the original writers and director seem to be with
their own creations.  Elwood is transformed into a chatty, warmhearted fellow
-- his Jack Webb quality has almost entirely vanished.  One would think that 
with three new characters to potentially speak for him, Elwood could have re-
mained his old taciturn self, but times have definately changed.
It's difficult to imagine this new Elwood capable of provoking anyone.
A group of Russian assassins are here for this go-around, and a group of
Southern militant survivalists replace the Illinois Nazis, both to lesser ef-
fect.  Talkiness, regrettably, is throughout the new film, replacing the empha-
sis on the pair as deadpan reactors to the insanity around them.  Everyone sits
about and spews exposition, then tosses off some disarming one-liner to let us 
know they're in on the joke.  Landis has a few choice moments -- the background
music stops as the characters pause for a red light; a frenzied police car 
pile-up that rivals one of the best sequences in the original -- but overall,
it's a slack, unfocused film, with little of the enthusiasm of the original.
Many touches -- a gaggle of cowboy-skeletons materialize during "Ghost Riders 
in the Sky", for example -- feel random and indulgent.
By the time we arrive at the "Battle of the Bands" -- one song each from two
bands -- and our heroes lose to their more experienced predecessors, one hardly
notices.  It's sad to see a pale sequel to a highly entertaining film, but to
see one this confused and poorly motivated is sadder still.  If you do wind up
going to see this after all that I've said, be sure to stick around until it's
entirely finished -- James Brown has (what appears to be) a cut scene that's a
lot of fun.  Not Recommended.

Title
Review for Radioland Murders (1994)
     RADIOLAND MURDERS is the only film I've ever walked out of
and asked for my money back.  I only paid four bucks to begin with, so
this strikes me as a serious failure.  The high concept review would
be, "1941 meets RADIO DAYS".  The twenty minutes that I saw proceeded
to dump a truckload of characters on me, none of whom I cared about.
They all began running around in circles as fast as possible, usually
hitting each other in the face as they went through doors again and
again.  It seems that this is the opening night of a fledgling radio
station that's going national, and surprisingly nothing's going right
on the night of the big debut. I only made it to one of the murders
before I left, and the killer broke into the broadcast twice,
presumably to let the live audience(?) know that he/she was going to
kill someone else soon.  I couldn't understand what the voice said in
any event.  There's some stars here, but what this really needed was
first rate stand-up comedians to deliver this shit and give it some
timing and the illusion of wit.  The only ones to be seen were Harvey
Korman and fat-to-the-point-of-unrecognizable Bobcat G.  Why go
on--this is a mess of the first order, the worst I've seen this year.
     LOVE AFFAIR is an outsized disappointment, an inflated remake of
AN AFFAIR TO REMEMBER the weepie all-but-advertised in SLEEPLESS IN
SEATTLE.  Beatty seems uninterested in playing anybody but himself
these days (or at least a media-hounded celeb), which automatically
puts the film out of the range of experience of most people.  Annette
Bening fares better, but she also suffers from the
Michelle-Feiffer-as-waitress-believability-syndrome.  The verbal
swordplay setup is sprinkled with romantic jazz standards, and you wind
up feeling a little like you're in a Woody Allen film.  There aren't
many sparks flying (much less heat) until they visit Beatty's aunt (a
decent cameo by Katherine Hepburn), and the combination of the gorgeous
island scenery and Kate's salty charm start winning Annette over
(Beatty seems to have little to do with it).  They're on an island in
the first place because their plane had to make an emergency landing,
so the two of them transferred to a beautiful ocean liner (man, the
hassles that rich people have to put up with), and they boated to the
island from the liner to see how Kate was doing.  Everything in the
film is like this ... it's as if love is impossible if it isn't in the
most stunning backdrop imaginable.  When Beatty loses Annette and goes
to a charity show with his ex-lover, Ray Charles is playing.  There are
sweet moments, but most of them are throttled by this incessant
upscaling.  About the time of the island visit, the pop ballads shut
off (like someone turning a tap), and Morricone's score takes over.
What limited emotional effect the film had, I credit the instrumental
score for at least half, if not more.  Morricone's score is sweet and
sad, and does more for the film than a score should have to.  A
leftover from the original plot--Annette's unwilling ness to reveal her
injury--seems odd and unmotivated.  It does make for some nice
say-the-opposite-of-what-you-mean dialogue from Robert Towne, though.
Garry Shandling gets all the laughs, and the photography/art direction
are fine, but overall it's pretty forgettable.  Still, more than one
member of the crowd I was with broke down and wept, so what do I know?
Not Recommended.

Title
Review for Cop Land (1997)
        "Cop Land" is the sophomore effort of writer/director James Mangold,
and doubtless many will say that it's not as good as his first film, "Heavy".
Since I haven't seen "Heavy", I'm not as subject to the seemingly inevitable
disappointment that seems to follow an impressive debut.  I found "Cop Land"
an affecting film that has many strong moments, if a bit lacking in the unity
department.
        "Cop Land"'s script doesn't want to do very many things in a literal
way, so it winds up being a little too oblique with one too many things.  The
consequence is that the set-up for this film is large and long, not bad in and
of itself, but this forces writer Mangold to reveal many plot points through
expository dialogue rather than having things unfold more naturally through 
events in the film.  One of the strong things about the film is that there are
very few characters who ever tell the truth, but this happens so often that
the script has little time left for revelations.  
        The basic story is that of a group of New York cops who have set up
residence in a small town in New Jersey.  It's rife with corruption, a hope-
lessly tangled net of influence and political connections, most of them invol-
ving Ray Donlan (Harvey Keitel) and his cronies.  He runs things far more than
the town's local sheriff, Freddy Heflin (Sylvester Stallone, in an agreeable
role), and when any of the club shows signs of rebelling, the consequences are
cold, brutal betrayals -- there's plenty of opportunities to let your fellow 
officer slip below the tide as you swim away, telling whatever story you like 
later.  The atmosphere of this film reminded me of the soldiers of "Platoon",
where your life could depend on the loyalty of your companions.
        Freddy starts the film well aware that things aren't on the up and up,
but things come to a boil when an intoxicated officer shoots two people, and the
local system starts a cover-up.  The cost of the lies mounts quickly, and 
Freddy is edged ever closer to confronting those whom he would be (Freddy is
partially deaf due to an accident, and is thus ineligible for the force).  As he
becomes more and more certain of what he should do, the support of his friends 
falls away little by little, until he is seemingly lost in the maze of payola
and power.
        None of the performers in the film are on unfamiliar ground, which
doesn't adversely affect the acting, but does affect the verisimilitude some-
what.  I was a bit detached from things, half aware that was *Robert DeNiro* up
there.  A cast of talented unknowns might have gone a long way here, but aside
from DeNiro, everyone played thier roles with an appropriate level of inten-
sity.  Stallone's performance is a bit underplayed for my taste, but to a de-
gree that was refreshing, and appropriate -- his character is reticent, looking
for compromise and mutually agreeable solutions -- but it was difficult not to
(at least partially) interpret the performance as a very conscious Departure 
>From The Rambo Stuff.  Playing it down is fine, but I found the performance 
bordering on colorless at times.  The underdog role still suits him far better 
than the superhero, and Freddy's back story of an unrequited love illustrates
this nicely.  Freddy's life of quiet desperation is touching, and his bid for
justice engaging.  The climax, with a further deafened Freddy confronting his
'superiors', is a nice turn on the typical shootout sequence.
        The cinematography by Eric Alan Edwards is effective without showing 
off (an attempted murder near a swimming pool is nicely lit with menace), while
Howard Shore's score is derivative of past efforts (particularly "Seven") and
only sporadically effective.  Mangold is definately a director to watch, and
while "Cop Land" isn't "High Noon" (a film it bears some resemblance to), it's
an ambitious, textured, intelligent effort.  Moderately Recommended.

Title
Review for Ed Wood (1994)
     Tim Burton's latest offering, ED WOOD, is an affectionate
one-could-say tribute to a director many consider to be the worst of
all time (my vote goes for Michael Cimino).  ED WOOD has the usual
Burton strengths and weaknesses: a thorough sense of time and place,
more interesting characters than the plot can handle, and a storyline
that seems to be mostly a daisy chain of spot gags.
     To be fair, though, the film has more story structure than any
other previous Burton effort--screenwriter Michael Lehmann figured out
a good way to trick Burton into thinking he didn't have a three-act
story while in actuality giving him what may be the closest thing he's
had to one.  The film focuses on the making of three Wood "classics,"
so no matter what else happens, the result of each production will give
a resolution of sorts.
     If ED WOOD had been a half-hour, or even an hour long, it would
have been a quirky entertaining novelty.  At two hours, though, the
gags are repeating for the third time, and one begins to wonder if
the film isn't spliced into a loop, and that you'll never get to
leave.  There's only so many times that seeing Johnny Depp in an angora
sweater can provoke any sort of reaction before you start checking your
watch.
     Tha cast's performances are stronger than most Burton outings, but
Martin Landau stands alone in giving his Lugosi portrait sufficient
weight and depth to engage you beyond the gags.  The relationship
between Depp and Landau is the strongest thing in the film, and the
film might have been better all around if this had been focused upon
more.  As it is, the film has to fall back on a "stick-to-your-artistic-
vision-kid" message (from a pretty implausible source) that rings
particularly hollow (especially from the director of BATMAN).  ED WOOD
is consistently entertaining, but wears out its welcome too
soon ... people who aren't rabid Wood fans will probably come away
wondering why Burton went to all the trouble.  Not Recommended.

Title
Review for Shawshank Redemption, The (1994)
     THE SHAWSHANK REDEMPTION is a strong debut for director Frank
Darabont, a screenwriter who sold the script on the provision that he
could direct it.  This isn't a Film For The Ages, but it is involving
and engaging for the majority of its 150-minute running time.  Tim
Robbins and Morgan Freeman are both fine as convicts who meet in
Shawshank Prison in the late 40's and get to know each other as they do
time together.  The suspense mainly revolves around 1) whether Robbins
will continue to survive prison life; and 2) whether he should be there
at all.  The script does a decent job of sustaining these elements and
keeping the viewer in doubt.  On the other hand, there are few moments
in the story that, once they are revealed, are different than you might
expect.  For the most part, the satisfying option is usually chosen,
the one that will make the audience happy.  While this makes for an
enjoyable immediate experience , the side effect is that the lack of
genuine surprise makes it less enduring than you'd like.  On the whole
though, aside from script weaknesses and implausibilities (more than a
couple), the performances are uniformly strong, if a bit
two-dimensional in spots, the period feel of the art direction is
thorough yet understated, Thomas Newman's score nicely supports things
and is emotional without being too overpowering or treacly.  For a
prison drama, the violence isn't played up particlarly, but this ain't
FREE WILLY, either.  For the curious, SHAWSHANK makes for a good
night out, as the saying goes.  If the concept doesn't grab you from
the start, I don't know that it would win you over.  Marginally
Recommended.

Title
Review for Lost in Space (1998)
The Nineties have been called "the era of reduced expectations", and nothing 
seems to support this more than the spate of recent films.  Many efforts 
("Starship Troopers", "The Lost World", "Alien Resurrection") seem to be little
more than tent poles for extensive marketing campaigns or establishing franchi-
ses, rather than involving an audience.  I'd be tempted to say that "Lost In
Space" is the ultimate extension of that philosophy, but I'm afraid to be pro-
ven wrong by a film even less concerned with coherence.
There's a salvaged feeling to the whole film, as if some drastic changes were
made at the last minute after the rough cut was assembled and screened.  There
isn't an opening credit sequence, and one is tempted to think (as one of my 
friends did) that the end credits were originally at the beginning, only to be 
moved to the end of the film after they made a poor impression at early test
screenings.  The film begins by introducing not the Robinson family, but the
Major West character in a space battle.  This action sequence was clearly in-
tended to wow the audience before the main story gets underway, but only suc-
ceeds at hurling lots of effects at us without engaging our emotions.
This sheer volume method of entertainment continues throughout the film, the 
plot of which consists mainly of elements from the first few episodes, combin-
ed with bits and pieces from other films made over the last twenty years.  The
mission is re-written as a sort of competition between two factions, each try- 
ing to reach (and colonize) the same new planet first.  Earth's natural resour-
ces are almost completely exhausted, and its dwindling ozone layer spells Cer-
tain Doom for the human race.  This is an attempt to update the Cold
War aspects of the original series, but (as with the James Bond series) when
the Cold War is removed, it makes the new premise seem arbitrary (why would 
two factions sabotage the others' mission if both face certain extinction when
Earth dies?).  At any rate, Dr. Smith (played perceptively, if too subtly, by
Gary Oldman) is once again trapped in the ship as it launches, caught in
his own subterfuge as the robot he reprogrammed begins to demolish the space-
craft.  This forces the crew to blast their way into deep space without proper
preparation, plunking them in an unknown quadrant with no point of reference to 
guide the way home.
Most know that the Robinson name is no accident, and transplanting "Swiss Fam-
ily Robinson" into outer space seems like a reasonable opportunity for an ex-
citing survival/exploration adventure.  Very little is done with this decent
premise other than burying the viewer under an avalanche of very uneven effects
work.  Director Steven ("Predator 2") Hopkins has experience directing effects, 
so it's puzzling that he'd use this vast amount of computer imagery with such a
lack of clarity -- even the editing has little sense of geography.  
Bruch Broughton's score is hardly noticable over the clamor.  Akiva Goldsman's
script shows most of the weaknesses evident in his writing for "Batman and
Robin" -- a predeliction for one-liners and short term laughs at the expense of
long-term structure and character development.
The saddest loss due to this approach is the robot -- Goldsman's script reduces
him to a Mr. Microphone for Will (though this is one of the film's few good
jokes), and by the time he begins to evolve into an actual character, there's
little time remaining for him to do anything.  The rest of the script is a 
daisy-chain of one-liners (most of which render the characters as unlikable 
smart-alecks) and incidents (an extended sequence on a derelict spaceship seems
to exist only to force the Jupiter 2 to crash-land on the required planet) 
that lead to a time-travel premise.  This sort of thing is tricky stuff for 
anybody, and here it collapses entirely, giving the characters an opportunity 
to return to the time and place that the sabotage occurred, thus allowing them 
to essentially eradicate the events of the film.  Oddly, the crew doesn't choose
to do this, but instead they drop themselves in the middle of another perilous
situation (when exactly the time machine is reset is unclear) which requires 
them to once again use the hyperspace button and get themselves even more lost.
The fact that their mission to save Earth has failed isn't supposed to matter 
anymore, because somewhere along the line, Pop Robinson has learned to become a
caring father after years of putting his career first (even if you buy this, 
the daughters are completely ignored, which doesn't say much for the parenting
message), and to bond less sarcastically with his wife.  The older Robinson 
daughter learns to love the chauvanist pilot, while the younger daughter gets a
pet to care about.  The family members' performances range from bland (Hurt) to
infuriatingly smug and precocious (Lacey Chabert).  Heather Graham struggles
mightily, but can't rise above her nasty, you-go dialogue.  June Lockhart has
an arbitrary cameo as one of Will's teachers.  It's sad to see such a basic 
premise made into such a noisy muddle.  Not recommended.

Title
Review for Fifth Element, The (1997)
MORE "HEAVY METAL" THAN "HEAVY METAL"
        "The Fifth Element", the latest offering from Luc Bresson, the director
of "La Femme Nikita" and "The Professional", is a lavish-if-unfocused sci-fi
fantasy.  The basic idea is that there's Something Big and Nasty way out there
at The Edge of The Universe, and periodically it Comes Back to Earth to Cause
Problems that are Nicely Scored.  One alien race, a pleasantly lumbering bunch,
have been maintaining a device/weapon created to keep the SB&N at bay upon its
return.  The device uses the four alchemical elements plus a fifth -- a perfect
being, the supreme warrior -- to operate.  For some reason, this race removes
this device from Earth (the oncoming first World War seems to be a plausible
cause, but this was not made very clear if that was indeed the case), but prom-
ises to return it before the beginning of Act III.
        The main problem with this device is that if someone other than the 
true Fifth Element uses the device, they become Really Bad and More Powerful
than most villains.  Naturally, Gary Oldman -- or Jean-Baptiste Emmanuel Zorg
-- wants to do just that.  Working with him are a group of apparently free-    
lance mercenary aliens who can disguise themselves by morphing their frog-esque
heads into human heads.  Apparently, this is difficult -- whether the creatures
need to hold their breath or keep their concentration very focused is again un-
clear.  It read to me as the latter.
        Coming into this film, I expected that this monsterous "Stargate"-like
premise would involve Bruce Willis.  The Scruffy Cynic with the Shitty Job has
deep within him the perfection of the Fifth Element.  As it turns out, this is
not the case.  The craft, returning as promised, is attacked by Zorg's buddies
and destroyed.  Fortunately, enough remains that a clone can be made (in a tru-
ly impressive sequence), and our F.E. turns out to be a feral Milla Jovovich.
The current Earth military underestimates her prowess (insufficiently displayed
in my opinion, as compared to the assassin in "The Professional"), and she es-
capes.  Bruce saves her in his cab, and the two spend the remainder of the film
trying to get back to locate and operate the device, all the while evading 
Zorg's clutches.  This becomes easier as Zorg pisses off the Frog men rather
early in the film, and is forced to create most of his own obstacles to Bruce
and Milla's progress.  The Frog men are reduced to being an additional-one-    
might-say-extraneous obstacle.
        Over the running time of the film, Bruce and Milla are supposed to fall
in love and care for one another -- Milla's emotional development is crucial to
her effectiveness within the device's operation.  Bresson has never been good
at more than the most rudimentary character development, and this time the 
story needs it more than usual.  As a result, this aspect of the film is espec-
ially unsatisfying.  Additionally, the film's message comes across as "Love is
the greatest weapon of all", which struck me as a little odd.  Bresson's films
when they are working, resemble energetic comic books, while "Element" comes
off as a decent issue of "Heavy Metal" -- a simple story told in an extremely
elaborate, oblique way.  The storytelling seems especially fuzzy here -- my 
view of the plot is my impression gathered from the entire film, rather than a
series of clear points made in succession, each building upon the previous one.
        The main strength of "Heavy Metal" is in its graphic richness and the
technique of its execution, and "Element" shares both "Metal"'s strengths and
weaknesses.  Moebius is a design contributor to the film, and his unique look
can be seen and felt, particularly with the graphically snappy designs of the 
policemen's uniforms.  There are not a lot of narrative surprises, so it is 
left up to the visuals to compensate.  They aren't paticularly original -- as
usual, "Blade Runner"'s influence is heavily felt -- but they are entertaining
in their own right, and drew me through the film.  There are many entertaining
characters, but most have little to do of and importance (Ian Holm is paticu-
larly wasted).  For sheer audacity, Gary Oldman and Chris Tucker deserve the
top scenery-chewing awards.  Tucker plays a futuristic DJ character, a colli-
sion between Prince and Madonna, with such energy that you'll either laugh or
clutch your your temples.  I found him funny, but like many of "Element's"
charms, not well integrated into the story.  I'd like to see this again, mostly
to hum the sets and to see if I can bring the plot more into focus.  Otherwise,
if you're not interested in flying cars or Milla's midriff, you won't have 
much to do.  Recommended for art directors.
