Authors
Faust668@aol.com
Number of Reviews
2

Title
Review for Evolution (2001)
The beauty of comedy is that there are no rules and, quite simply, rules are made to be broken in the comedic arena. Director Ivan Reitman is often aware of this, as evidenced by his crude though subtly funny "Junior" and, his biggest hit, "Ghostbusters." Both films redefined the boundaries of good taste by imbuing crudeness with cleverness rather than cheap, desperate gags a' la "Austin Powers" that only serve to make the audience puke. Consider Arnold Schwarzeneger as a pregnant man in "Junior," a premise that is otherwise ripe for gross-out humor.  Instead that film built its premise with wit and engaging repartee between Schwarzeneger and Danny DeVito. 
"Evolution" does the same thing, imbuing crudeness with cleverness. The premise deals with a community college science teacher (and former scientist), Ira Kane (David Duchovny), who partners with a sharp, jocose scientist, Harry Block (Orlando Jones), to investigate a flaming meteor that has burned a hole through the ground into an underground cavern. Kane's class goes on a field trip to discover and study this meteor only to find some strange atmosphere has developed at an accelerated rate, not to mention some expanding and evolving wormlike creatures. Kane and Block realize this is no ordinary meteor - it is a fertile ground for alien creatures. At first, the creatures seem harmless in the form of butterflies until they later evolve into flying dinosaurs, raging blue monkeys and some shapeless matter in the form of large intestines.
The only way to approach "Evolution" is by checking your brain at the entrance door of the cinema before the first reel is projected. It is a one-note joke movie to be sure but it has moments of eye-opening special-effects, shrewd one-liners and moments where you will literally jump out of your seat. It mostly pokes fun at "Independence Day" right down to the climax involving those humongous intestines where a central digestive tract is the target for destruction - the expansive mass even looks like a spaceship. Mostly, the screenplay by David Diamond, David Weissman and Don Jakoby focuses on bodily functions and sexual entendres, as well as creepy monsters hiding inside harmless looking alien slugs and such. Many of the sexual entendres center around Julianne Moore as an assistant to a soldier-scientist (Ted Levine) - she is regarded at one point as an "icy goddess in desperate need of some humping." Speaking of the ravishing Moore, it is nice to see her as a clumsy woman who!
!
 keeps tripping over objects eve
ry once in a while. 
"Evolution" is cutesy nonsense and often quite funny and engaging. It is actually a breath of fresh air as compared to the gross-out humor so reminiscent of most comedies nowadays - wit and some dry humor are this film's virtues. As for performances, Duchvony and Jones make a delightful pair and Moore is lots of fun to watch - nice to see her handle comedy for a change in contrast with her dramatic roles. Only Ted Levine seems a little out of his element as the straight-faced soldier scientist, Dr. Woodman, who doesn't want Kane anywhere near these aliens. 
"Evolution" is not as frantically funny or as visually inventive as Reitman's "Ghostbusters,"  but it will suffice in what has been a dry couple of years of laughless comedies. 
For more reviews, check out JERRY AT THE MOVIES at http://moviething.com/members/movies/faust/JATMindex.shtml
E-mail me with any questions, comments or general complaints at Faust668@aol.com or at faustus_08520@yahoo.com 

Title
Review for Bridget Jones's Diary (2001)
Renee Zellweger is an actress whose sprightly charm and quivering, cutesy smile can melt moviegoers' hearts like no other. She is the girl-next-door type but her irresistibility breaks some new ground here - you get the feeling that she can be embarrassed and impish at the same time. She is the unique joy of "Bridget Jones' Diary," a fairly amusing if slightly misguided
romantic comedy with ample charm and considerable laughs. It just lacks the extra leap to take it beyond conventionality. 
Bridget Jones (Renee Zellweger) is the neurotic, lonely, uncouth heroine of the 1996 bestseller by Helen Fielding. She is so lonely that she drinks
heavily while listening to Eric Carmen's "All By Myself" (a touching, heartbreaking moment). At first glance, no one seems to take a gander at Bridget. She is plumpish and tends to say exactly what is on her mind, including at book receptions where everyone looks at her with slight bemusement. At dinner parties, she confronts men who see her as an unappealing spinster, including the rich Mr. Darcy (Colin Firth). Her boss,
however, takes a liking to her (he is played with irresistible glee by Hugh Grant), and the two begin having an affair. Of course, Mr. Darcy gets jealous
since he does like her. 
It is no surprise where the film is headed when we know Mr. Darcy will inevitably change his mind about Bridget. But the film takes on a knowing, self-conscious style at the beginning where we begin to think that it will poke fun at romantic comedy conventions. There is a moment where Bridget
makes an error in judgment at work and we see her unsaid obscenity splashed across the screen. "Bridget Jones' Diary," however, does not take as many
unconventional routes as one might hope. Bridget loves the two men but has to decide between one. Bridget tries to bring her parents back together after a
brief separation. Some of these episodes work better than others but they hardly figure cohesively as a whole. 
I have not read Fielding's book but I've been told that it truly maps out Bridget's insecurities and messy lifestyle with more depth. The film does
show her drinking and eating and smoking too much and we sense she is real obsessive and has trouble finding the proper man (she is also a bad cook, witness the strange coloring of her cooked meals). But all these qualities are painted in broad strokes. Bridget's biggest flaw seems to be her uncouth quality but I was not clear why everyone seemed so perturbed whenever she
made a speech (I found her speeches funny and engaging). As played by Zellweger, she has charm and an affable quality but her weight gain (reports
say she gained as much as 20 to 40 pounds for the role) does not exactly put her on the same scale as Conchata Ferrell (who I love no matter how much she
weighs). In other words, I get the sense that the film has been sanitized from its written form to accommodate all women in the audience. Where does this leave the women who are perhaps uncomfortable with their weight or who need someone like Bridget Jones as their role model, essentially saying it is
okay to be fat and still have Hugh Grant as your suitor? 
"Bridget Jones' Diary" has Zellweger at its center and she is as convincing and delightful as one can imagine. Kudos also go to Hugh Grant and Colin Firth in witty supporting roles (I could have lived without a cliched
fistfight between them). There is also a funny cameo by Salman Rushdie as himself no less. The film has pizazz to offer but compare this to any other romantic comedy, and I dare you to find the difference. 
For more reviews, check out JERRY AT THE MOVIES at http://moviething.com/members/movies/faust/JATMindex.shtml 
E-mail me with any questions, comments or general complaints at Faust668@aol.com or at faustus_08520@yahoo.com
