Authors
John Baechem
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Screwed (2000)
Directed by: Scott Alexander, Larry Karaszewski
Written by: Scott Alexander, Larry Karaszewski
Willard Fillmore (Norm Macdonald) is chauffeur to an evil old hag, Virginia
Crock (Elaine Stritch). Actually, his job title may be chauffeur, but his
actual duties consist of doing just about everything from scrubbing Crock's
dentures to feeding her dog, Muffin. After Crock gives him a pie for
Christmas, rather than the new suit he so desperately needs, Willard hatches
a plan with his friend, Rusty (Dave Chappelle), to kidnap Muffin and ransom
him back to Miss Crock. The plan, of course, backfires and a new plan must
be hatched. This one consists of Willard himself being ransomed. Rusty and
Willard decide to fake Willard's death by having a mortician, Grover Cleaver
(Danny DeVito), fix up a corpse to look like him. Everything manages to go
wrong with every plan the trio think up, and the situation grows worse and
worse.
Danny DeVito seems to be developing an interesting and slightly worrisome
habit with his script choices. His last two pictures have had three things
in common. Both involved evil, universally hated old women; some sort of
cheesy, tacked on mystery; and a horrible, poorly written script. This is a
shame considering what a talented actor DeVito is. "Screwed" is a weak,
often painfully forced and unfunny film which will most likely vanish from
theaters in a month. The movie starts off with no humor except Macdonald
("Dirty Work") doing a somewhat amusing impersonation of Bruce Campbell's
Ash from "Evil Dead II". This lack of humor lasts for about 45 minutes, and
the movie then begins to show some signs of life, with one or two truly
funny scenes. Unfortunately, this doesn't last, and the film ends horribly.
Let's get one thing straight everyone. Norm Macdonald cannot act in any way.
The man stumbles through his lines with the same poker face and dreary,
boring voice throughout all his films. His lack of emotion can be somewhat
amusing in stand up comic sketches on Saturday Night Live, but it doesn't
translate well into movies. Dave Chappelle can be one of two things in his
movies: irritating or very irritating. In Martin Lawrence's "Blue Streak" he
was irritating. In "Screwed" he is very irritating. The man has the most
annoying, whiny tone of voice you're likely to hear. DeVito does what he can
with his miserable role, but you can't pull something out of nothing. I
think the character of Grover Cleaver was supposed to be some sort of mad
scientist who was funny because of all the disgusting things he did - like
play harmonicas pulled out of dead people. However, Cleaver is disgusting in
a very unfunny way.
There are few things worse than a movie which tries far too hard to be
funny. Comic films are at their best when they aren't trying as hard as
possible to be humorous. On the rare occasions that "Screwed" manages to
pull a chuckle out of its audience, it drags the scene on well past the
point where it is welcome. For example, when Muffin jumps out the back of
Rusty's van while he and Willard are driving (that's funny, right?), the
camera stays focused for several minutes on the two in the front seat,
joking about taking the dog. "Screwed" only runs 90 minutes, but it's a long
hour and a half. I'd recommend it to people who, for some reason, like Norm
Macdonald movies, but to no one else. I'm giving the movie two and a half
out of five stars out of respect for Danny DeVito, and because there are a
few funny scenes at about the mid point that almost give the film some
saving grace. Almost.
Any past movies you want me to review? Send to:
johnbeachem@dependentfilms.net
For past reviews, movie news, and other fun stuff, visit:
http://www.dependentfilms.net
* * * * * - One of the best movies of the year.
* * * * - Great flick, try and catch this one.
* * * - Okay movie, hits and misses.
* * - Pretty bad, see it at your own risk.
* - See this one only if you enjoy pain.
