Authors
John Smyth
Number of Reviews
17

Title
Review for Payback (1999)
When Porter (Mel Gibson) and his partner Val Resnick (Gregg Henry) rob a 
bunch of Chinese mobsters, the last thing Porter expects is to be left 
for dead, having been double-crossed by Val and shot in the back by his 
wife, Lynn (Deborah Unger). He survives and decides to hunt the two 
down,and get his money back. His task is complicated by the fact that 
there are a lot of other parties interested in the money, not least the 
Chinese, but also a couple of bent cops and a whole syndicate of bad 
guys.
Director Brian Helgeland's career so far has ranged from the excellent
L.A. Confidential to the God-awful Assassins. He has worked with Gibson 
before (on Conspiracy Theory). The film is intended to be a darkly 
humorous and slick thriller, along the lines of Get Shorty, but with 
more violence (The tagline is " Get ready to root for the Bad 
Guy").There are a few problems with this approach. The first is that 
this movie is rather violent, with plenty of killing. Since some of the 
film's punchlines involve somebody dying violently, it makes the average 
viewer a little uncomfortable about laughing at such moments. A subplot 
involving a female sadomasochist offers the audience the opportunity to 
laugh at her taking a beating; a dubious pleasure. 
To say that most of the film's characters are not very smart is an 
understatement - some of the most stupid bad guys ever committed to 
celluloid reside within Payback. Porter wants revenge and his share of 
the money from the Chinese heist. Unfortunately (both for him and almost 
everyone else he meets), Resnick has used to money to pay off a crime 
syndicate which is led by a smooth talking mobster called Carter (played 
as an oily smoothie by William Devane). Carter decides to have Porter 
killed to avoid any problems for his organisation. Porter also attracts 
the attention of a couple of crooked detectives, Hicks and Leary (played 
unsuccessfully for laughs by Bill Dukes and Jack Conly)who want the 
money, and the Chinese mobsters themselves are also hunting Porter 
(whose depiction would be racist except that everyone gets a raw deal in 
this movie).
Porter's various efforts to get his money back are both clever and 
stupid, sometimes both within the same scene. The film also relies 
too much on coincidence (never a good sign in a movie). Raymond Chandler 
(who scripted classics such as The Big Sleep and Double Indemnity) used 
to claim that, whenever he got stuck on a plot detail, he would 'invent 
a body', figuring that he could explain it away later in his story. 
Helgeland seems to have the same approach, but his script lacks the dry 
wit or style of Chandler. 
The film lacks the courage of its own convictions, too. Porter's wife 
is his first target but he doesn't get to kill her (she dies 
accidentally, from a drug overdose). Even his encounter with his former 
partner, Resnick, is more self-defence than cold-blooded revenge. Sure, 
Porter gets to kill a few defenceless people later in the film, but 
since they were really bad guys, the audience doesn't mind so much. 
Gibson seems unsure whether his character is supposed to be sympathetic 
or scary. The result is that he is neither.
I never though I would ever write this sentence but what this movie 
needs is Bruce Willis. Mel Gibson is just not convincing as a ruthless 
gangster obsessed with murder and revenge, and his ability to take 
constant beatings, gunshot wounds and torture recall his adventures as 
Detective Martin Riggs. Willis, for all his flaws, could have played 
this with more tongue-in-cheek.
If Helgeland has taken Point Blank (John Boorman's 1967 classic, with 
Lee Marvin) as his inspiration, the result is, unfortunately, Lethal 
Weapon 5. Not much of a tribute.
Get Your Private, Free Email at http://www.hotmail.com

Title
Review for Brylcreem Boys, The (1997)
The Brylcream Boys tells the story of two prisoners of war who are
incarcerated in the same prison camp in the Republic of Ireland
during World War Two, and have fallen for the same girl, a local
flame-haired beauty named Mattie Guerin (Jean Butler). There is an
added complication that one of the prisoners is a Canadian airman,
Miles Keogh (Bill Campbell) while the other suitor is a German
officer, Count Rudolph Von Stegenbek (Angus McFadyen).
The film touches upon a little known part of Irish (and World War
II) history. In the outbreak of war in 1939, the Republic of Ireland
was determined to remain neutral. The country had independence (from
Britain) for less than two decades and the leadership of both Ireland
(De Valera) and the UK (Churchill) had been former adversaries in
the battle for independence. The Republic had a small army with
almost no ability to defend itself against attacks from sea or air.
A declaration of support for the Allies would have meant that Allied
(i.e. British) troops would have had to occupy Ireland in order to
defend it against German attack - an prospect which had too much
historical baggage for De Valera to contemplate. Most Irish supported
the Allied cause and many fought in the British and (to a lesser
extent) the US army during the war. De Valera was determined to
preserve the appearance of neutrality throughout the war, even to
the extent of sending the official condolences of the Irish government to 
the German embassy in 1945 on the death of Hitler.
Soldiers from both the Allied and Axis sides (mainly shot-down pilots, and 
some shipwrecked sailors) were imprisoned (in separate compounds) in the 
same military camp outside Dublin - in reality, many of the Allied pilots 
were allowed to return to duty by making their way (largely unhindered) to 
the border with Northern Ireland (only 50 miles away from the camp). 
Security in the camp itself was lax, since it was understood by all that 
breaches of the rules would only make things worse for other prisoners. It 
was also a fact that, if one was fated to be a prisoner-of-war, the camp was 
a pretty good place to sit out the war.
What a pity that the potential for an offbeat exploration of a little
known aspect of WWII is completely wasted by this trite and cliché-ridden 
production. Almost every character in the film is a crudely drawn 
stereotype, from the well-meaning but stupid Irish soldiers guarding the 
camp, to the square-bashing, humourless Germans obsessed with discipline. Of 
course, Count Rudolph is a 'good' German; i.e. he
despises the other Germans in the camp (and by implication, the Nazi
cause). Miles Keogh is a gung-ho pilot who just wants to get back into 
action - he teams up with the British prisoners (absolutely
unconvincing performances, to a man) to plan his escape.
The love interest arrives in the rather fetching shape of Mattie
Guerin, who seems to hold both men in thrall merely by fluttering
her eyelashes (perhaps because she is not capable of much else).
Actually, that is not entirely true - this film was intended to be the 
breakthrough role for Butler. She had already achieved fame as the lead 
dancer (along with Michael Flatley) in Riverdance, a Celtic
music and dance extravaganza. She gets a chance to dance in the
film, too - but the sequence is so ineptly photographed that her
dancing skills don't shine. Since her acting skills are not in
evidence, I foresee a short movie career unless she can become the
Esther Williams of Irish dancing, miraculously weaving dancing
routines into every film. I'm not sure the world is ready for that!
Campbell and McFadyen don't fare much better, though the script is so
bad, I doubt there was much either could do. McFadyen (who played
Robert the Bruce in Braveheart) looks particularly uncomfortable
throughout the film, as if he had realised too late what a turkey
it would turn out to be. However, the worst performance is that of
Gabriel Byrne (also a co-producer) who mugs and grins stupidly
throughout the entire film. He seems to be imitating Barry
Fitzgerald in The Quiet Man in every scene. There is a reason that
movies like The Quiet Man isn't made any more, but at least John
Ford knew how to invest his film with charm and whimsy. The
Brylcream Boys possess neither - one might accept the crude
national stereotypes if the film was at least entertaining. But it
is not, and is simply an insult to filmgoers.


Title
Review for Birds, The (1963)
A beautiful socialite Melanie Daniels (Tippi Hedren) arrives 
in the small town of Bodega Bay, ostensibly to deliver two 
lovebirds to someone. While out on a boat, she is attacked 
by a gull. She meets up with Mitch Brenner (Rod Taylor) with 
whom she had a previous encounter in San Francisco. He invites 
her to his young sister Catherine's (Veronica Cartwright) 
birthday party the next day. She seeks out lodging in the 
nearby home of Annie Heyworth (Suzanne Pleshette). That night, 
a bird smashes against a window. At the party the next day, a 
flock of bird descend on the children and attack them.
Alfred Hitchcock made The Birds in 1963, arguably at the height 
of his fame. His three previous pictures were Psycho (1960), 
North by Northwest (1959) and Vertigo (1958), and during the 
Fifties, he also made Dial M for Murder (1954), Rear Window 
(1954) and To Catch a Thief (1955). It seemed that he could 
master any genre to which he turned his attention; suspense, 
horror, comedy, romance or a mixture of all. He was fascinated 
with the dark consequences of apparently minor human failings. 
In Psycho, white-collar crook Marion Crane (Janet Leigh) pays 
the ultimate price as a result of her theft, while the seemingly 
innocuous habit of bored invalid Jeff Jeffries (James Stewart) 
leads him to a very dark place indeed in Rear Window. Hitchcock's 
work could be light and humorous (To Catch a Thief) but he preferred 
his comedy black (The Trouble with Harry) or even macabre. He 
used romance to explore the obsessive (and therefore disturbing) 
side of love, such as Vertigo and, in a perverse way, Psycho. 
The Birds shares many of Hitchcock's trademarks. It is a horror 
story but the cause of the horror is so banal, so ordinary, that 
nobody can believe it to be true. It is also a tale of obsession. 
Mitch Brenner is a highly successful lawyer and very eligible 
bachelor but spends most of his weekends at home with his possessive 
mother Lydia (Jessica Tandy). He is powerful and self-confident, 
and is surrounded by women who care for him. Aside from his mother, 
Annie Heyworth, Melissa's landlady for the weekend, was once Mitch's 
girlfriend, and moved from San Francisco to Bodega Bay just to be 
near him, after they broke up. Melissa is also attracted to Mitch, 
and her errand of love-birds is merely an excuse to meet him again.
Even though Melissa makes a good impression on Mitch, she receives a 
much cooler reception from his mother Lydia. She finds out that 
Annie's relationship with Mitch had cooled only after his mother 
had voiced her disapproval of her. Melissa is beautiful, rich and 
famous and has led a privileged existence, but feels trapped in the 
glare of the public eye (much like the caged lovebirds she has 
brought to Bodega Bay). 
The psychological elements of the story are consigned to the background 
once the bird attacks begin. There is no real attempt to explain why the 
birds turn nasty, though there is a suggestion that perhaps the caged 
lovebirds may be the source of the problem. It is this element of the 
story that has dated badly. One can only imagine the gleeful sequences 
Hitchcock would have devised if he had the benefit of 1990's special 
effect technology.
Nevertheless, many of bird scenes are chilling, particularly when they 
gather silently at a school playground before attacking the 
schoolchildren. Indeed, Hitchcock anticipates by decades big-budget 
horror movies of the Seventies (such as Swarm) and also sci-fi movies 
such as the Alien series and Jurassic Park. (Of course, Hitchcock was 
cleverly updating the familiar scenario of the Western, by substituting 
Mitch and the others for the embattled homesteaders and normally 
harmless 
birds for ferocious Indians). In fact, there is a direct link between 
The Birds and Alien, since Veronica Cartwright plays a screaming (and 
for the most part, fleeing) character in both movies.
Despite Hitchcock's skill, The Birds is not one of his better movies, 
though memorable nevertheless. Neither Taylor nor Hedren are 
particularly 
strong leading characters. Taylor's character should exude power and 
charm, but comes across as bland. Tippi Hedren made her debut here as 
a leading lady but doesn't measure up when compared to previous 
Hitchcock female leads, like Grace Kelly and Kim Novak. Some of the 
action is a bit hokum too. In the history of hysterical leading ladies 
doing something stupid to advance the story, Tippi deserves an 
honourable mention. In one scene, she opens a door slightly to glance 
inside, screams in fright when she sees it is full 
of birds, and then manages to fall inside the room, so that her body 
blocks the door. I suspect an unfinished page in the script. There is 
also a bizarre scene with an ornithologist who just appears to 
order to reel off a list of statistics about birds. It is also difficult 
to overlook the creaking special effects - both the super-imposed and 
the mechanical birds are not very realistic. Now, if Gus Van Sant had 
decided to re-make The Birds with state-of-the-art special effects and 
strong leading roles, instead of messing around with a masterpiece 
(Psycho), he might have actually done something useful.
Directed by Alfred Hitchcock.
Get Your Private, Free Email at http://www.hotmail.com

Title
Review for Entrapment (1999)
Stockholm film Review (http://www.reviewfilm.com)
After a daring robbery of a Rembrandt, insurance agent Gin Baker
(Catherine Zeta-Jones) is convinced that a famous art thief,
Robert 'Mac' McDougal (Sean Connery) has been responsible, and
persuades her boss Hector Cruz (Will Patton) to let her go
undercover in order to track Mac down. Hector reluctantly agrees,
and Gin heads to London and soon makes contact with Mac. She
persuades him that she is a fellow thief, and that she needs his
help in order to steal a priceless (what else ?) Chinese mask,
which is on display in an English castle. They devise an intricate
plan to bypass the security systems (which involves lots of lasers),
which involves the help of Mac's associate, Thibadeaux (Ving
Rhames). The questions are, is Mac really convinced that Gin is a
bone fide thief, and what is Gin's real role; undercover agent or
double agent ?
Entrapment is a curiously listless affair. It's intent seems to be
a glossy, fast-paced international thriller, full of exotic locales
and exciting action sequences. Almost like a 007 movie, perhaps ?
However, no amount of tourist scenes from the U.S. and Malaysia can
disguise the fact the movie is more or less set in Scotland. Sound
economics maybe, but not so exotic. Sean Connery produced this
movie and he finished it under budget. It shows. It might also
explain the most puzzling aspect of the film. There are two heists
in the film, the theft of the mask, which takes up most of the
movie, and a cunning scheme to rip of an international bank in
Kuala Lumpur on the eve of the millennium (the film opens 15 days
before the Millennium) which provides the climactic finale to the
film. Though it becomes apparent that the bank heist is intended
to be the highlight of the film, and a complicated job, it
occupies a small amount of screen time. Moreover, Mac and Gin only
have less than 24 hours to read a bunch of detailed schematics of
the world's tallest building, learn about all the security systems
and plan their robbery, and spend half of that time trying to
double-cross each other.
What is even more odd is the amount of time spent avoiding the
alarm laser beams which intersect the exhibition room. This means
that Gin, is a rather fetching, skin-tight costume, must perform
an intricate routine (almost like a ballet) to squeeze between the
beams. While it is great to look at (and, I suspect, the actual
reason for the scene) it accomplishes very little, since the guard
arrives about 10 seconds after they take the mask, and sounds the
alarm. A smash and grab would have achieved the same result. The
bank heist isn't much better, and degenerates into a very routine
chase.
Since Sean Connery is almost seventy years of age, and Miss Jones
is a mere slip of a girl at 29, it was always going to be a bit
difficult to convince the audience that there can be a plausible
romance between the two. In fact, you would find more evidence of
chemistry (organic or otherwise) on the Moon. If anything, their
relationship comes across as more father-daughter, which is probably
even less palatable than a straightforward romance. Moreover, the
Gin character acts more like a teenager than would-be master
criminal, and most of the plotting and attempted double dealing
is either incomprehensible or just silly.
It is possible to make an enjoyable movie with the sort of raw
material available in Entrapment. After all, Brian DePalma managed
such a feat with Mission:Impossible (1996). Jon Amiel not so much
directs as just points in the general direction, in the vague hope
that the film finds its own way. It doesn't. Ving Rhames is sadly
underused (and just about repeats his Mission:Impossible role),
Will Patton doesn't have much to do either, and Maury Chaykin
performance as criminal art collector Conrad Greene is excruciating.
Connery himself looks tired throughout the film, as if perhaps he
has finally realised that he's getting a bit old for this sort of
nonsense. It's not that Entrapment is a very bad movie, just a
very indifferent one. For a thriller, that's not much of a
recommendation, though.


Title
Review for I'm All Right Jack (1959)
It is the 1950's in Britain, and the nation is undergoing social 
and economic changes after the long depression of World War Two. 
Stanley Windrush (Ian Carmichael), newly-graduated from Oxford, 
and most decidedly 'old money', decides to dabble in industry. 
Despite the absolute disapproval of his aunt Dolly (Margaret 
Rutherford), who is appalled that a gentleman should actually have 
to toil for a wage, he goes looking to various companies for an 
executive position. The problem is, though well-meaning and charming, 
Stanley is a useless twit. He infuriates his interviewers and causes 
chaos when shown around the factory floor wherever he goes.
Stanley has become desperate when his uncle Bertram Tracepurcel 
(Dennis Price) offers him a job at his armaments factory, Missiles 
Ltd. The catch is that Stanley must start at the bottom. Bertram 
also advises him not to mention the fact they are related, 'in the 
interests of industrial relations'.
Stanley runs into problems on his first day. He is put to work moving 
crates, but since he hasn't done a days work in his life, he cannot 
operate the forklift, and his accent is obviously not working class. 
His work-mates have reason to be suspicious of him, since they have 
discovered that the management has been secretly observing their work 
practices in a 'time and motion' study. The workers immediately tell 
the head of the Works Committee Fred Kite (Peter Sellers), who demands 
an instant meeting with the general manager Major Hitchcock 
(Terry-Thomas),who offers to fire him (since he knows that the real 
'time and motion inspector (John Le Mesurier) hasn't begun working yet. 
Since it goes against all of Kite's beliefs to let management fire a 
worker, he takes Stanley under his wing. He has mistaken Windrush for a 
well-meaning intellectual, and when Stanley moves in with Kite and his 
family, he subjects Stanley to long-winded discussions on socialism, the 
Soviet Union and Marxism. Stanley had only moved in because he got a 
glimpse of Fred's blonde bombshell daughter Cynthia (Liz Fraser).
John and Roy Boultings 1959 comedy is a brilliant satire on both the 
class struggle and industrial relations in Britain of the 1950s. As the 
movie shows, both were closely intertwined. Despite a complete absence 
of any natural talent, Stanley Windrush expects to become an executive, 
because he has been educated at Oxford and is a 'gentleman'. The 
management structure in industry mirrored the Army structure from the 
war, which of course mirrored society: - Major Hitchcock is the manager 
of the factory and had been an officer in the Army. Another factory 
owner, Sidney De Vere Cox (Richard Attenborough) had served with Stanley 
as officers. 
The workers were all non-commissioned soldiers.
The workers are, to a man, bone-idle at Missiles Ltd. Any attempts to 
improve productivity or change work practices are stoutly resisted. And 
the heart of that resistance is Fred Kite. Fred, sporting a Hitler 
moustache, sees life as one long class struggle. He takes his 
inspiration from socialist struggles across the world, and is 
permanently on guard against any change to the status quo. Again, this 
reflected the wider situation in society. It was difficult for anyone to 
move out of their class (in an upward direction anyway), and since a 
worker would get paid anyway, why bother do a good job? The management 
doesn't really care too much about quality or efficiency either - since 
most of their business is dependent on the 'old boy network'.
In the case of Missiles Ltd., Tracepurcel has employed Stanley for a 
reason. Knowing him to be useless, he figures that it will only a matter 
of time before he causes trouble. Tracepurcel has hatched a plan with De 
Vere Cox and needs a strike at his factory. The plan seems to be working 
when the union vote to 'send Stanley to Coventry' (i.e. ostracise him) 
for raising productivity. Stanley had unwittingly quadrupled the 
productivity requirements of the workers by showing off his prowess with 
a forklift in front of the undercover 'time-and-motion' inspector. Kite 
calls a strike, which then escalates as other factories go on strike in 
sympathy. Soon, half the country is on strike. Since a nation-wide 
strike would jeopardise Tracepurcel's plan, Stanley comes under pressure 
to quit, from both the management and the union.
The depiction of the factory atmosphere is both hilarious and deadly 
accurate. On his first day, Stanley comes across 4 workers playing 
cards. These are not mere idlers - their role has been eliminated but 
the company cannot fire them (or the union will strike, so they are paid 
to come in every day and do nothing. The American author and journalist 
Bill Bryson, in his best-selling memoir of living in Britain, Notes from 
a Small Island, recalls his time working for a British newspaper during 
the mid-1980's. At one point, auditors discovered an extra 300 printers 
on the payroll of another newspaper (i.e. they weren't actually 
reporting for work at the newspaper). From the Fifties to the Seventies, 
British industry grew more strike-prone and less efficient. All was to 
change with the election of 
Margaret Thatcher in 1979, which, after traumatic confrontation, lead to 
the dismantling of union power in the UK. 
In contrast to the dodgy work practices depicted in the film, the 
production values in I'm alright Jack are of Rolls-Royce standard. The 
Boulting twins, having produced some fine dramatic pieces during the 
1940s (most notably Brighton Rock), turned out a number of light 
comedies during the 1950's, most with the same cast. Indeed, I'm alright 
Jack is actually a sequel to Private's Progress (1956), which featured 
Terry-Thomas, Carmichael, Price and Attenborough playing the same 
characters (but in the Army). And in 1959, the Boultings also released 
Man in a Cocked Hat (a.k.a. Carlton-Browne of the F.O.), starring 
Terry-Thomas and Sellers.
All of the performances are hugely enjoyable. The cast had spent the 
entire decade working almost as an ensemble (and very often for the 
Boultings) and it shows. If I have one regret, it is that we don't see 
enough of either Terry-Thomas or Sellers. Terry-Thomas played much the 
same role in many of his movies, but he was always enjoyable to watch. 
Sellers is a revelation. He completely inhabits the persona of a man for 
whom the union is his life, and is his only source of power. Speaking 
entirely in bureaucratic gobbledegook, and delightfully mispronouncing 
any word over three syllables, Seller's Fred Kite demonstrates not just 
his comic touches but also his undoubted acting ability. Sellers was on 
the verge of discovery in 1959. His third movie of that year, The Mouse 
That Roared, would attract the attention of film producer Blake Edwards, 
who decided that Seller's comic talent would be ideal for a David Niven 
star vehicle which he was planning. That movie was The Pink Panther and 
it was released in 1964, the same year as another Seller's film, Dr. 
Strangelove.
Get Your Private, Free Email at http://www.hotmail.com

Title
Review for Blade (1998)
A review from the Stockholm Film Review
http://www.fortunecity.com/lavendar/heat/435/
Blade (Wesley Snipes) is a vampire hunter with a difference - he seems 
to be part vampire himself. With the help of his assistant, Dr. Abraham 
Whistler (Kris Kristofferson), he emerges after dark to do battle with 
the blood-sucking creatures of the night, who prey on humans. The 
vampires 'infect' humans with their bite and contaminated humans become 
vampires too. 
Based on the eponymous comic-book hero, Blade is breathtaking in its 
monotony and lack of originality. The twist, if you can call it that, is 
that the vampires consist of two classes those who have always been 
vampires, and those who have been infected, but who were originally 
human. The two factions are engaged in a power struggle, with the leader 
of one faction, Deacon Frost (Stephen Dorff) planning to overthrow the 
present leadership. And that is as complex as the movie gets, 
unfortunately.
The story of vampires has inspired many filmmakers, from schlock-horror 
hacks to A-list directors. Since F.W. Murnau's Nosferatu (1922), the 
themes of immortality, the allegory between sex and the vampire's bite, 
and the blood imagery have inspired works by Neil Jordan, Francis Ford 
Coppola, John Landis, Abel Ferrera and Tony Scott amongst others. 
However, David Goyer's script seems to be content to leave these themes 
unexplored and Stephen Norrington's heavy-handed direction consists of 
one tedious, overblown fight scene after another.
The prospect of Blade as a sort of iconic figure is simply risible. 
Wesley Snipe's performance makes one yearn nostalgically for Passenger 
57 and Demolition Man, while I hope Stephen Dorff sent a good portion of 
his fee to Kiefer Sutherland, since Dorff's performance is a leaden 
imitation of Sutherland in The Lost Boys (hardly a classic in itself). I 
can only presume Kris Kristofferson is saving up for something expensive 
as an excuse for appearing in Blade - I hope he got well paid. This is 
completely forgettable stuff.


Title
Review for Stiff Upper Lips (1998)
Peter Ustinov, Prunella Scales and Sean Pertwee make complete fools
of themselves in this unbelievably feeble comedy. Ostensibly a spoof
on Merchant Ivory productions (particularly   A Passage To India)
and the English class system, it is simply dreadful. A bunch of
upper class twits, the Ivorys (Scales, Georgina Cates, Samuel West
and Robert Portal) wander about India, accompanied by their servant
George (Pertwee). Emily Ivory (Cates) prefers Pertwee, who is a
commoner, to her upper-class male companions. Since they are closet
homosexuals anyway, they haven't the slightest interest in her.
However, their love affair leads to trouble and dire consequnces
for George.
I have a confession to make - I may have given the impression that
there is a coherent plot. There is not. Instead, there is a series
of desperately unfunny scenes, which don't deserve a description.
The film attempts to emulate the Carry On movies, but fails miserably,
since it lacks the sense of fun and cheekiness of that series. God
knows what director and writer Gary Sinyor was thinking - this film
is a huge step down after his promising debut (Leon the Pig Farmer)
and his follow-up, Solitaire for Two.
One can't help wishing for something like Top Secret or Hot Shots!
while watching Stiff Upper Lips - and any movie that makes you wish
for a Charlie Sheen performance should probably left well alone.


Title
Review for Boy and His Dog, A (1975)
The year is 2024 and Earth has been rendered desolate by a nuclear
war. Vic (Don Johnson) is a teenager who is trying to survive by
foraging amongst the wastelands of post-apocalyptic USA. Life is
dangerous since many of the other foragers are deranged lunatics
with a penchant for killing anything that moves. Vic has only one
friend - his dog, Blood, who can communicate with Vic via telepathy.
Blood has plenty of guile and worldly wisdom, and Vic relies on him
to keep them both alive in such a dangerous environment.
Vic's primary concern is to find food and water, but being a young
man of a certain age, he is also looking for women. Alas, finding a
woman is no easy task since groups of marauding 'rippers' rape and
kill any woman they find. However, in the basement of a building,
he spies on a woman, Quilla June (Susanne Benton) and is fascinated
by her body as she dresses, unaware of Vic's presence. After some
initial protests, she has sex with him, and tells him of an
underground community which is much safer than the surface. Leaving
Blood behind (against the dog's better judgement), he follows her
and discovers a puritanical community led by Lou Craddock (Jason
Robards).
On the face of it, a post-apocalyptic world and a talking dog may seem like 
a bizarre scenario but A boy and his Dog is quite an enjoyable sci-fi tale 
(and has become something of a cult classic). Blood's voice is done as a 
narration, the cheapest way of conveying telepathic messages and Tim 
McIntire gravely voice (as Blood) strikes just the right notes of irony and 
wisdom. Don Johnson, the pastel coloured cop who would elevate the act of 
staring into space to an art form in Miami Vice, is quite good as the 
enthusiastic but naive, teenager. The film takes a firm swipe at American 
society, particularly when the action moves underground. Vic is initially 
delighted when he finds that, due to a lack of fertile men, he must 
'service' all the women in the community. He is not so happy when he finds 
out the consequence of his eager acceptance of that task. Craddock's society 
is a sick parody of what had existed before the nuclear war, and not much 
better or liberated than the misery on the surface. The analogy of the 
suppressed underground society, and the suppressed emotions and undercurrent 
of 1970's society is hammered home, but the film works just as well as a 
straightforward sci-fi tale.
This was L.Q. Jones last directorial effort as a moviemaker - he had
previously made a low-budget horror movie called The Devil's Bedroom
(1964). However, he has had a long and varied career as an actor (he
appeared in The Mask of Zorro last year), mainly in Westerns both in
film and TV. He appeared with Elvis in his one serious movie (The
Flaming Star,1960), with Clint Eastwood in Hang Em High (1967), before
hooking up with Sam Peckinpah, which led to roles in Ride the High
Country (1960), Major Dundee (1965), The Wild Bunch (1969), The Ballad of 
Cable Hogue (1970) and Pat Garrett and Billy the Kid (1973). One could 
possibly regard A Boy and his Dog (which was also entitled, somewhat 
luridly, as Psycho Boy and his Killer Dog) as a subversion of the typical 
western, just as Peckinpah's later work (particularly The Wild Bunch and Pat 
Garrett...) would transform the concept of the noble hero into an amoral 
anti-hero. Tim McIntire provided the voice of Blood and also composed the 
music for the film (he would commit suicide in 1986).
The movie is based on a story by Harlan Ellison, who has a long history in 
science fiction on TV and movies. Currently a script consultant for Babylon 
5, he has written for The Twilight Zone, The Outer Limits and Star Trek, and 
has a story credit for The Terminator, which was added just before that 
movie's release. (Legend has it that when Ellison had protested that the 
Terminator storyline was very similar to a story he had written for TV, 
Cameron's lawyers were going to contest his claim. They swiftly changed 
their minds when they found out that Cameron had boasted to the film crew 
that he had cobbled the Terminator story together from a couple of Outer 
Limits episodes).
Despite the low budget, the film is nevertheless entertaining, thanks
to Jones' assured direction, the black humour of the script and the
performances of the eponymous heroes. And the best scene is the very
last one.
(c) Review of Film, Stockholm Film Review


Title
Review for Girl (1999)
Girl tells the story of an eighteen-year-old girl, Andrea Marr
(Dominique Swain, who was the object of desire in the remake of
Lolita) in her last summer of high school, and the events that take
place before she leaves for a prestigious university. She is a grade-A
student, her family is wealthy and she leads a straightforward, if
uneventful, life. Her only concern, shared with her best friend,
Darcy, is when she will 'become a woman' (i.e. lose her
virginity). Feeling that she needs more 'life' experience, she heads
to a seedy part of town, where she encounters the lead singer of a
local underground band, Todd Sparrow (Sean Patrick
Flanery). Completely smitten, she decides to ditch her prim and proper
lifestyle and embrace the 'alternative' scene, in order to impress
Todd.
It is easy to see how this movie got made. Take a confused but 
savvy Nineties teenager (My So-Called Life), add a humorous take 
on the rites and passages of high-school (Clueless) and add a 
background of an alternative music scene (Singles). Unfortunately, 
despite slavishly copying bits of each of those productions, the 
result is a trite and boring teen flick. Clichés abound, from the 
thick-headed jocks, the randy and drunk college students trying to 
deflower Andrea, to the shy but artistic boy that no one but Andrea 
appreciates.
The film is essentially a journey - Andrea must find her real self, 
as she becomes a woman. In addition to having sex (and experiencing 
love for the first time), she is also trying to discover what is 
her philosophy for life. She embraces the alternative scene, which 
means that she ditches her best friend for a group of students 
generally regarded as the school losers. This group has formed a 
struggling rock-band, consisting of Cybil, the brash, devil-may-care 
lead singer (whom Andrea secretly admires), and the geeky duo of 
Greg (David Moscow) and Kevin (Channon Roe). Andrea latches onto 
this group, since it brings her into contact with Todd. Andrea 
soon becomes obsessed with Todd and becomes what she had previously 
despised - a groupie.
There used to be a TV series called Midnight Caller, which starred
Gary Cole as a late-night DJ on a talk-radio station. At the end of
every episode, Gary would sign off portentously with a bit of
philosophy which was invariably inane, stating something so blindingly
obvious that it served only to illuminate why he was working the
graveyard shift. I was reminded of that show while watching this film.
Like Clueless and My So-Called Life, Girl has a narration by Andrea.
Unfortunately, she tends to babble incessantly without being either
funny or meaningful.  It was a mistake to use the music scene as a
backdrop, too. Singles managed to capture the Zeitgeist of the grunge
era when it was released (and would have featured Nirvana's debut if
it hadn't been for the corporate boot of their record company). Part
of Todd's charisma is that he is a struggling artist, an image that is
swiftly dispelled once he starts singing. The movie devotes far too
much time to his performances on stage, which sound like the result of
a whinging competition between Neil Diamond and Jon Bon Jovi. Not a
pleasant prospect, by any means.
What finally sinks the movie is the last twenty minutes, when the 
film attempts to become a serious teen drama and fails miserably. 
Having ignored almost every character except Todd and Andrea for 
most of the movie, suddenly the peripheral characters take centre 
stage and then disappear after a few scenes. In addition, Andrea's 
life takes some unexpected turns, which are so unbelievable (compared 
to the earlier part of the film) that I presumed it would all be 
explained as a dream sequence. I presumed wrongly.
The one saving grace (and it's a big one) is the performance of 
Dominique Swain. Despite the lack of even one original line of 
dialogue, she manages to be funny, sexy and vulnerable. The film 
works best when it's trying to be funny - there are a couple of 
good scenes between Andrea and her well meaning (if perpetually 
worried parents, particularly when they attempt to explain the facts 
of life to her). However, those scenes are too few, and are not 
enough to save a movie, which feels like a very bad episode of 
Beverly Hills 90120.


Title
Review for Hi-Lo Country, The (1998)
The film opens with a very tense Pete Calder (Billy Crudup) who
pulls up in a battered old pickup outside a church. In voice-over,
he states his intention to kill a man. The rest of the movie
relates how Pete got to this point. It begins with how he met his
best friend 'Big Boy' Matson (Woody Harrelson), who, like Pete,
owns a small ranch in Hi-Lo. They hang out together, drink and
womanise together and, when WWII begins, join the Army together.
When they return from service, they find that their holdings are
hardly sufficient to make a living. They are cowboys, but life has
changed. Ranchers such as Jim Ed Love (Sam Elliot) own huge tracts
of land, and employ former ranchers to work as hired hand. Trucks
have replaced the cattle drive as a means of getting the herd to
the train stations. To Big Boy and Pete, Jim Ed is an object of
contempt - while they were away fighting, he stayed at home buying
up land, getting rich and slowly destroying the culture and
position of the cowboy. What's worse, Big Boy's younger brother,
Little Boy (Cole Hauser) now works for Jim Ed.
When Pete returns to Hi-Lo, his first act is to go to a dance in
a nearby town, in the hope of meeting his former girlfriend, a
Latino beauty called Josepha (Penélope Cruz). Instead he bumps
into Mona (Patricia Arquette) who flirts openly with him, though
she is married to Jim Ed Love's foreman, Les Birk (John Deihl).
Though he later meets Josepha, Pete cannot get Mona from his mind.
He is determined to see her again, and feels that she wants to
take their relationship further, despite professing his love and
loyalty to Josepha. He is horrified when he finds out that Big
Boy is having an affair with Mona, particularly as Big Boy uses
Pete to help him keep the affair a secret. As Big Boy becomes
more smitten with Mona, Pete's secret passion for her also
builds unbearably, as does his guilt for deceiving Josepha.
Pete and Big Boy, though close friends, have very different
characters - Big Boy is loud, brash and passionate, whereas
Pete keeps his emotions and thoughts to himself. He is as cautious
as Big Boy is impulsive. The festering resentment between Jim Ed's
men and the independent ranchers begins to boil over as news of
Big Boy's affair becomes known. As Big Boy becomes more prosperous,
he becomes more reckless, as if to invite confrontation, while
Pete is torn between trying to protect his friend and also
his desire to betray him (by taking Mona).
Director Stephen Frears clearly loves the landscape and the story.
The Hi-Lo Country is a beautifully filmed Western, and his direction
won the Best Direction prize at the Berlin film festival this year,
and is accompanied by a stirring score by Carter Burwell (who also
scored Fargo). The story (based on a book by Max Evans) poignantly
evokes the sunset of the working cowboy era, as well as the strains
of loving in a small, rural community (echoing the work of novelists
Cormac Carthy and Larry McMurty).
Both Woody Harrelson and Billy Crudup are completely authentic as
both cowboys and best friends, and their relationship forms the
emotional axis upon which the film revolves. However, the film is
far less convincing in the depiction of Arquette's character,
Mona. So little effort is made to portray her as a real character
that it is difficult to see why she evokes such passion in both
men. Since Mona only kisses Pete once, it is a bit of a stretch
to comprehend why he should harbour such desire for her, since the
woman who does love him (Josepha) is far more beautiful and
interesting. Likewise, it is never apparent why Big Boy would
risk his life and livelihood for Mona either.
The other cause of conflict which drives the film is the
relationship between Big Boy and his brother which lurches from
anger to affection and back to outright hatred from scene to
scene in an incomprehensible manner. It's as if all the fraternal
scenes were scattered at random throughout the film, without
regard what had happened before or after in the story. The uneven
tone of this subplot is particularly evident at the climax of the
movie, and the final, important scene between the brothers seems
to have almost no bearing on what had gone before.
The performances are generally excellent throughout, particularly
Harrelson and Crudup, as well as the secondary characters, such
as Elliot (as the machiavellian Jim Ed Love) and Rosaleen Linehan
as the mother of the feuding brothers. Frear's previous work
includes The Grifters and Dangerous Liasons, so he knows something
about stories of deception and illicit love affairs. However, this
film feels like it has been heavily edited, at the expense of the
characters of both Mona and Little Boy. The result is that one
feels like is hearing the story second-hand, with the best bits
left out.


Title
Review for Bug's Life, A (1998)
A review from the  Stockholm Film Review
http://www.fortunecity.com/lavendar/heat/435/
Worker ant Flik (voiced by Dave Foley) has a streak of individuality 
that constantly gets him into trouble. He invents things, to the 
bemusement of the rest of the ant colony, and he lands himself (and the 
colony) in big trouble when one of his inventions, an automatic 
harvester of grass seeds, causes the destruction of a food pile, the 
collection of which had occupied the whole colony for the summer. The 
problem for the colony is that the pile of food had been the annual 
offering to a group of bullying grasshoppers, who will destroy the 
colony if they do not get their food. When the grasshoppers, led by the 
cruel Hopper (Kevin Spacey) discovers the lack of food, he demands a 
double supply of food to be gathered before the end of the summer.
The colony is led by the ant Queen (Phylis Diller) who has given most of 
her responsibilities to her neurotic daughter Princess Atta (Julia 
Louis-Dreyfus). While Atta and her staff debate Flik's punishment, he 
suggests that he will travel from the colony (which is on an island) to 
find a bunch of warrior insects who will free them from Hopper's 
tyranny. The colony are glad to be rid of him and don't give him any 
chance of success. On his journey, Flik encounters a down-trodden (flea) 
circus of various insects and mistakes them for a bunch of fierce 
soldiers he and brings them back to the colony. The troupe think that 
they have been hired to give a performance. 
John Lasseter and Andrew Stanton set a very high standard for 
computer-generated animation with Toy Story (1995), which evoked classic 
Disney animation values, with breathtaking animation, exciting story and 
a sharp and witty script which worked on two levels; amusing and 
entertaining kids and grown-ups equally. This time, the release of Antz 
(with a broadly similar backdrop and story) has added an extra 
competitive edge. And while both movies feature with a plucky individual 
ant, they are really quite different.
A Bug's Life is a far lighter movie in tone than Antz, and it is easy to 
see how the movie follows the traditional Disney formula. The animation 
is bright and colourful, and the humour is broad and wholesome, aimed 
squarely at the kiddies. Most of the characters are lovable (apart from 
Hopper) , and differ in appearance from each other (important for the 
cuddly toy spin-off market). Much of the humour is derived from the 
silly voices, antics and inept circus acts of the circus troupe - one of 
the most enjoyable scenes of the film is when the circus troupe try 
unsuccessfully to entertain a bunch of bored and unappreciative 
fruitflies. 
Funnily enough, it is the fact that this is unashamedly a children's 
movie that points up the main weakness of the film. Like Toy Story, a 
number of celebrities appear (courtesy of their famous voices). However, 
the series that feature these actors, such as Frazier (David Hyde 
Pierce), Seinfeld (Julia Louis-Dreyfus) and Spin City (Richard Kind) are 
unlikely to mean much to the average eight or nine year old. Moreover, 
their personas in the film are pretty much the same as those for which 
they are better known on TV. Therefore Hyde Pierce is a haughty stick 
insect (Slim), Louis-Dreyfus is a neurotic whiner and Kind (as a 
grasshopper called Molt) is a big goofy but well-meaning sidekick to 
Hopper. The problem is, they don't seem half as funny in the film, as 
they do in their familiar TV surroundings. Louis-Dreyfus is particulary 
grating. This is due, in no small part, to the script. It is rather 
bland, and only Kevin Spacey gets lines worthy of his menacing character 
(but the bad guy always gets the best lines in movies).
Don't get me wrong - this is a fine entertaining movie for kids, which 
is exactly what it was intended to be. But the animation is not as 
well-detailed or spectacular as Antz, and as a follow-up to Toy Story, 
it certainly doesn't have the same impact. There were scenes in Antz 
that I felt simply could not have been made as well using traditional 
animation, whereas A Bug's Life, in it's structure and visual effects, 
looks as if it could have been made twenty years ago. But maybe that is 
no bad thing either. 
It is also a rather cloying movie, with the moral of the story well and 
truly rammed home. However, before you, as a viewer, go home after the 
show, be sure to watch the end credits(after the theme song has played). 
It is the wittiest part of the movie.


Title
Review for Hi-Lo Country, The (1998)
The film opens with a very tense Pete Calder (Billy Crudup) who
pulls up in a battered old pickup outside a church. In voice-over,
he states his intention to kill a man. The rest of the movie
relates how Pete got to this point. It begins with how he met his
best friend 'Big Boy' Matson (Woody Harrelson), who, like Pete,
owns a small ranch in Hi-Lo. They hang out together, drink and
womanise together and, when WWII begins, join the Army together.
When they return from service, they find that their holdings are
hardly sufficient to make a living. They are cowboys, but life has
changed. Ranchers such as Jim Ed Love (Sam Elliot) own huge tracts
of land, and employ former ranchers to work as hired hand. Trucks
have replaced the cattle drive as a means of getting the herd to
the train stations. To Big Boy and Pete, Jim Ed is an object of
contempt - while they were away fighting, he stayed at home buying
up land, getting rich and slowly destroying the culture and
position of the cowboy. What's worse, Big Boy's younger brother,
Little Boy (Cole Hauser) now works for Jim Ed.
When Pete returns to Hi-Lo, his first act is to go to a dance in
a nearby town, in the hope of meeting his former girlfriend, a
Latino beauty called Josepha (Penélope Cruz). Instead he bumps
into Mona (Patricia Arquette) who flirts openly with him, though
she is married to Jim Ed Love's foreman, Les Birk (John Deihl).
Though he later meets Josepha, Pete cannot get Mona from his mind.
He is determined to see her again, and feels that she wants to
take their relationship further, despite professing his love and
loyalty to Josepha. He is horrified when he finds out that Big
Boy is having an affair with Mona, particularly as Big Boy uses
Pete to help him keep the affair a secret. As Big Boy becomes
more smitten with Mona, Pete's secret passion for her also
builds unbearably, as does his guilt for deceiving Josepha.
Pete and Big Boy, though close friends, have very different
characters - Big Boy is loud, brash and passionate, whereas
Pete keeps his emotions and thoughts to himself. He is as cautious
as Big Boy is impulsive. The festering resentment between Jim Ed's
men and the independent ranchers begins to boil over as news of
Big Boy's affair becomes known. As Big Boy becomes more prosperous,
he becomes more reckless, as if to invite confrontation, while
Pete is torn between trying to protect his friend and also
his desire to betray him (by taking Mona).
Director Stephen Frears clearly loves the landscape and the story.
The Hi-Lo Country is a beautifully filmed Western, and his direction
won the Best Direction prize at the Berlin film festival this year,
and is accompanied by a stirring score by Carter Burwell (who also
scored Fargo). The story (based on a book by Max Evans) poignantly
evokes the sunset of the working cowboy era, as well as the strains
of loving in a small, rural community (echoing the work of novelists
Cormac Carthy and Larry McMurty).
Both Woody Harrelson and Billy Crudup are completely authentic as
both cowboys and best friends, and their relationship forms the
emotional axis upon which the film revolves. However, the film is
far less convincing in the depiction of Arquette's character,
Mona. So little effort is made to portray her as a real character
that it is difficult to see why she evokes such passion in both
men. Since Mona only kisses Pete once, it is a bit of a stretch
to comprehend why he should harbour such desire for her, since the
woman who does love him (Josepha) is far more beautiful and
interesting. Likewise, it is never apparent why Big Boy would
risk his life and livelihood for Mona either.
The other cause of conflict which drives the film is the
relationship between Big Boy and his brother which lurches from
anger to affection and back to outright hatred from scene to
scene in an incomprehensible manner. It's as if all the fraternal
scenes were scattered at random throughout the film, without
regard what had happened before or after in the story. The uneven
tone of this subplot is particularly evident at the climax of the
movie, and the final, important scene between the brothers seems
to have almost no bearing on what had gone before.
The performances are generally excellent throughout, particularly
Harrelson and Crudup, as well as the secondary characters, such
as Elliot (as the machiavellian Jim Ed Love) and Rosaleen Linehan
as the mother of the feuding brothers. Frear's previous work
includes The Grifters and Dangerous Liasons, so he knows something
about stories of deception and illicit love affairs. However, this
film feels like it has been heavily edited, at the expense of the
characters of both Mona and Little Boy. The result is that one
feels like is hearing the story second-hand, with the best bits
left out.


Title
Review for Little Voice (1998)
In a drab English seaside town, Mari Hoff (Brenda Blethyn) whiles
away her middle-aged widowhood in her chaotic home (a closed up
record shop) in the local pub. However, she is the last to admit
that age is overtaking her, as she totters about in high heels,
gaudy make-up and low-cut, tight-fitting tops. She blatantly
flirts with the two phone engineers who install her phone, making
fun of the shy younger Billy (Ewan McGregor) and his hobby (he
keeps homing pigeons). She also screams constantly at her painfully
shy daughter, LV (Jane Horrocks). LV (which stands for Little Voice
because she is so shy) spends every day in her bedroom which is
the only neat room in an otherwise slovenly house. There, she listens
to records by Edith Piaf, Shirley Bassey, Judy Garland and others,
that her dead father had given to her.
One night, when Mari lurches home from the pub with a washed-up
showbiz promoter called Ray Say (Michael Caine) for a bit of slap
and tickle, LV breaks into song. She can imitate any of the singers
whose records she has listened to for years. Ray sees her as a way
of establishing his showbiz credentials and a means of escape from
the grotty venues and third-rate acts that he normally peddles. He
cajoles her into performing in public (by persuading her that her
dead father would approve), and begins to plot her (and his future)
career. Meanwhile, Billy (who glimpsed her while installing her
mother's phone) tries to meet with her again - since both of them
are so shy, the relationship develops very slowly indeed.
The screenplay by Jim Cartwright is based on his own play The
Rise and Fall of Little Voice, which also starred Jane Horrocks.
The leitmotif of a caged bird is firmly established and relentlessly
re-affirmed throughout the movie. Both LV and Billy are too shy to
fly free of their shackles - Billy's pigeons are an obvious reminder
of their straitened circumstances. However, the film itself never
flutters free from its stage origins. Cartwright and director (and
co-writer) Mark Herman don't make use of the extra possibilities by
transferring the story from stage to screen. The result is that some
of the performances are a little too theatrical - dialogue delivered
to a live audience requires a more subtle touch for cinema. Brenda
Blethyn's performance garnered her a Golden Globe nomination and an
Academy Award nomination for a performance which teeters between
overwrought and over-the-top, and lapses into parody on several
occasions. It's a pity because the character is well written. Michael
Caine fares better as the down-at-heel impresario, and deserves his
Golden Globe award. Ewan McGregor is quietly effective as a minor
character, but it is Jane Horrocks that grabs the attention.
Jane Horrocks has had a varied acting career - she captured headlines
for a hard-hitting version of Macbeth (which involved her character
urinating on stage nightly) but is probably best known as Bubbles,
the airhead assistant in Absolutely Fabulous. She performs all the
singing in Little Voice, and she is an excellent mimic as well as
singer. However, there isn't much singing in the film. There is,
however, a lot of screaming and shouting, courtesy of Blethyn, and
as the movie progresses, the story becomes ever more predictable.
It is also surprisingly grim, though there are nice flashes of comedy. 
Unfortunately, there are not enough of them, and the story is not 
sufficiently plausible or strong to work as a straight drama. Herman's 
previous directorial effort was Brassed Off, which shares many of the 
bittersweet, small-scale sensibilities of Little Voice (as well as Ewan 
McGregor). However, despite his best efforts, Little Voice never really 
escapes from its stage origins, and the film never really hits the high 
notes that Horrocks' talent could have delivered.
(c) Review of Film, Stockholm Film Review 1999


Title
Review for Brylcreem Boys, The (1997)

The Brylcream Boys tells the story of two prisoners of war who are 
incarcerated in the same prison camp in the Republic of Ireland 
during World War Two, and have fallen for the same girl, a local 
flame-haired beauty named Mattie Guerin (Jean Butler). There is an 
added complication that one of the prisoners is a Canadian airman, 
Miles Keogh (Bill Campbell) while the other suitor is a German 
officer, Count Rudolph Von Stegenbek (Angus McFadyen).
The film touches upon a little known part of Irish (and World War 
II) history. In the outbreak of war in 1939, the Republic of Ireland 
was determined to remain neutral. The country had independence (from 
Britain) for less than two decades and the leadership of both Ireland 
(De Valera) and the UK (Churchill) had been former adversaries in 
the battle for independence. The Republic had a small army with 
almost no ability to defend itself against attacks from sea or air. 
A declaration of support for the Allies would have meant that Allied 
(i.e. British) troops would have had to occupy Ireland in order to 
defend it against German attack - an prospect which had too much 
historical baggage for De Valera to contemplate. Most Irish supported 
the Allied cause and many fought in the British and (to a lesser 
extent) the US army during the war. De Valera was determined to 
preserve the appearance of neutrality throughout the war, even to 
the extent of sending the official condolences of the Irish 
government 
to the German embassy in 1945 on the death of Hitler.
Soldiers from both the Allied and Axis sides (mainly shot-down 
pilots, 
and some shipwrecked sailors) were imprisoned (in separate compounds) 
in the same military camp outside Dublin - in reality, many of the 
Allied pilots were allowed to return to duty by making their way 
(largely unhindered) to the border with Northern Ireland (only 50 
miles away from the camp). Security in the camp itself was lax, since 
it was understood by all that breaches of the rules would only make 
things worse for other prisoners. It was also a fact that, if one was 
fated to be a prisoner-of-war, the camp was a pretty good place to 
sit out the war.
What a pity that the potential for an offbeat exploration of a little 
known aspect of WWII is completely wasted by this trite and cliché-
ridden 
production. Almost every character in the film is a crudely drawn 
stereotype, from the well-meaning but stupid Irish soldiers guarding 
the camp, to the square-bashing, humourless Germans obsessed with 
discipline. Of course, Count Rudolph is a 'good' German; i.e. he 
despises the other Germans in the camp (and by implication, the Nazi 
cause). Miles Keogh is a gung-ho pilot who just wants to get back 
into 
action - he teams up with the British prisoners (absolutely 
unconvincing performances, to a man) to plan his escape. 
The love interest arrives in the rather fetching shape of Mattie 
Guerin, who seems to hold both men in thrall merely by fluttering 
her eyelashes (perhaps because she is not capable of much else). 
Actually, that is not entirely true - this film was intended to be 
the breakthrough role for Butler. She had already achieved fame as 
the 
lead dancer (along with Michael Flatley) in Riverdance, a Celtic 
music and dance extravaganza. She gets a chance to dance in the 
film, too - but the sequence is so ineptly photographed that her 
dancing skills don't shine. Since her acting skills are not in 
evidence, I foresee a short movie career unless she can become the 
Esther Williams of Irish dancing, miraculously weaving dancing 
routines into every film. I'm not sure the world is ready for that!
Campbell and McFadyen don't fare much better, though the script is so 
bad, I doubt there was much either could do. McFadyen (who played 
Robert the Bruce in Braveheart) looks particularly uncomfortable 
throughout the film, as if he had realised too late what a turkey 
it would turn out to be. However, the worst performance is that of 
Gabriel Byrne (also a co-producer) who mugs and grins stupidly 
throughout the entire film. He seems to be imitating Barry 
Fitzgerald in The Quiet Man in every scene. There is a reason that 
movies like The Quiet Man isn't made any more, but at least John  
Ford knew how to invest his film with charm and whimsy. The 
Brylcream Boys possess neither - one might accept the crude 
national stereotypes if the film was at least entertaining. But it 
is not, and is simply an insult to filmgoers.


Title
Review for Liebe ist kälter als der Tod (1969)
LOVE IS COLDER THAN DEATH (Liebe ist kälter als der Tod) (1969)
Stockholm Film Review (http://www.reviewfilm.com)
In 1969, the Western world was in turmoil. The Vietnam war had
poisoned U.S. politics - events like the My Lai massacre, the
Tet offensive and the shootings at Kent State university fuelled
an already burgeoning counter-culture movement. In Europe,
students had taken to the streets in France (the so-called
chienlit), Germany was divided by the Iron Curtain and Warsaw
Pact tanks had savagely crushed the Prague Spring. The movie
world was feeling the whiff of revolution too. Bonny and Clyde
(1967) had already signalled that a change was coming.
In 1969, Dennis Hopper and Peter Fonda would make Easy Rider and
Sam Peckinpah would release The Wild Bunch. Directors like Francis
Ford Coppola, Martin Scorsese, William Friedkin, Peter Bogdanovich
and many others were on the verge of redefining American cinema.
Many of these new directors were inspired by the French New Wave,
the term describing the group of French directors who came to
prominence in the late Fifties and early Sixties. Directors such as
Francois Trauffaut, Jean-Luc Godard, Louis Malle, Claude Chabrol
and Erich Rohmer made movies which gave rise to the auteur theory;
the notion that the director was the most important influence on a
movie (as distinct from the producer, the actors or even the
writers). In Germany, a young film-maker was similarly inspired
by the New Wave directors. His name was Rainer Werner Fassbinder
and he announced himself to the world at the 1969 Berlin Film
festival with Liebe ist kälter als der Tod. The movie got a very
lukewarm reception at the festival, though it didn't put Fassbinder
off movie-making.
Liebe ist kälter als der Tod is dedicated to Rohmer and Chabrol,
and a minor (female) character in the film is called Erika Rohmer,
just in case we missed the introduction to the film. The film itself
is a very low-budget black and white production with atrocious sound
quality (not such a problem if you're reading the subtitles),
indifferent production values and several examples of very bad
acting indeed. The movie opens with a bunch of gangsters under
interrogation. Their inquisitors are not the police, but a crime
syndicate who want to recruit the unwilling gangsters into the
organisation, and intend to brutalise them until they acquiesce.
Two of the criminals strike up a friendship. Franz (Fassbinder) is
a pimp in Munich while Bruno (Ulli Lommel) is from a provincial town.
Franz is disdainful of the syndicate and tells Bruno to contact him
when they are released. Some days later, Bruno arrives at Franz'
address and meets his girlfriend, a prostitute called Johanna (Hanna
Schygulla). Franz is keeping a low profile because another pimp,
the Turk, is trying to kill him. At Bruno's urging, they devise a
plan to retaliate first (in a manner of speaking) by eliminating
the Turk. This plan leads to a much higher body count than expected,
and proves that Bruno is a ruthless killer. even though Franz is
impressed by his resolute manner, Johanna distrusts him deeply. She
fears him not just because he seems to have taken a proprietary
interest in her, but also his ambition could get both herself and
Franz killed. She becomes increasingly apprehensive when Bruno
decides to rob a bank with Franz.
Next paragraph (between the ****) contains spoiler information. Page down 
for the rest of the spoiler-free review.
Johanna's fears seem to be realised when Bruno, having killed one
of Johanna's clients, meets a man in a games arcade. They speak in
a coded manner, but it is obvious that they are both part of the
crime syndicate featured at the beginning of the movie. Bruno
instructs the other man to make sure that Johanna does not survive
the robbery attempt. At the beginning of the film, the syndicate
had threatened Franz by speculating about his girlfriend, but he
had not wavered. They had presumably decided that a more subtle
approach was necessary. Their presumption is that, once Johanna
is gone, Franz will join his new 'friend' in the syndicate.
However, Johanna has also planned ahead. When they arrive at the
bank, there are men loitering about outside. They are policemen,
who mortally wound Bruno in a shoot-out. Franz drags him into
the car, but Bruno is already dead. Franz is forced to dump his
body out of the car to halt the chasing police. Johanna admits
that she called the police, intending to prevent the robbery.
She has unwittingly saved her own life (and probably Franz' too)
but he calls her 'whore', believing her to have betrayed his
trusted friend. She was prepared to see her lover go to prison
than be killed in a robbery, but, at the end of the film, they
drive into an uncertain future, and Johanna's sacrifice goes
unrecognised.
Is this film any good ? Well, it certainly establishes some of
the themes that would occupy Fassbinder during his professional
life. There is a definite sense of style (though the fixed
camera position for almost every shot suggests a budget limitation
more than anything else). Hanna Schygulla is clearly star-material
she is positively brimming with confidence and charisma - she
would be Fassbinder's muse in many subsequent movies. Fassbinder
doesn't do so bad himself as Franz, but Ulli Lommel's performance
as Bruno is completely ludicrous - his inability to convey any emotion with 
conviction and his appearance (trilby, trenchcoat and sunglasses are 
straight out of the Forties) are more likely to induce sniggers. Fassbinder 
had a lot to learn about directing too - many of the scenes are far too 
amateurish, particularly the gangster scenes. The climactic scene at the 
bank is simply terrible. Some scenes provoke laughter - the appearance of a 
black American gangster's at the beginning of the film is both incongruous 
and unintentionally hilarious. A supposedly erotic scene between Bruno and a 
woman on a train is even worse. It's not surprising that the film got the 
cold shoulder in Berlin, particularly when compared to U.S. independent 
films.
As an introduction to Fassbinder's oeuvre, "Liebe ist..." is a good
example of the ideas that he would explore in later (and better made)
movies. His art-house techniques, melodramatic story and unconventional 
plots are all explored here, though the theme of betrayal and loyalty is 
perhaps more personal than some of his later, more thematic movies. 
Fassbinder's reach clearly exceeds his grasp here and the lack of money 
shines through - scenes where the film equipment accidentally appears in 
view , or the actors don't perform remain in the movie, suggesting that 
Fassbinder couldn't afford reshoots. His technique suffered from the budget 
restrictions too - he favours sparse dialogue and long pauses to punctuate 
the action, and the poor production values tend to be distracting to the 
audience. Still, he signalled his ambition, and would establish his 
reputation within a few years (and retains that reputation ever since).
Two of Fassbinder's contemporaries, Wolfgang Petersen and Roland
Emmerich earn their living in Hollywood these days. Petersen has
forsaken the gritty and gripping realism of Das Boot (1981) for more
mainstream fare such as Outbreak (1995) and In the Line of Fire (1993). 
Emmerich is Mr. Mainstream, who with Dean Devlin, has produced summer 
blockbusters such as Stargate (1994), Independence Day (1996) and the 
god-awful Godzilla (1998). It is doubtful that Fassbinder, had he not died 
of a drugs overdose in 1982) would have made the same transition. Though he 
turned to more accessible, English-language films towards the end of his 
life (he died at the age of 37), it is hard to envisage him devoting his 
talent to glossy superficial work - he was too much of an individualist for 
that.


Title
Review for Rush Hour (1998)
As the outgoing Hong Kong chief of police, Han (Tzi Ma) celebrates
his appointment as Chinese consul to the United States, his most
trusted detective, Lee (Jackie Chan), leads a raid against a top
crime boss, Juntao. The raid is successful but the crime leader
escapes. Meanwhile, Los Angeles police detective James Carter (Chris
Tucker) is in trouble. Though he successfully apprehended Clive
(Chris Penn), a dealer illegally selling explosives, he managed
to cause an explosion, and his captain is about to suspend him.
Soon after Han arrives in Los Angeles, his daughter is kidnapped
in a violent ambush. The FBI takes charge of the investigation,
and is not happy to hear that Han has asked his friend Lee to fly
to the States to help with the investigation. They resolve to
ensure that Lee is kept well away from the investigation, and
ask the LAPD to supply a detective to act as a nursemaid for
Lee - Carter gets the job (thinking he has been promoted to the FBI).
The reason people go to see movies with Jackie Chan is neither to
see subtle character studies or hear reams of dialogue. No, the
reason people pay to see Jackie Chan movies is to see Jackie do
his martial arts thing. Chan's movies usually thin on plot but
compensate with spectacular stunt work and martial arts skills.
Chan plans and executes most of the stunts, which are generally
breath taking and done with a great deal of humour and skill. I
have to confess to having a soft spot for Jackie Chan - his movies
hark back to a time when actors such as Buster Keaton and Charlie
Chaplin invented exciting and complex stunts and didn't use doubles
for the dangerous stunts. Chan's Hong Kong movies have had a cheap
and cheerful feel to them, and he has yet to make a breakthrough in
the English-speaking market, particularly the United States.
The decision to put Chan with brash, wisecracking comedian Chris
Tucker seems to be a good idea - let Tucker do the talking and let
Chan do the high kicking. Alas, there is far too much talking.
Tucker made his mark in The Fifth Element as the voluble DJ with
the outrageous coiffure who helped Bruce Willis save the universe,
and followed it up with a small role in Jackie Brown. He gets far
more screentime in Rush Hour but he doesn't seem to know what to do
with it. It becomes obvious after a few scenes that Tucker hasn't
much to say, and his allegedly comic presence soon becomes tiresome.
He seems content to pass off a tired pastiche of Eddie Murphy (circa
48 Hours and Beverly Hills Cop) rather than carve out a distinct
persona of his own. Unfortunately, Tucker's prominence means there
is less of Chan and his acrobatic antics. The action sequences that
do appear are strangely subdued, and are not exactly awe-inspiring.
All in all, this film is incredibly pedestrian - it certainly doesn't
capture Chan at his best, and it proves that too much of Chris Tucker
is definitely not a good thing. You would be much better served by
renting a video of Supercop(1996), which stars Chan and Michelle Yeoh
(of Tomorrow Never Dies fame) - it is much more fun.


Title
Review for M (1931)
Fritz Lang's M (1931) tells the story of a child killer who 
is terrorising a small German city. The film opens with a group 
of children playing and singing a nursery rhyme, the lyrics of 
which tell of a man in black who will take children who are 
naughty and chop them up. As they play, they bounce a ball 
against a street lamp, on which there is a Wanted poster, for 
the killer.
The next scene is in a fairground - a man buys a balloon for a 
small girl while whistling a jaunty tune. Meanwhile, her mother 
is busy preparing dinner for her return. Soon, the balloon is 
seen tangled in overhead power-lines - the child is the latest 
victim of the killer, while, at home, her mother becomes more 
and more frantic.
The latest killing causes outrage - parents are afraid to let 
their children go to school and even the most innocuous gestures 
by men towards children lead to suspicion and accusations. The 
police are under pressure - the city council, the press and the 
public are screaming for results.
The police inspector Lohmann (Otto Wernicke) in charge of the 
Investigation is a clever man, and he is methodical in his 
methods of detection. The killer is Franz Becker (Peter Lorre), 
who has been sending letters to the press and the police manage 
to track down his apartment. However, the police are not the only 
people looking for the killer - the criminal underworld has offered 
their own reward for his capture. This is not because of 
philanthropy - the police searches have caused so much interference 
to their activities, they decide that it is better for them if 
they catch the killer.
Lang's superb film contrasts the gentle, almost child-like manner 
of the killer, as he gradually gains the trust of his victims, 
with the frantic nature of the police and criminal investigations. 
When Becker attempts to lure another child away, he is patient 
and meticulous. He is a charming fellow, and he easily seduces 
his latest target, plying the young girl with cakes and bringing 
her to a funfair. 
The pace of the chase is far more frantic. Though the police 
quickly discover the identity of the killer, it is the criminals 
who find the killer first. Becker is betrayed by his trademark 
tune. He buys a balloon from the same vendor as he had done when 
he murdered his previous victim. The vendor is blind but remembers
the tune (Edvard Grieg's Peer Gynt Suite 1 Op. 46, "In the Hall 
of the Mountain King") and sends a young helper to follow Becker. 
The boy chalks the letter 'M' on his hand and, walking past 
Becker, pats him on the shoulder, leaving the 'M' imprinted on 
the back of his coat. In a delicious irony, the child with him 
(his prospective victim) notices the smudge on his coat, and 
tries to wipe it off. Becker realises that he has been marked, 
and attempts to escape. He is now in a dilemma - both the police 
and the criminal underworld hunt him. As night falls, he takes 
refuge in an office building. The criminals surround the 
building, seize him and hold their own mock trial.
Lang's movie constantly jolts our expectations - the criminal 
boss who organises the hunt for the killer is a sharply dressed 
and well-organised man. In contrast, Lohmann (the police 
inspector) is sloppily dressed, drinks and smokes too much, and 
exhibits the characteristics normally associated with a movie 
villain. He is, however, a clever detective, and his methodical 
approach, and his ingenious interrogation techniques lead him to 
both Becker's apartment and to the office building where the 
criminals are hunting Becker.
What is most impressive about M is how relevant and modern the 
film appears. The depiction of the hard-pressed police and also 
Lorre's portrayal of a baby-faced killer have not been surpassed 
by filmmakers since. There isn't a superfluous frame in the 
movie - Lang cuts between the hunt for the killer, and the 
killer's own hunt for his next victim to build the tension 
unbearably towards an exciting and fascinating climax. Several 
scenes stand out - the mother of a murdered child busying 
herself preparing her daughter's dinner. Every time a child 
arrives in the apartment block, she rushes out to see if it is 
her daughter. Each time, she grows a little more worried. We, 
the audience, know the child is never coming back, which makes
the mother's anxiety even more poignant. Another outstanding 
scene is when the criminals are hunting for Becker in the office 
building. The alarm has been sounded, so the criminals have only 
a limited amount of time in which to search for Becker - of 
course, Becker does not know this. He cowers like a caged rat, 
in a storage locker, hoping the criminals will not find him.
Again, Lang skilfully manipulates the audience - we want justice, 
but do we want it to occur at the hands of the criminals 
(amongst whom are killers and other undesirables) or at the 
hands of the upright and resourceful police inspector? His use 
of music is also skilful - we need only hear the tune to know 
that the killer is active and another child is in mortal danger. 
It's hard to believe that this was Lang's first 'talkie' - he was 
already well known for his silent classic, Metropolis (1926).
It is interesting to compare M to movies released in the United 
States around the same time. Both The Public Enemy (1931) and 
Little Caesar (1930)featured strong criminal personalities 
(breakthrough roles for James Cagney and Edward G. Robinson 
respectively). However, both films were studies of misused 
power. Though both Cesare 'Little Caesar' Bandello (Robinson) 
and Tom Powers (Cagney) were both capable of murder and 
viciousness, they were evil in a conventional sense. Two 
classic horror movies were also released at that time - 
Frankenstein (1931) and Dracula (1931). Both movies featured 
a monster, and scared audiences but in each case, the monster 
conformed to conventional mythology - it looked terribly scary 
and had an inhuman conception. The power of M derives from the 
fact that the monster had a human, almost angelic face, but 
his crimes were beyond comprehension.
Though most reviews of M describe Lorre as the main star, 
it is really an ensemble performance. Lorre's performance 
is outstanding - his portrayal of the truly multidimensional - 
his inability to see himself as anything other than a victim 
makes him seem even more evil. His terror at the prospect of 
receiving summary justice from the criminals is palpable. Lorre 
seems far heavier, even chubby, in this role than he would for 
later roles in Hollywood, such as The Maltese Falcon (1941) 
and Casablanca (1942).
The original title for M was The Murderer among Us, but it 
was changed in case the Nazi party inferred a reference to 
them. In fact, the story was based on a real-life murderer, 
but since M featured a dark parody of law and order (when 
the criminals hold their own 'trial' of Becker) and examined 
the power of mob-rule, it may have caused discomfort amongst 
the followers of the Nazi party. One could argue, with the 
benefit of hindsight that the portrayal of 'unspeakable evil 
with an ordinary face' in M could be seen as an allegory of 
the Nazis during World War 2, but it is unlikely that Lang 
intended such a comparison. In fact, Hitler and other high-level 
members of the Nazi party were fans of Lang's work. They wanted 
Lang to make propaganda films, but Lang escaped to America, 
fearing the consequences of having Jewish relations. Lorre, 
who was Jewish, also left for America during the Thirties.
Get Your Private, Free Email at http://www.hotmail.com
