Authors
Rick Scoggin
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Rajio no jikan (1997)
About a week ago my wife and I just wanted see a funny movie. We
took a chance on a film at the Portland International Film
Festival, a recent Japanese movie titled Welcome Back, Mr.
McDonald. The whole movie takes place in a Tokyo radio station
where a live radio drama is being done. With the housewife author
in the studio, the prima donna lead actress demands a major
script change and soon the other actors are insisting on their
own script changes. The seat of the pants rewrites, live acting,
special effects and chaos, all on the edge of going completely
out of control, is hilarious. As soon as things slow down a bit,
something else is uproarious. My wife and I hadn't laughed so
long at a movie in a long time. The local movie reviewer was less
than totally enthusiastic about this movie because of the
"determined lightness of the material." And though he gave the
movie a B-, he admitted that "charm and fun are in high supply."
But sometimes you want to go to movie just to laugh a lot and
have a good time. You don't want high art or messages all the
time; you want to see well done hilarity. And this movie really
was a funny, funny surprise, that you could laugh out loud at. My
wife and I are hoping that this will be like Shall We Dance from
Japan a couple years ago. After we saw that at the International
Film Festival, it gained wider distribution a few months later
and was a hit in the US. I'd urge everyone who wants a funny
comedy to see this if it comes around to your area in a film
festival sometime in the future. And it's a family movie! Anyone
over 10 would love this. There is no sex or bad language! I'd
rate this a solid B+. Keep your eyes open for it!
For more movie reviews (including foreign films and classic
movies), conservative commentary, or classical CD reviews go to
www.ricksreviews.com
Conservative Commentary:
www.ricksreviews.com/conservativeopinion.htm
Movie Reviews: www.ricksreviews.com/moviereviews.htm
Classical CD Reviews: www.ricksreviews.com/classicalcdreviews.htm
* Sent from RemarQ http://www.remarq.com The Internet's Discussion Network *
The fastest and easiest way to search and participate in Usenet - Free!
