Authors
Roger Rubio
Number of Reviews
3

Title
Review for Alien: Resurrection (1997)
This movie was interesting.  As far as story is concerned, it was a
hell of a lot better than Alien 3.  At the same time, it was trying to
be an amalgamation of Alien and Aliens, and the result is, well, just
interesting.
ALIEN RESURRECTION is the story of the Auriga, a military ship which is
being used for the transport, breeding, and study of the alien species. 
A band of mercenaries boards the ship and becomes trapped on it when the
aliens escape.  Notice I haven't said anything about Lt. Ellen Ripley. 
The reason for this is because Ripley doesn't do much in this movie. 
Ripley used to be the centerpiece of the Alien series; apparently, the
aliens have really taken over.  Regretfully, in this movie, she seems to
be just another one of the people trying to get off the ship.  She is
brought to life as a clone (with some residual alien characteristics),
but is not "resurrected," as the title of the movie would have you
believe.  If she was truly resurrected, she would have kicked more alien
ass, expressed herself more, led more, and not stood idly by while other
people struggle with the aliens.
Ripley, in the original ALIEN, was the first female hero, leader, and
the first to survive at the end of the movie.  This made the character
of Ripley (and consequently Sigourney Weaver) into a role model and
inspiration for several young actresses and women everywhere. After all,
the women usually did not survive a horror movie, and if they did, they
would be subject to the damsel-in-distress syndrome.  Lt. Ellen Ripley
changed all that.  The character and role model was further reinforced
in ALIENS, where Ripley got to kick some alien ass and exorcise her own
demons in the process.  Weaver portrayed a woman who could be strong,
aggressive, and not lose her femininity in the process: she was not
killing aliens just to kill them; she had a little girl to protect. 
ALIEN 3 was just a rehash of the original ALIEN with a "what's the point
anymore?" version of Ripley.  In ALIEN: RESURRECTION, Ripley is just
there, because an ALIEN movie would not be an ALIEN movie without
Ripley.  I guess there's nothing else interesting enough to explore
about her character anymore.  That's too bad.  "Greedy studio execs
resurrect Ripley for another outing" would have been the headline if
this were a newspaper article.  Ripley had to be re-invented to attract
Weaver back to the role; unfortunately, the old Ripley is more
interesting than the new one. 
What Ridley Scott (the director of ALIEN) established and James Cameron
(director of ALIENS) reinforced, David Fincher (director of ALIEN 3)
wasn't quite sure what to do with.  This criticism is not to deprecate
Fincher; its just that he was given the helm of the Titanic and was told
to keep it afloat as long as possible.  Given the story he had to deal
with, I'd say Fincher did a fabulous job.  Jean-Pierre Jeunet (director
of ALIEN RESURRECTION) looks like he didn't burden himself with any type
of ALIEN legacy.  He decided to make his movie his way. I respect that
kind of independence.  The film looks great, with stimulating color
contrasts and respectable FX.  Sigourney Weaver is a little more sedate
(with a few exceptions) in this movie.  Winona Ryder is good, although a
little out of her league amongst these people. Ron Perlman is as good as
always.
The writing demonstrates an openness to new ideas about the aliens,
although it's a little zealous about presenting them, and in the
process, the audience becomes lost as to how certain things happen. 
Ripley and the aliens seem to have a bond now; what kind of bond?  They
take the Queen out of Ripley's cloned body, and she starts to breed; how
is this possible?  I'm not a biologist, but don't you need a fertile
male to impregnate the female?  Were there any alien males on the ship?
Then the Queen (all of a sudden) sprouts a human-like womb after
squeezing out a few alien eggs; again, how?  How did the womb show up
after all that egg laying?  What impregnated her new womb?  Straight
cloning?  I don't think so.  And this newborn?  All this comes near the
end of the movie, after every familiar idea is exhausted.  It is clear
the ideas that should have been explored were neglected in favor of
things that are all too familiar: aliens, eggs, chest bursters, face
huggers, people trying to get off the ship, and, unfortunately, Ripley's
face, not her character.  This neglect means this movie is just a
rehash, and not an exploration of a new incarnation of Ripley and the
aliens.
Regardless of its flaws, this movie wasn't bad.  I just wish they would
have explored the ideas they brought up late in the film.  Apparently,
those ideas are brought up strictly for sequels (again, the studio execs
make sure they get a return on their investment, and I can't say I blame
them).  I could always describe each movie in the Alien series with one
superlative: ALIEN was suspenseful, ALIENS was exciting, and ALIEN 3 was
depressing.  The best word for Alien Resurrection would have to be
twisted.  It had potential -- maybe a second writer could have fleshed
out the loose ends better.
"You cannot escape one infinite, I told myself, by fleeing to another;
 you cannot escape the revelation of the identical by taking refuge in
 the illusion of the multiple."
          -- Umberto Eco, FOUCAULT'S PENDULUM

Title
Review for Picture Perfect (1997)
PICTURE PERFECT
Directed by Glenn Gordon Caron
Starring Kevin Bacon, Jennifer Aniston, Jay Mohr, Olympia Dukakis
Jennifer Aniston has a terrific smile.  Too bad it wasn't used more in
this movie.
PICTURE PERFECT is about a 28 year old woman named Kate (Jennifer
Aniston) who is having trouble in both her career and in finding a
potential mate of whom both she and her mother (Olympia Dukakis) would
approve of.  Kate's boss doesn't want to promote her because he believes
she has no real commitment to her job.  She also can't seem to find the
right person through regular dating.  So she fixes her efforts on Sam
(Kevin Bacon), a man who is not interested in a woman unless she is
unavailable.  Kate attends the wedding of a friend, at the behest of her
mother, and there she meets Nick (Jay Mohr), a videographer.  In order
to make Kate's boss think she is more committed to her job, Kate's
friend Darcy (Illeana Douglas) gets people to believe Kate is engaged to
Nick.  Kate, thinking she can use this situation to get Sam, manipulates
and uses Nick to that end.  Nick starts to fall for Kate regardless, and
in the end Kate realizes she wants Nick instead.  Complicated for a date
movie?  You decide.
This movie is supposed to be a romantic comedy, but it comes off as a
romantic situation.  I felt as though there should have been some
commercial breaks somewhere in the middle.  It wasn't because the
director Glenn Gordon Caron was a television director before he became a
film director.  It's just that this movie was not endearing enough to be
a romantic comedy.  There are a few scenes which are endearing, but not
enough to carry the entire movie.  A romantic comedy has a gimmick that
makes it work: in PRETTY WOMAN it was a hooker with a heart of gold; in
WHEN HARRY MET SALLY it was two lovers from "just friends;" in GREEN
CARD it was a marriage of convenience.  In PICTURE PERFECT, the gimmick
is a lie to get what someone wants.  The execution of that gimmick is
where the overall problem with this movie lies.
I saw right off the bat what this movie was trying to be.  Have you ever
seen the remarriage comedies of the late 30's and early 40's?  Some of
the best known are THE LADY EVE starring Barbara Stanwyck and Peter
Fonda, THE PHILADELPHIA STORY starring Audrey Hepburn, Cary Grant and
Jimmy Stewart, and IT HAPPENED ONE NIGHT starring Clark Gable and
Claudette Colbert.  These are movies about a woman who is getting
"married," either explicitly or implicitly, to one man, but winds up
spending most of her time with another man.  What she finds out during
the course of the film is that she really belongs with the man she spent
most of her time with and not with the man she is supposed to "marry." 
This formula for a genre was discovered by Stanley Cavell and is
detailed in his book PURSUITS OF HAPPINESS.  It was clear to me that
this movie was trying to be a remarriage comedy.  It falls short in a
few places.
The best modern-day execution of a remarriage comedy I have seen in
recent years is THE CUTTING EDGE starring Moira Kelly and D. B. Sweeney.
Moira Kelly's character, Kate, spends most of her time with D. B.
Sweeney's character, Doug, training for ice-skating championships.  Kate
is engaged to be married to Hale.  Notwithstanding explaining the whole
story, Kate spends most of her time with Doug, believing she is in love
with Hale.  She eventually ends up dumping Hale.  D. B. Sweeney had a
lot more screen time than Jay Mohr did in PICTURE PERFECT, and Hale took
a backseat to the Kate-Doug relationship.  It was easier to see why Doug
would fall for Kate in THE CUTTING EDGE.  In PICTURE PERFECT, more
screen time is devoted to Sam than Nick, and not enough time is devoted
to Nick in order to understand his character.
Nick barely has anything to do with the story; he just comes in when
it's convenient to do so.  I found it hard to see how he would help this
woman who is just using him for her own ends.  I also found it hard to
believe he would take her back at the end.  If the story committed more
time to Mohr's character, I may have been able to see why he would fall
in love with her.  But as the story stands, Nick seems to be a little
stupid.  Stupid with love?  I don't believe it.
I am sorry to say that PICTURE PERFECT is run-of-the-mill Hollywood
entertainment.  The talents of Jennifer Aniston, Jay Mohr, Kevin Bacon,
Olympia Dukakis, and Illeana Douglas are put to meager use in this
movie.  On the other hand, I guess you could say that it is the perfect
date movie: the kind where you can pay more attention to the date you
brought to the movie rather than the movie itself.

Title
Review for Event Horizon (1997)
After a long hiatus, The Snapman returns.
Something was missing in this film.  Something that would have really
screwed me up, as some of the best horror movies have done in the past.
The visuals were stunning, the cast talented, the writing decent; so
what was missing?
EVENT HORIZON takes place in 2047.  The crew of the Search & Rescue ship
Lewis & Clark has been sent to the planet Neptune to search for
survivors of the Event Horizon, a ship which mysteriously disappeared
seven years ago.  Dr. Weir (Sam Neill) explains to Captain Miller
(Lawrence Fishburne) and the crew of the Lewis & Clark the secret of the
Event Horizon: the gravity drive.  The gravity drive creates a black
hole which folds two points in space-time close together which are
normally very far away.  The ship then hops the shortened distance
through a "dimensional gateway" and returns space-time to normal.  When
the Lewis & Clark arrive at the Event Horizon, they find the crew dead
and some very disturbing things going on.  Apparently the trip brought
back something it shouldn't have.  Requisite horror movie misadventures
ensue.
The dimensional gateway the Event Horizon went through is never really
explained in great detail.  All you know is that it uses a black hole to
create a dimensional gateway.  The gateway apparently opened up a hole
in our universe to a dimension of pure chaos.  Okay, fine, I can deal
with that; but why didn't it open a hole up to another universe instead
of another dimension?  Is there a whole dimension of pure chaos
enveloping the universe as we know it?  Does traveling through the
gateway take you to a specific location, or just a dimension in general?
As a techie-type, these are the kind of geeky questions I found myself
asking about this story.  If the story is going to go as far as
explaining the space-time relationship and the folding of space, why
doesn't it go as far as to explain the whole enchilada?  And another
thing: why did the ship come back?  Just to get another crew so that
they would promptly go back and die horribly in the dimension of hell? 
Unless Hollywood plans a hundreds EVENT HORIZON sequels to explain all
of this, these issue will remain unclear.
EVENT HORIZON relies heavily on its stunning visuals and impressive
production design.  All of it floored me; I give great kudos to the
production crew for some great vision.  But the writing is not exactly
sure where it wants to go.  Regular horror movie gimmicks find their way
into a movie that is trying hard to be different from all the others. 
The idea of a spaceship going to hell and coming back is an interesting
one, but this concept is awkwardly executed.  This script is not very
sure if it is trying to be an ALIEN crew-monster movie (the "evil" of
the ship), THE SHINING spook-house movie (instead of the hotel
"shining," the ship is "alive"), or a combination of both.
If this movie wants to shock and disturb, it succeeds very well. But it
resorts to in-your-face "jolt" scenes, where bursts of sounds and
disturbing visuals will hopefully scare you out of your seat.  Such a
scheme for disturbing the audience only works when there is no sound
accompanying the visuals.  Otherwise the intent of the filmmakers is too
obvious.  And the flashes of pure chaos do not seem to be focused on any
of the characters in general, just on the audience.  The audience gets
scared when the characters get scared.  It is clear (or should I say,
unclear if) the ship is not trying to scare the crew; it's trying to
scare the people sitting in the audience in the movie theater.
In ALIEN, the characters were scared to death of the monster running
around the ship.  In THE SHINING, Jack Torrance was the immediate object
to be scared of, but in the end it was the hotel itself to stay away
from.  In EVENT HORIZON, we are not sure what to be scared of; the ship,
the dimensional gateway, the supposed evil behind it all, or what? 
Great visuals, good special effects, and good acting can't fill in what
was missing from this movie: genuine suspense.
