Authors
Robert Plamondon
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Tonari no Totoro (1988)
An animated feature film, written and directed by Hayao Miyazaki
Rated G, 1:25 running time
I give it four stars out of a possible five.
     MY NEIGHBOR TOTORO is a charming children's film by Japan's
leading animator, Hayao Miyazaki.  Set in rural Japan in the 1950s, it
is a story about two little girls and their father, who move into an
old farmhouse and quickly discover that it is haunted.  Later, they
encounter Totoro, a giant, vaguely rabbit-like magical creature who
lives in a hollow in the enormous camphor tree next door.
     A series of delightful adventures ensue, from magical encounters
with Totoro, to run-ins with the boy next door who loses the ability to
speak in the presence of girls.  Real-world concerns intrude heavily at
times: the girls' father bought the country house to benefit their
mother, who is recovering at a nearby hospital, presumably from
tuberculosis.  All these elements are woven tightly together in the
movie.
     One unusual element of the story is how the adults react to
reports of magical creatures in the neighborhood.  While it's a little
hard to tell whether the adults REALLY believe in them, they all take
reports of Totoros and Soot Sprites in perfect stride.  Not once does
Miyazaki trot out the hoary children's literature chestnut of "the
adults think I'm a liar, so I'm going to have to save the world by
myself."  This accepting attitude towards traditional Japanese
spirit-creatures may well represent an interesting difference between
our two cultures.
     Originally released in Japan in 1988, MY NEIGHBOR TOTORO has been
competently (but not brilliantly) dubbed into English.  (Many dubbed
Japanese films have such bad voice acting that the films are painful to
watch.  TOTORO doesn't suffer from this problem.) The lip-synch is
probably better than in the original Japanese.
     Unlike the ultra-expensive, all-singing, all-dancing,
effects-laden, weak-script extravaganzas put out by Disney recently,
the film concentrates on story, characterization, and cinematography.
     Disney, for example, wanted a wonderful ballroom scene in BEAUTY
AND THE BEAST, and conveniently forgot that the castle was under a
curse that changed its appearance to be gloomy and forbidding.  Such
deliberate errors, always present in recent Disney films, are
conspicuously absent from Miyazaki's work.  MY NEIGHBOR TOTORO hearkens
back to an era of simpler, more honest Disney films, like 101
DALMATIONS.
     Like 101 DALMATIONS, the animation in MY NEIGHBOR TOTORO is not as
smooth or as detailed as recent Disney works, but it is a classic
nonetheless.
     When watching MY NEIGHBOR TOTORO in a theater, I was impressed at
the way the kids in the audience were glued to the screen the entire
time.  Certain scenes, such as when Mei, the five-year-old girl,
discovers pollywogs in a pond, brought smiles to the faces of the
adults -- but shouts of excitement from the kids in the audience.
Miyazaki has their number.
     The wonderfully detailed characterizaton and the charming story
make MY NEIGHBOR TOTORO a delight for adults as well.
