Authors
Aaron Price
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Seven Years in Tibet (1997)
Seven Years In Tibet is a simple movie about a complicated topic. It
is a Hollywood version of a story about a narcicistic mountain climber who
finds peace through a friendship with the Dalai Lama, the spiritual leader
of Tibet. 
Brad Pitt stars as Heinrich Harrer, a famous German mountain climber
who visits the Himilayas to conquer a peak as part of Germany's late
1930's propaganda machine. Along the trip he is captured by the English
and interned in a prison camp in India.  While the conditions are not too
bad in the camp, he escapes and wanders the Himalayas for a couple of
years before stumbling into the capital of Tibet. 
It is here, in this city normally cut off from all foreigners, that
he befriends the Dalai Lama as a child and teaches him western ways. It is
a typical post-colonial fairy tale about what western society has to offer
the rest of the world:  cars and movie stars (literally). 
This film tries very hard to be epic in scope. It also tries very
hard to paint a sympathetic portrait of the Tibetans as they are crushed
by Chinese invaders. Finally, it tries very hard to show the turmoil
inside a man as he discovers that spirituality means more than worshipping
his body as a temple. 
It unfortunately fails in every attempt. 
 What we get is superb movie-of-the-week material full of Hollywood
cliche's, stereotypes, and feel good endings that resolve nothing of the
matter at hand. What little glimpse we get into the culture of Tibet is
relegated mainly to the typical jokes about a backwards people's first
glimpse at technology. (When they see their first movie all they can do is
stand around and make shadow puppets.) The spirituality of the Dalai Lama
is constrined to a couple of poor analogies bestowed upon Himmler and a
tendancy of the people to be charitable. 
The dialog is simple and uncluttered. There is no attempt to make the
movie great nor action packed. The sole battle scene in the movie is
heavily edited with special effects and fails in its attempt to bring out
emotion in the viewer. The score to the film is self-conscious and
frequently overburdens the imagery with a melodramatic feel and pace the
film cannot keep up with. 
What we end up with is a 2 hour long short story. Which is sad
considering the possibilities behind the ture story and the book this film
was based on.  Interestingly left out of the film is the fact that our
hero was a longstanding member of both the Nazi party and the SS while in
Germany. Yet this film even has a scene where Harrer rejects his German
citizenship to a fellow officer and rather claims "I'm not German, I'm
Austrian." So much for a true story. 
Brad Pitt should get some credit for playing his character
unsympathetically. He offers no excuses for his actions and plays the
egomaniac well.  Unfortunately for him the writing and direction does not
give us time to get to know him well enough to care nor even to get a
glimpse inside of this man in supposedly in pain. There is a single moving
scene in the film where Harrer realizes his brazen efforts at winning a
female have failed.  This side plot carried more truth and interest in it
than the rest of the 139 minute film.
David Thewlis, who was superb in the otherwise horrid cult-hit
Naked, has a demanding screen presense in his secondary role. He does well
to combat Pitt's star quality and is perfect in doing what a sidekick
should do in a movie without a real antagonist, give the star someone to
play against. 
Overall we have a film that either gave up halfway through shooting,
or never aspired to be better than average. It is a textbook walk through
a time in a man's life that is not profound nor realistic. The true
stories here, about a man changing and a culture collapsing, are simply
vehicles to get us to an ending. 
The ultimate fault for this lies in the writing. This is a well
meaning film created as a Hollywood story book. Such topics as this
deserve a more thoughtful and careful examination rather than a once over
with a 35 millimeter camera and a box of words. 
