Authors
Chris Loar
Number of Reviews
17

Title
Review for Duoluo tianshi (1995)
In this beautiful, baffling follow-up to CHUNGKING EXPRESS, Wong Kar-wai   
has lapsed once again into near-total disregard for coherence and   
linearity, serving up instead something like a visual symphony.   
 Structured more around allusion and image than character and event,   
ANGELS lacks the tight coherence of EXPRESS, which makes it at once   
astonishing and incredibly frustrating; viewers may find themselves   
transfixed by this vision of Hong Kong and its denizens, even as they're   
baffled by plotlines and elements of story that seem without purpose or   
direction.  Not every moment of the film is compelling, but taken as a   
whole, Wong has once again provided a fascinating statement about memory,   
longing, and human relationships in the urban world.
FALLEN ANGELS borrows from CHUNGKING EXPRESS its essential structure; it   
tells us two stories, both centering on peculiar love affairs.  The first   
shows us a detached gun-for-hire, Wong Chi-Ming (Leon Lai) and his   
partner, known only as the Agent (Michele Reis).  Wong and the Agent   
rarely meet, communicating by beeper code and fax, but they have an   
intimate connection nonetheless:  the Agent maintains Wong's base of   
operations, and takes his rubbish home with her to peruse in private.   
 The second tale shows us the antics of one He Zhiwu (CHUNGKING EXPRESS's   
Takeshi Kaneshiro), a mute ex-con who makes a strange living by   
impersonating shopkeepers after hours and forcing passers-by to consume   
his goods and services.  He develops a relationship of sorts with Cherry   
(Charlie Young), a young, possibly deranged woman recently dumped by her   
lover; He obviously cares for her deeply despite the fact that it's never   
clear that she's actually aware of his presence.
These stories, which sound like B movie fodder, are brought to luscious   
life by amphetamine-paced editing and cinematography that's almost too   
good to believe.  Wong is using his usual cinematographer, Christopher   
Doyle (also noted for his work on the recent TEMPTRESS MOON); their work   
together is consistently distinctive and provocative, and FALLEN ANGELS   
is no exception.  In fact, the filmmakers have outdone themselves; using   
a hand-held camera, a few wide-angle lenses, and complex, suggestive   
lighting, Wong and Doyle have provided us with a Hong Kong that evokes   
the longings and languishings of its inhabitants.   And, unlike EXPRESS,   
which tells its two stories sequentially, ANGELS tells its tales   
virtually simultaneously, driving home the point that Wong always seems   
to be making about life in the postmodern city -- that the urban   
lifestyle does not destroy the cords that tie people to others and to   
their culture, but rather transforms them into something less   
recognizable -- something complex, beautiful, and tragic.
The film's visual style is so suggestive as to be almost domineering, and   
it would make it easy to overlooks some impressive performances by its   
principals.  Fans of CHUNGKING EXPRESS will hardly recognize Takeshi   
Kaneshiro as he videotapes his father or attempts to forcibly shampoo an   
innocent bystander; his hair, his costume, and his demeanor bear no   
resemblance to those of the lonely, noble Cop 223.  But the actor retains   
his appealing, youthful exuberance, and he brings a credible humanity to   
a part that threatens to collapse into caricature.  Michelle Reis also   
deserves special mention; her stoic, detached demeanor dovetails nicely   
with her character's quiet, private obsessions.
FALLEN ANGELS certainly has its weak moments; Wong doesn't always seem to   
know the difference between the quirky and the trivial, and some of his   
subplots are more than a little tedious.  Moviegoers who demand that   
their films make easy sense and tell an entertaining story will probably   
come away frustrated or bored, or both.  But the film remains immensely   
valuable for its virtuoso style and its lusty embrace of urban life.

Title
Review for He Got Game (1998)
Call it "Spike Lee's LAST TEMPTATION OF CHRIST."  Or, rather, of Jesus --   
Jesus Shuttlesworth, Jesus of Coney Island, Brooklyn's hottest hoopster,   
1998's top NCAA prospect.  This Jesus, as the film opens, is experiencing   
the greatest temptations of his life -- making choices about where to go   
to college, whether to move directly to the pros, and how to balance what   
he needs to do for his family's sake versus what he'd like to get for   
himself.
Into this complex mixture of good and evil walks a complex man -- whether   
Jesus' savior or his Antichrist isn't immediately obvious.  This man is   
Jesus' father, Jake Shuttlesworth, played with perfect pitch by Denzel   
Washington.  Jake's out of prison, temporarily; he's been serving a   
fifteen year prison sentence, and he's just been offered a chance at a   
sort of redemption.  The governor of New York is a huge hoops fan   
himself, and he's offering Jake a very special deal:  if he can get Jesus   
to attend the governor's alma matter, he'll see if he can't reduce Jake's   
sentence a little.  Jake accepts the offer, naturally enough, but he   
doesn't seem very optimistic, and we soon see why -- he is, to say the   
least, estranged from his son.  We quickly learn that while Jesus wants   
to do the right thing, he's not at all sure that that includes getting   
his pop out of jail early.
This, in a nutshell, is the setup for Spike Lee's HE GOT GAME --   
basketball movie, father-son story, religious allegory, all in one.  It's   
a little contrived, yes, and a little predictable, certainly; but it is,   
nonetheless, a real pleasure to watch -- energetic, heartfelt, and   
engrossing.  We're immediately sucked in by Lee's obvious love for the   
visual energy of a basketball game; he holds our attention with his   
overall brisk pace and with Denzel Washington, who's never turned in a   
better performance.  He shows us Jake's contradictions and his   
complications; he's a man who wants the best for his son, but also   
desperately wants what's best for himself, and that inner struggle is   
what gives the film most of its emotional resonance.  (Washington's   
strong performance is more than enough to carry his costar, Ray Allen,   
who's strong on the court but could really use an acting coach.)  Lee   
also tosses in a couple of fine bit parts for Ned Beatty and John   
Turturro.
The film's plot isn't as easy to admire, and it has been criticized for   
being a bit rambling.  I'm not sure that's entirely fair; the criticism   
is, I think, due to the mistaken assumption that the film is, first and   
foremost, about a father-son relationship, or about basketball.  It   
isn't.  The game referred to in the title isn't just basketball -- it's   
also about the game of life, where all relationships can be tainted by   
the drive for power, or the love of money.  The film raises the question   
of whether any relationship -- even between a loving father and a loving   
son -- can ever be free from taint, and the answer seems to be no.  But   
Lee's script is nonetheless optimistic, suggesting that a contaminated,   
complicated relationship doesn't preclude real intimacy and caring.  He   
drives this point home with a seemingly disconnected subplot featuring   
Jake's relationship with a neighborhood prostitute, Dakota Burns.  Jake   
buys Dakota's time and favors, but the taint that implies isn't absolute   
 -- the somewhat unlikely couple manage to cultivate a genuinely caring   
relationship in spite of it.
There are, on the other hand, any number of very fair criticisms to be   
made of HE GOT GAME.  Washington's performance is so powerful, and the   
script so slanted in his direction, that the role of Jesus is   
overshadowed -- the script doesn't create a very convincing character,   
and Allen doesn't have the experience or skill to create one for us.  And   
Lee does make some unfortunate choices -- the film's epilogue has a   
syrupy tone that's reminiscent in an unpleasant way of the tacked-on   
conclusion of 1990's MO' BETTER BLUES, and his experiments with film   
stock and lighting might better have been left to Oliver Stone.
But the most serious criticism of the film has nothing to do with Lee's   
technique.  The unfortunate fact is that, while engrossing and enjoyable,   
the film isn't especially challenging or thought-provoking.  HE GOT GAME   
is a world apart from SHE'S GOTTA HAVE IT; Lee's early work, free from   
the demands of the mass market, was consistently challenging and   
stimulating.  GAME has a much more pre-digested feel.  It dissolves on   
the palate, light as a communion wafer; yet someone, it seems, has their   
eye on the collection plate.  No relationship is untainted, certainly,   
least of all a filmmaker's relationship to his audience; but it's still a   
small sin against cinema that the film isn't more challenging than it is.

Title
Review for Sydney (1996)
Starring Philip Baker Hall (Sydney), John C. Reilly (John
Finnegan), Gwyneth Paltrow (Clementine), Samuel L.
Jackson (Jimmy)
Written and Directed by Paul Thomas Anderson
HARD EIGHT is Paul Thomas Anderson's debut feature, and it's
not so different in most respects from his much-hailed BOOGIE
NIGHTS.  True, NIGHTS offers us an Altman-esque sprawl of
story and character, while HARD EIGHT focuses on a small
cast and a simple tale.  But Anderson is repeating himself
thematically, and those who liked NIGHTS' family of porn stars
and low-grade filmmakers will also appreciate the strange, slightly
seedy surrogate family he creates here.  One hopes that
Anderson will start to broaden his horizons a bit, but the fact
remains that in HARD EIGHT we have a competent piece of
storytelling from a precocious young director; the film is a
vehicle for some very good performances and has a pleasant
visual style that hints of better things to come.
HARD EIGHT is essentially the story of Sydney (Philip Baker
Hall), an aging gambler who takes a young fellow named
John Finnegan (John C. Reilly) under his wing, becoming a
stand-in father to him.  We meet both Sydney and John during
the film's prologue outside a dingy roadside coffeshop in Reno.
John is sitting outside in the dirt, very visibly down on his luck.
He's just lost his money in Vegas, and in the process lost the
chance to give his mother the funeral she deserves.  Sydney
takes John inside, buys him a cup of coffee, and offers to help
him bury his mother and perhaps put his life back together --
by showing him how to play the casino system for everything
it's worth.  John, though skeptical, accepts the offer.
We skip over the next two years to get to the heart of the film.
John and Sydney have become friends -- or, rather, family.  John's
missing both his parents, and it's obvious from the get-go that
Sydney serves as a surrogate father to him.  They're an
appropriate match; John is an overgrown child, all puppy-dog
eyes and naivete, while Sydney as played by Hall has a powerful,
relaxed presence.  Hall's an actor of impressive talents, and while
his performance here is slightly uneven, he is perfectly cast; the
lines in his face convey far more than those the script gives him.
He hints at restraint and secret knowledge with every blink of his
heavy eyelids, and he's a delight to watch.  Reilly is also good
here as the weak and gullible son; his lack of experience is
written all over his well-intentioned face.
The only other two characters who matter are Gwyneth Paltrow's
Clementine, John's slightly troubled love interest, and Samuel L.
Jackson as Jimmy, John's disrespectful, irreverent, and slightly
dangerous friend.  Jackson and Hall are particularly good when
onscreen together; Hall's old-school Mafia conservatism -- his
deference to women, his dislike of anything loud or flashy --
contrasts vividly with Jackson's crass, upstartish muscleman
with a gun.
The rest of the story really ought not be revealed; the film traffics
in Sydney's secrets, and it's important to see it the first time
without knowing where the plot is going.  Suffice it to say that
Sydney's relationship with John is more complex than is initially
obvious.
I said the film covers the same ground as BOOGIE NIGHTS,
and the films are nowhere closer than in their treatment of
their morally ambiguous father figures, Sydney and BOOGIE
NIGHTS' Jack Horner.  Both serve as ersatz parents to otherwise
lost young men, and both seem like strange choices for that role,
with their seedy lifestyles and questionable morals.  But Sydney
is a more interesting and complex variation on this theme -- more
fleshed-out than Horner.  For while Horner doesn't see his own
sins -- just his own impending obsolescence -- Sydney knows
how many secrets he has, and needs to pretend to be much that
he is not if he is to serve effectively as John's father.  And that's a
very interesting way of looking at fatherhood in general; for I
suppose that many fathers must feel at times that they're playing
a role they simply aren't cut out for.  Fathers in stories (though
not, I suppose, in the real world) always hide their weakness and
their guilt from their children.  Sydney does this, too, and goes to
extraordinary lengths to keep John innocent of the knowledge of
his new father's sins.  It's not clear in the end if we're supposed
to see this as noble or as base, and whether we should feel love
or revulsion for Sydney.  Perhaps both.
Taken as a whole, HARD EIGHT is far from perfect.  There is much
in both the film's conception and its execution that could have been
handled more effectively, and everything from the lighting to the
dialogue suffers from amateurism at times.  But unlike many
imperfect films, it has a number of perfect moments:  Sydney
sitting quietly at a casino table, chatting in a fatherly way with
Clementine; Sydney drinking coffee, offering a young man a second
chance at life; John and Clementine chatting nonsensically about
rigging the pay-per-view system in the hotel, slowly falling in love.
Anderson is simply superb at creating moments like these; I'm
hoping that his ability to tie these moments together into whole
movies will soon catch up.

Title
Review for Drugstore Cowboy (1989)
_Drugstore Cowboy_ is an odd hybrid.  On the one hand, it's a
coming-of-age story about a man learning to put away childish
things; on the other, it's part of a genre of sorts that turns
drug addicts into tragic icons of failure and missed chances --
the romanticism of the beautiful loser, a revised and updated
style of noir.  And although this film has its failings, it is
on the whole a fine bit of filmmaking that explores the second
genre in terms of the first; that is to say, it tells the story
of a man learning to see through the romanticism of his own
drug noir tale, and coming to appreciate the pleasures and
satisfactions of an ordinary working stiff's life.
The film is told in flashback; the first things we hear and
see are the voice and face of Bob (Matt Dillon) being hauled
off in an ambulance.  Bob ruminates briefly, and then begins
the story of his days as the leader of a crew of junkies who
support their habit by knocking over drugstores, hoping to
score a bit of dilaudid among the stool softeners and
antidepressants.  His crew consists of his girlfriend/wife
(a convincing Kelly Lynch) and another rather waiflike 
couple, Rick (James LeGros) and Nadine (Heather Graham,
cute as a button).  Their setup is rather simple:  Bob 
robs the store while his three comrades create a diversions.
Things are going well until Heather brings down a hex on
the foursome by daring to mention dogs -- one of several
taboos enumerated by the rather superstitious Bob.  And
misfortune does indeed begin to befall the little band; the
heat (in the form of some hard-nosed detectives) begins 
closing in.  Bob's crew decides to take a little trip up
the coast until things cool down, and for a while they
enjoy some success hitting unsuspecting drugstores in 
smaller towns.  But bad luck really sets in when Nadine
makes the mistake of tossing a hat on a hotel bed -- 
the worst omen imaginable.  The events that follow are 
so horrific that Bob decides to go straight and before long
finds himself in a rehab clinic, settling into a drab but 
somehow satisfying routine of work.  And while the closing
sequences bring us back to the image of Bob being taken
to the hospital to be treated for wounds received at the
hands of some of his associates, we can still see him 
smiling a smile of maturity and grace.
The film succeeds in telling this fairly straightforward 
tale in a way that conveys the junkies' edgy experience
without lurching into some sort of cliched psychedelia.  
The truly psychedelic sequences, which could have easily 
come across as ham-handed, are salvaged by Van Sant's 
sense of humor and visual wit (look for a nice homage
to _The Wizard of Oz_).  Other sequences make very 
effective use of disorienting close-ups, which seem to
me to succeed in conveying the loss of proportion that 
our anti-heroes are experiencing.  And, on the whole, 
Van Sant uses his cast well; Kelly Lynch is particularly
convincing.  Dillon's work here is a little more problematic;
he really has a little too much energy and presence to make
a convincing junkie.  And we don't really see his character
descend into the pit of suffering through which he attains 
his salvation; he comes off as healthy and vigorous when he
is supposed to be reaching a personal low.  This makes his
transformation into a straight working guy rather 
anticlimactic; his new self is calmer, more self-assured, 
and mature, but not nearly so exciting.
But then, that may be precisely the point that Van Sant is
making.  Because of course an ordinary person's tale is
not particularly exciting; this is a drug noir film, and the
excitement is out there on the street, running from needle
to needle, not in the machine shop or the halfway house.
What's impressive about the film is the way it undermines
the very genre it initially seems to be a part of; our hero
matures, and comes to see the falsity of his own role as 
a beautiful loser, choosing instead to live as a normal
guy.  It's not an exciting role to choose, but it does
have one virtue -- it's real.

Title
Review for Aguirre, der Zorn Gottes (1972)
Written and Directed by Werner Herzog
Starring Klaus Kinski (Don Lope de Aguirre), Del Negro (Brother Gaspar de   
Carvajal), Ruy Guerra (Don Pedro de Ursua), Peter Berling (Don Fernando   
de Guzman), Cecilia Rivera (Flores), Helena Rojo (Inez), Edward Roland   
(Okello)
There is some evidence to support the theory that Werner Herzog was   
completely out of his mind.  We're talking here about a fellow who once   
ate his own shoe, sole and all, on a bet; who reportedly used a loaded   
pistol to keep eccentric actor Klaus Kinkski from deserting a production;   
and who has been accused of enslaving indigenous populations to assist   
with his location shots.  If a tendency towards instability and excess is   
one hallmark of genius, Herzog certainly qualifies.
Ironically, instability and excess are the very traits Herzog seems to be   
criticizing in his first major feature, _Aguirre:  The Wrath of God_.   
 The title character in this film is driven by obsession -- especially by   
self-obsession.  It would be easy to argue that Herzog's production of   
this film demonstrates the same characteristics; he dragged his cast and   
crew off into the Andean highlands for weeks of filming, reportedly   
spouting rather self-importantly about his art for the duration of the   
shoot.  But while Aguirre's traits lead him to disaster, Herzog's pay off   
for him in spades, because _Aguirre_, though deeply flawed, is also a   
truly great film.
The film is based on an incident that occurred in the Andean highlands in   
the late sixteenth century.  The party of Gonzalo Pizarro, seeking the   
fabled city of El Dorado, sends out a small scouting party, headed by the   
ostensibly valiant Don Pedro de Ursua (a very pretty Ruy Guerra).   
 Disastrously, however, Ursua's deputy is the leering Don Lope de Aguirre   
(a credibly crazed Klaus Kinski).  The rest of the party is assembled in   
classic epic fashion: we have the noble priest, Brother Gaspar de   
Carvajal; the token black man, Okello; the ostensibly noble but   
completely ineffectual nobleman, Don Fernando de Guzman; and a couple of   
damsels in distress, Ursua's wife Flores and Aguirre's daughter Inez.  So   
far, we have what looks like a perfect opening for a rather stirring epic   
adventure, a la _The Seven Samurai_.
But almost immediately, things begin to go wrong -- both with the   
expedition itself and with our expectations that this will prove to be an   
ordinary epic adventure.   Following a deadly attack by local villagers,   
Aguirre takes advantage the confusion and distress to stage a mutiny.  He   
believes that the party can find El Dorado on their own, and set up a   
vast empire, not answerable to Spain.  Abandoning all ties to Spain and   
Pizarro, Aguirre leads his party farther down the river through greater   
and greater hardships, all the while seeking the elusive El Dorado.  I   
don't think I'm giving away too much to say that things end very badly   
for all concerned.
The centerpiece of the story is the figure of Aguirre, played with crazed   
demonism by Klaus Kinski.  He's terrifying in the part -- his lips   
contort underneath cold blue eyes that convey a ruthlessness that slips,   
not so slowly, into insanity.  By placing him and his arrogant delusions   
about himself and the environment he finds himself in, Herzog seems to be   
criticizing the entirety of Western culture, from imperialism to Nazism   
to the American occupation of Vietnam.  Aguirre and those who follow him   
are ultimately destroyed by their own delusions of grandeur; in the end,   
the world they're confronting is simply too large and complex to be   
encompassed by their petty plans and ambitions.  Herzog makes this point   
effectively; unfortunately, to drive home this allegory, he makes a   
number of concessions, particularly in drawing his characters.  The parts   
somewhat underwritten, and Herzog's use of the camera doesn't help -- he   
uses plenty of sweeping shots of the river and wilderness, at the expense   
of close-ups and sustained shots of individual actors.   This is, to some   
extent, and intended effect; it drives home the idea that Aguirre and his   
crew are rendered almost irrelevant by their environment.  But it also   
gives the film a rather cold, cerebral feel that might frustrate some   
viewers.
But despite these sacrifices, the film still makes for compelling   
viewing.  It's filmed with a delirious energy, all sweeping pans and   
unsteady footing, emphasizing the hallucinogenic quality of the   
expedition and Aguirre's slide into madness.  The colors are striking,   
sometimes lurid, and the scenery is just exquisite.  And the structure of   
the tale itself, with its allusions to the very heroic epics which it is   
in fact critiquing, makes the film more than watchable.  We can't   
identify with the characters, but we recognize the story well enough to   
be carried along until it's too late for us to back out.  We're tricked   
into following a story that promises to be glibly satisfying, and by the   
time we realize what we're in for, it's already too late.

Title
Review for Amistad (1997)
Directed by Steven Spielberg
Starring Morgan Freeman (Theodore Joadson), Anthony Hopkins
(John Quincy Adams), Matthew McConaughey (Baldwin), Djimon
Hounsou (Cinque), Nigel Hawthorne (Martin Van Buren), David
Paymer (Secretary Forsyth), Pete Postlethwaite (Holabird),
and Stellan Skarsgard (Tappan)
I went to see _Amistad_ expecting, from the reviews I'd read,
to find a film that was morally uncomplex, self-satisfied and
self-congratulatory, but nonetheless a well-told tale in the 
Spieldbergian tradition -- polished, well-acted, shining like a
new penny.  What I found surprised me on all counts.  For while
the film certainly has a self-satisfied tone, all aglitter with
pride in the traditions of the American legal system, there is 
more at work -- a happy depiction of cross-cultural respect and
understanding, certainly idealized and unrealistic but optimistic 
in a way a really self-satisfied tale can never be.  At the same 
time, the storytelling here is often severely disappointing; just 
enough of really fine filmmaking comes through to make us wish for 
more.  The film is, ironically, neither ill-intentioned nor
especially well-crafted.
The film, as most everyone probably knows by now, deals with an 
unjustly obscure event in our nation's history -- a slave revolt
aboard a ship (the _Amistad_) carrying recently-captured African 
slaves to the new world.  The film opens just as the revolt is 
about to begin; we watch as the leader of the revolt, Cinque
(portrayed with astonishing charisma by West African actor Djimon 
Hounsou) pries free from his chains and frees his fellow captives.
The prisoners take control of the ship, slaying most of their
captors in the process, and attempt to take the ship back to
Africa.  But their captors succeed in tricking them, and the
ship winds up off the coast of New England, where the Africans
are captured and put on trial for the murder of their captors --
and, more importantly, for their status.  For it's not clear
whether the Africans are legally property or free citizens,
a legal question first seized on by their lawyer, Baldwin
(Matthew McConaughey).  Working with a free black abolitionist
(Morgan Freeman), Baldwin works to establish a rapport with
Cinque, while trying to secure the expert legal support of the
once-brilliant attorney and former President John Quincy Adams
(Anthony Hopkins).
What follows is several hours of, essentially, a courtroom drama,
which culminates when John Quincy Adams argues the African's case
before the Supreme Court.  The courtroom sequences are, for the
most part, overlong and a little tedious, in my opinion.  Much
better are what breaks those sequences up -- the flashbacks which
show us Cinque's capture and some of the horrors of the Middle
Passage, as well as some fine scenes demonstrating Cinque's 
growing understanding of the American legal system, and his 
defenders' growing ability to see him as a real human being, rather
than a mere cause.
It's really not terribly hard to nitpick about the film's failings,
which are numerous.  Neither Hopkins nor McConaughey is especially
convincing as a quirky attorney; both actors' excessive reliance
on gimmicky tics and obvious eccentricities looks flaccid when placed
side by side with Freeman's easy solemnity and Hounsou's volatile
intensity.  And the story doesn't really give any single character
his or her due; instead, it lights on its characters like butterflies,
departing after an instant, leaving a tickle rather than a real
impression.  The plot also does at best a poor job of explaining why 
this case mattered as much as it did to abolitionists or Southerners
or anyone else; after all, the final verdict seems to have little 
enough bearing on the fate of slaves born into slavery.  And the John
Williams score, while fine in itself, feels intrusive and manipulative,
bursting in to cue our emotions in spots where the plot and characters
can't quite carry the moment.
These failings, though, don't ruin the movie, they simply turn what
could have been a compelling, fascinating film into one that is 
merely watchable and engaging.  For _Amistad_ is clearly worth 
seeing for its many virtues:  Djimon Hounsou's powerful performance,
its moving images of racial injustice and revolt, and its well-
intentioned (if flawed) depiction of cross-cultural communication
and understanding.

Title
Review for After Dark, My Sweet (1990)
At first glance, Westerns don't seem to have much in common with films   
noir; they seem to occupy opposite ends of the genre-cinema spectrum.   
 Westerns are all about wide open spaces, and are full of real heroes   
doing heroic things.  Noir flicks are crammed into constrictive   
cityscapes, with depressed midlife men drinking too much whiskey and   
trying to decipher complex plots that sometimes even their writers don't   
completely understand.  But, of course, this opposition is illusory; noir   
is the Western's illegitimate child, and the two genres have fertilized   
and influenced each other in countless ways.  Most obviously, the best   
films in the two genres share the same ur-protagonist, a complex hero who   
is at once sinner and saint.  He is often a mysterious stranger, or at   
least an outsider, entering situations of chaos and restoring a semblance   
of justice and order.
But I've never before seen a film that tried to merge these genres in   
quite the same way as James Foley's AFTER DARK, MY SWEET.  For while this   
film -- and the Jim Thompson novel on which it's based -- has a fairly   
standard film noir plot, all intrigues and lies and ambiguous motives,   
it's got none of the standard visual cues that go along with that plot.   
 Film noir relies on urban settings, sharp contrasts, chiaroscuro, and   
the flavor of night.  AFTER DARK, despite its name, is first and foremost   
a movie of the desert and of daylight.  Filmed in and around Indio,   
California, the movie is about agoraphobia, not claustrophobia, and uses   
emptiness and space rather than density and texture to make its visual   
points.  It's this conspicuous use of the desert that makes us see the   
Western that lies beneath the surface of so many noirs and neo-noirs.
The story revolves around Kevin Collins (Jason Patric, looking hunky).   
 Collins, or "Collie," has a pronounced nervous disorder which gives him   
an unusually sudden temper -- a temper which, combined with the skills of   
a former boxer, makes him a little bit dangerous.  Which is why he's been   
in and out of institutions for a number of years.  As the movie opens, we   
meet Collie on the run from one of these institutions.  Bedraggled and   
tired, he's looking for a lift, and he finds it in the form of Fay   
Anderson (Rachel Ward), a recent widow who offers to let him do a few odd   
jobs around her home.
Fay is a classic noir enigma, a wasted, leggy beauty; not surprisingly,   
it's Collie's attraction to her that gets him involved in the   
machinations Fay's friend of Uncle Bud (Bruce Dern).  Bud is a former   
detective, but he's clearly not on the side of truth and justice.  Uncle   
Bud has a proposition for Collie, though, that might set him up for the   
rest of his life, or so he claims.  He plans to kidnap a wealthy man's   
son -- and, with his inside connections to the police department, all he   
needs is the right man to help him along.  Dern is perfect for this part;   
his performance is gloriously unctuous, and he carries himself with a   
seedy charisma that gives this film some much-needed energy.
The storyline is firmly grounded in Thompson's novel; much of the   
dialogue is culled more or less word for word.  But the novel has a   
punchy energy that this film lacks; the novel ends up as a framework for   
Foley to do what he wants to do.  And what he seems to want is to give us   
a noir that's really a sort of hollowed-out Western.  Fay's cavernous   
house, where much of the film takes place, is missing a husband and   
father; Collie is missing a purpose in life; Uncle Bud is missing a few   
screws.  And it's hard to do a film that's mostly about absence; it tends   
to hollow out the entire project, and indeed, this film is missing any   
real energy or drive.  Which leaves us with a film that's more   
interesting to think about than it is to watch.
Compounding this difficulty is the presentation of Collie.  In Thompson's   
novel, the reader is very much sucked into Collie's consciousness; he   
feels very authentic, and unlike many of Thompson's protagonists, he's   
almost entirely sympathetic.  In the film, we're largely locked out of   
Collie's head; we hear his words as voice-over at times, but (partly but   
not entirely due to the intrinsic limitations of film) it's hard to   
identify with him.  This problem is enhanced by Patric's performance.   
 It's not that Patric is bad in the part; quite the opposite, he's   
surprisingly good -- convincing, enigmatic, complex.  And that's part of   
the problem -- he plays things a little too complex, leaving the audience   
without a solid reference point.  There's a lot going on behind those   
blue eyes of his -- but while Thompson let us know exactly what was   
there, Patric and Foley only provide hints and glimpses.
All of which leaves AFTER DARK as an admirable but not exactly compelling   
picture.  It's certainly a lovely movie to watch (rather less so on video   
than on the big screen, of course); shots of the barren California   
deserts echo spacious interior shots that at times echo Orson Welles with   
their depth of focus and complex content.  The performances range from   
good to excellent, and the writing is vintage Thompson.  But when it's   
all said and done, it's really too airy and spacious to feel very   
substantial.

Title
Review for Dead Zone, The (1983)
Starring Christopher Walken (Johnny Smith), Brooke Adams (Sarah
Bracknell), Tom Skerritt (Sheriff Bannerman), Herbert Lom (Dr.
Sam Weizak), Anthony Zerbe (Roger Stuart), Colleen Dewhurst
(Henrietta Dodd), Martin Sheen (Greg Stillson)
_The Dead Zone_ is an entertaining bit of fluff from the normally
rather more controversial David Cronenberg.  It's taken from a novel
by Stephen King, but it's not the King novel I'd have suggested that
Cronenberg direct; he could have done much more with something a
bit more visceral -- _Salem's Lot_, perhaps.  From what I remember
of it, King's novel is pretty low-key, an effort at something more
internal and psychological; Cronenberg, on the other hand, is anything
but low-key, and the ill-conceived match here yields a film that,
while not exactly bad, isn't terribly compelling, either.
The story is rather faithful to the novel, and revolves around Johnny
Smith (Christopher Walken) who, following a serious injury, spends five
years in a coma and emerges with psychic powers -- the ability to see
the future.  Unfortunately, Johnny doesn't get to see any of the good
stuff that might happen -- he only sees tragedy, impending doom, death,
despair, catastrophe -- that sort of thing.  Johnny, not surprisingly,
isn't entirely happy about all this, and since his visions are
intensified by human contact, he becomes increasingly reclusive and
antisocial, hoping to rid himself of the agony of everyone's eventual
death.  He's is brought partially out of his shell by a young man who
he's hired to tutor; and, before long, he's pried out the rest of the
way by a premonition of world war -- a war that might be brought about
by a Perot-esque politician, Greg Stillson (Martin Sheen).  Johnny takes
decisive action for perhaps the first time in his life, and ends up (I
don't think I'm giving away too much here) saving the world, quite
literally.
_The Dead Zone_ is, as I mentioned, a bit of a stretch for Cronenberg;
it's not especially gory and it's not particularly provocative.  There's
no sign of Cronenberg's usual distortions and transformations of the
human body, and it's visually uninspired -- just another Hollywood
knockoff of a Stephen King novel, when it comes down to it.  There's
nothing especially wrong with that, of course, and Cronenberg does it
as well as anyone; _Dead Zone_ is a competent thriller with a few
frightening moments.
But no one involved in the production is at their peak.  Christopher   
Walken
is convincingly passive when he needs to be, and he manages to look
appropriately twitchy when he's in the throes of one of his "episodes,"
but he hasn't yet developed that signature creepyness that makes him so
much fun to watch in films like _True Romance_ and _Last Man Standing_.
Martin Sheen is, of course, convincingly charismatic, but he's never   
quite
as terrifying as he needs to be.  And cinematographer Mark Irwin (fresh
from _Videodrome_ himself) doesn't seem to have any ideas to spruce   
things
up; there are a few nicely claustrophobic shots, but nothing remarkable.
It's a film to see if you love Stephen King, or are intent on seeing
Cronenberg's entire body of work, or get a special charge out of stories
about clairvoyants.  Otherwise, you can safely give it a miss.

Title
Review for Daytrippers, The (1996)
Starring Hope Davis (Eliza D'Amico), Stanley Tucci (Louis D'Amico),   
Parker Posey (Jo), Liev Schreiber (Carl), Anne Meara (Rita Malone), Pat   
McNamara (Jim Malone), Campbell Scott (Eddie)
THE DAYTRIPPERS is Greg Mottola's feature debut, and it's a fairly   
promising one, full of fine performances and well-written scenes.  But if   
you find the memory of it slipping away from you within moments of its   
denouement, don't be surprised.  The film's plot is loosely constructed,   
and although there is an intriguing interplay of theme and story, Mottola   
ultimately doesn't have enough control over his material to turn it into   
anything affecting or memorable.  But his little micro-Odyssey is   
nonetheless a good trip; it's worth going along for the ride.
The story is rather picaresque in structure; our heroes, somewhat hapless   
suburbanites, take an impromptu trip through the amoral jungles of   
Manhattan.  All this gets rolling when Hope, who appears to have a   
strong, loving relationship with her husband, Louis, finds a love note in   
the form of an early modern lyric poem, and doesn't know what to make of   
it.  Encouraged by her domineering and slightly unhinged mother (played   
with frightening presence by Anne Meara), she decides to head down from   
Long Island to Louis's Manhattan office to ask him in person.  Dad (an   
underused Pat McNamara) drives; Mom, younger sister Jo (played with   
casual quirkiness by Parker Posey), and younger sister's beau Carl (Liev   
Schreiber) tag along for the ride, offering moral support and comic   
relief, as the mood dictates.
When Louis turns out to have taken the day off from work, the family's   
suspicions grow, and they spend most of the rest of the film searching   
around Manhattan for Louis, or for evidence of his infidelity.  This   
quest, such as it is, is the real meat of the film, for as our displaced   
adventurers roam about town, they bump into all sorts of eccentric urban   
types whose concerns are, more or less, intertwined with their own.   
 Everyone's life in the city is all about sex, and about family.  The   
dysfunctional troupe meets up with a son who's hiding his   
child-support-dodging dad from the police; with sisters squabbling over   
their mother's estate, fighting tooth and nail down to the last codeine   
pill.  Hope meets a spurned lover at a party, while Jo meets a man who   
might be perfect -- or might be a clever, manipulative schemer.  It's   
just another day in the big city.
But the real theme here is how the thick glaze of a good story gets   
scraped away by real pain.  Most of our little suburban squadron looks at   
their trip into the city as something of a lark, but for Hope and Louis,   
it's deadly serious.  Mottola has found a great newcomer in Eliza   
D'Amico; she's able to make her face speak louder than her family's   
words, and some of the film's most affecting moments come while we watch   
her face tugging at itself with worry while family glibly froths.
The rest of the cast is also strong.  Liev Schreiber gives a convincingly   
naive performance as a young intellectual without many good ideas; he has   
some difficulty in scenes that require more emotional intensity, but   
then, so does his character.  And Stanley Tucci, during his brief moments   
on screen, is utterly, hopelessly, devastatingly convincing in a part   
that requires him to play a good liar.
At its best, THE DAYTRIPPERS reminds me of recent films that celebrate   
the bizarre way that human lives are woven together in the modern city --   
films like Krzysztof Kieslowski's RED and Wong Kar-wai's CHUNGKING   
EXPRESS.  But here these themes serve more as connective tissue than   
anything else, holding together a plot that might otherwise -- and   
sometimes still does -- seem rambling and pointless.  In the end, the   
film's main pleasures are momentary and idiosyncratic -- the leisurely   
progress of a plot and the pleasantly unpredictable performances of the   
lead players.  These are not pleasures to be sneered at, mind you.   
 Mottola's debut is on the whole a real pleasure to watch, a deft piece   
of storytelling with some moments of real beauty and passion.   

Title
Review for Great Expectations (1998)
Starring Ethan Hawke (Finnegan Bell), Gwyneth Paltrow (Estella),
Hank Azaria (Walter Plane), Chris Cooper (Joe), Anne Bancroft
(Ms. Dinsmoor), Robert De Niro (Lustig)
Sympathetic press to the contrary notwithstanding, this film is
really just awful -- not merely flawed, but a really lousy piece
of filmmaking.  Its awfulness is made all the worse because it
feels slightly smug, as though it thinks it's important, artsy --
an achievement.  And that's a serious problem, because with this
sense of its own importance, it brings in all sorts of art film
baggage to call attention to itself -- expressionist lighting,
slow, laborious dialogue, overacting.  it leaves us with a mess
that's really only watchable because of its absurdity; one can
sit back and admire the scenery (and there is some lovely scenery)
without feeling the pressure of having a real cinematic
experience.
The story is, of course, loosely based on the novel by Charles
Dickens.  Like the novel, it opens with an initially frightening
encounter between an impoverished child (Finnegan Bell, played
here by Jeremy James Kissner) and an escaped criminal, Lustig
(Robert De Niro).  Finn is an orphan, and lives with his sister
and her husband in a squalid little town in Florida -- but he
has dreams of being an important artist one day.  He is
accosted by Lustig one afternoon while he's sitting in a small
rowboat in the bay, drawing pictures of birds and fish.  Lustig
emerges abruptly from underwater and induces Finn to fetch him
some bolt cutters and food.  Finn does as he's asked, and what's
more, he distinguishes himself by bringing along some whiskey.
Finn also goes above and beyond the call a bit later; as he
tries to help Lustig escape, his boat is accosted by a police
boat.  Lustig abandons ship -- and Finn, instead of simply
fleeing with the police, tosses the escapee a life jacket.
De Niro is fairly effective in this sequence (though it's
hardly outstanding work), and Kissner makes a fair showing;
so far so good.
Things go downhill fairly quickly, however, when we move to the
next sequence -- young Finn's first encounter with Estella (Raquel
Beaudene) and her crazed but affluent guardian, Miss Dinsmoor (Anne
Bancroft).  Estella and Miss Dinsmoor live in a decrepit old mansion
by themselves; Finn meets Estella while his own guardian is doing
some sort of delivery there.  Estella seems to take a reluctant
interest in Finn at first glance -- leading Miss Dinsmoor to invite
him to visit on a weekly basis, which he does for many, many years.
The visuals in this sequence are striking -- both the exterior and
the interior of Miss Dinsmoor's mansion are lavishly created and
well-filmed, which makes the dramatic flaccidly of these scenes
stand out all the more.  The weak link here is Bancroft's
performance, which is outlandish and laughable rather than sinister,
which seems to be what Cuaron was shooting for.  She prances about
to various versions of "Besame Mucho," occasionally muttering
things like "shika-boom" and fondling young Finn in a rather
suggestive way.  She also finds time to issue a warning to Finn:
"Don't fall for her.  She'll only hurt you."
Unfortunately for him and for us, Finn doesn't seem to listen, so
we get another 90 minutes or so of what is, more or less, a love
story.  We jump ahead a few years to watch Finn as a young man (a
slack-jawed Ethan Hawke) get teased, then summarily dumped by
Estella (an icy Gwyneth Paltrow).  Finn is heartbroken, and gives
up on his dreams -- of becoming an artist, and of ever escaping
the poverty of his community.  He stays there, learning to accept
his fate, when a lawyer appears on his doorstep, offering him a
ticket to the New York, art world -- money and a gallery show, a
gift from an anonymous donor.  Finn accepts what he assumes is
Miss Dinsmoor's generosity and heads north, where he finds a
receptive audience for his work.  He also finds Estella, on the
cusp of an engagement; he manages to seduce her, but the
seduction doesn't take, and she again moves out of his life.
I won't reveal the ending here, in case there's someone out
there who didn't have to read the Dickens novel in high school;
suffice it to say, everything wraps itself up in a rather
Dickinsian way.
Throughout it all, we're subjected to acting that ranges from
ridiculously overdone (Bancroft) to unreadably passive (Paltrow)
to aimless (Hawke).  Hawke and Paltrow, both fairly sexy
commodities in their own right, don't really seem to turn each
other on; they never manage to work up any credible chemistry.
The script is bland and directionless.  In the end, all we're
really left with are some fine visuals by Emmanuel Lubezki
(known for his work in _Like Water for Chocolate_ and _A Walk
in the Clouds) and some impressive artwork by Francesco Clemente
(who creates all the work attributed to Finn).  These are no
small pleasures, and if you're in the mood for a purely visual
experience, this film does have something to offer you.  I'd
recommend bringing along your Sony Discman and a pair of
headphones, though.

Title
Review for Good Will Hunting (1997)
Directed by Gus Van Sant, Jr.
Starring Matt Damon (Will Hunting), Robin Williams (Sean McGuire),
Ben Affleck (Chuckie), Minnie Driver (Skylar)
Gus Van Sant is known for his quirky, bold, experimental features.
This film is a break with that tradition; what we've got in _Good Will
Hunting_ is a much slicker, more commercially viable film than I've
seen from him before.  In fact, he's made a film that could easily
have been hackneyed, we've seen it so many times -- the rebellious
youth tamed by his respect for an older, experienced man. Filmgoers
hoping for the verve and originality of _Drugstore Cowboy_ or My Own
Private Idaho_ will likely be disappointed.  But Van Sant proves with
this picture that he can do something more mainstream and palatable
with not just competence, but with a certain level of energy and
enthusiasm.  We have certainly seen this story before, but it's
been a while since we've seen it told this well.
Will Hunting (Matt Damon) is a walking contradiction.  A young tough guy
from the wrong side of Boston, he spends his days roaming the streets
with his buddies, looking for trouble.  His nights, though, are spent
reading history and philosophy, and taking time out from his job as a
janitor at MIT to solve math problems that baffle Nobel Laureates.  Will
is a math genius with an eidetic memory; he is also an angry young man
who is on his way to a prison term when he is discovered by a Lambeau, 
a brilliant mathematician (played passably by Stellan Skarsgard), who
secures Will's release, on the condition that the two of them work
together -- and that Will agrees to see a therapist.
This last point is tricky, since Will is uncooperative, defensive, and
too smart for his own good, and runs circles around every therapist
he's sent to until he winds up in the hands of Lambeau's old college
roommate, Sean McGuire.  Sean is a brilliant burnout, a Harvard grad
who teaches at a community college and mourns the loss of his dead
wife.  And, at this point, the therapy starts to go somewhere -- for
Sean is from South Boston himself, and understands that the only way
to make any progress with Will is to win his trust.  Williams gives
one of the best performances of his career here, as we watch him teach
Will how to approach his life, even as he himself starts to awaken to
his own failures and what he needs to do about them.
These scenes with Will and Sean are often simply riveting, and they
alone would provide a perfectly good reason to see the picture.
Williams and Damon are great foils for each other; they bring two very
different sorts of energy to these scenes.  Damon, while not
delivering the film's best performance, has a way of bringing out the
finest in his co-stars; Williams flags a bit when Damon's not
onscreen, while Minnie Driver (playing Syklar, Will's love interest)
and Ben Affleck (as Chuckie, Will's best friend) really shine when
they're playing off Damon.
The film has difficulty holding itself together at times; Affleck and
Damon's script just doesn't have room to tell us everything we'd like
to know about the major characters; Driver's and Affleck's characters
would come off as rather cardboard were the actors not so skilled at
painting character in a few deft brushstrokes.  And the film hardly
compares to Van Sant's best work; the direction and writing, while
more than competent, are hardly making us take a fresh look at what
cinema can do.
Taken on its own, however, the film is engrossing and, at times,
startlingly moving.  And it does something that most films of this
troubled-youth genre don't do: it emphasizes that the most important
thing a person can do is learn to think and feel independently.  Too
many stories ask us to believe that rebellious youth should learn to
play by the rules; this one tells us that we should all be rebels --
but need to learn how to break only those rules that lie between us
and what we want.  Damon, Affleck, and Van Sant are telling us that
the cure for the rebel without a cause is not to stop rebelling; it's
to teach that rebel what a cause is, and let them find it themselves.

Title
Review for Opposite of Sex, The (1998)
The posters advertising THE OPPOSITE OF SEX declare "You'll Laugh. You'll   
Cry. You'll Be Offended."  Frankly, this misrepresentation is probably   
the most offensive thing about this film, which poses as a cynical   
portrait of an unscrupulous teen on the run while striking a tone no more   
jaded than your average Disney picture.  I don't mind light feel-good   
fare, but there's something cloying about this tease -- I like sentiment   
to advertise itself as such, rather than hiding behind an ink cloud of   
fashionable detachment.  That said, OPPOSITE is entertaining enough:  it   
features a nice turn by Christina Ricci (who's transformed herself from a   
hilariously ironic Wednesday Addams into a hilariously ironic late-teen   
vamp -- sort of a low-calorie version of Linda Fiorentino's Wendy Kroy)   
and a slight but clever script by director Don Roos.
As the film opens, Ricci's character, Dedee Truitt, sets the tone by   
spitting on her stepfather's grave -- at the funeral, no less -- and   
things go generally downhill from there.  Dedee runs away from her   
Louisiana home and her crazed mother, planning to crash with her   
half-brother Bill (Martin Donovan, as noble and injured as ever).  Bill   
teaches high school and lives comfortably from the money he's inherited   
from his long-time companion Tom; noble and generous to a fault, he gives   
Dedee the run of the house.  He comes to regret this move in short order,   
since Dedee's first act as houseguest is to seduce Bill's lover, Matt   
(Ivan Sergei) -- and, when she turns up pregnant, to take off for   
California, dragging with her Matt, Tom's ashes, and $10,000 in cash.   
 Bill's troubles are compounded when another of the prodigious Matt's   
lovers, Jason (Johnny Galecki) tells the police and the press that Bill's   
sexually assaulted him.  Suspended from work and heartbroken, Bill takes   
off for California to find Matt and Dedee, with Tom's sister Lucia (Lisa   
Kudrow) in tow, and with Sheriff Carl Tippett (Lyle Lovett) in hot   
pursuit.
All this may sound like standard comic fare, and sure enough, it is.   
 What we have here is a more or less formulaic film posing as a quirky   
independent feature; it dresses itself up in faux cynicism, and leans on   
some amusing self-referential voice-overs to distinguish itself.  It   
shouldn't have bothered; what value is there to be found is almost buried   
beneath the gimmicks and tricks.  Its primary virtue is, in fact,   
something so simple as a first-rate cast.  Ricci, as I've said, is all   
grown up now, but her character isn't; she's still a kid inside a grownup   
persona, and Ricci delivers that nuance perfectly.  This is also the best   
work we've seen from Lisa Kudrow; with a few tweaks to her FRIENDS   
persona, the ditz is gone, replaced by a somewhat twitchy, uptight   
schoolmarm.  And Donovan and Lovett, though sorely underused and slightly   
miscast, are as appealing as ever.
It's sad to see this talent working so hard on such an unworthy project.   
 It's not just that it isn't terribly original; I could live with that.   
 It's also that it feels sloppy and tacked-together; that it offers up   
silly stereotypes of gay men, then apologizes for them with preachy   
asides; that it hauls in flat, wooden characters to tie up subplots that   
had no business there in the first place.
So perhaps it's not the film's fundamental inoffensiveness that bothers   
me.  It's rather that the film is too obviously and casually offensive,   
all to no purpose.  Offense can be interesting; I'm a believer in   
throwing rocks at sacred cows.  But this film can't muster up the energy   
to  really upset anybody; telling us that teens are sometimes angry and   
often display a cynicism they haven't really earned isn't exactly news.   
 And where it is offensive, it's unintentional and to no effect, giving   
us rather tired portraits of queened-out gay men and bitter, frigid   
women.  So and watch Ricci blossom, Kudrow mature, and Sergei stand   
around looking pretty.  But don't expect a satisfying story; you'll be   
courting disappointment.

Title
Review for Elephant Man, The (1980)
As David Lynch's first commercially viable film, THE ELEPHANT MAN is an   
odd -- but nearly perfect -- blend of the conventional and the   
idiosyncratic.  What's remarkable about it is that, despite its   
mainstream appeal, it's still emphatically a film by David Lynch; it   
jettisons all of the mawkish sentimentality that might well have burdened   
a film about the travails of John Merrick, Victorian England's Elephant   
Man, and replaces it with a complicated meditation on voyeurism and   
ethics.  To my mind, this is one of Lynch's most successful films; the   
discipline of adhering to a conventional storyline makes his style here   
less solipsistic and self-indulgent than it has sometimes been elsewhere;   
and the credible characters of Dr. Frederick Treves (Anthony Hopkins) and   
John Merrick (William Hurt) make the picture more emotionally involving   
than, say, WILD AT HEART.
The film tells the tale of the unfortunate John Merrick, an Englishman   
afflicted with a rare congenital deformity; he has a profoundly misshapen   
skull, and most of his body is covered with fleshy growths and tumors.   
 He's on exhibit in a sideshow when he is rescued by Dr. Treves, who   
reacts to him with a mixture of pity and fascination.  And because that   
pity is tainted, the rescue itself is somewhat ambiguous; Dr. Treves   
initially assumes Merrick to be an imbecile, and puts him on display for   
his colleagues.  Later, as Merrick begins to open up to his new   
caretaker, the two begin to develop a friendship, and Treves begins to   
introduce his friend to members of polite society.  But that friendship   
and those introductions are also, arguably, tainted; as Merrick begins to   
enter polite society, he does so as a spectacle and a curiosity rather   
than as an active member of society.  Or so Lynch seems to argue.  What I   
admire most about this film is its refusal of easy sentimentality; there   
is no triumph here for Merrick.  Even in one of the final sequences, when   
Merrick attends the theater and, for the first time, is a spectator   
rather than a spectacle, there is no victory -- for immediately after the   
performance, the audience turns and looks to him, and it's HE that   
receives the standing ovation.  For a child of the carnival, there is no   
easy escape from the freakshow.
All this might not have worked were it not for some fine acting,   
including some first-rate work by Hopkins and Hurt.  Hurt, in particular,   
is excellent, even under what must have been fifteen pounds of prosthetic   
makeup; his dialogue shows a perfect sense of timing, and his body   
manages to convey debility mixed with a blend of self-hatred and pride.   
 Hopkins is nicely modulated as the morally confused doctor.  And there   
are some fine secondary parts; the virtually unknown Michael Elphick is   
particularly good as a night porter who profits by humiliating Merrick.
The film is also a technical marvel.  It's shot beautifully in black and   
white by Freddie Francis (a onetime director of horror films; he went on   
to win an Oscar for his work on GLORY), and Lynch's more expressionist   
tendencies are blended nicely with a relatively conventional visual   
style.  The soundtrack, too, makes excellent use of Lynch's trademark   
sound effects; hisses, clanks, and other sound effects blend with the   
dialogue to give the production a rather eerie effect.
Lynch's work since ELEPHANT MAN has increasingly veered back towards the   
arty self-indulgence of ERASERHEAD -- which isn't altogether a bad thing,   
and has resulted in some spectacular films.  (Indeed, some, such as BLUE   
VELVET, are clearly superior to ELEPHANT MAN.)  But this film -- by   
demonstrating that unconventional filmmaking can find a home in the   
bottom-line world of Hollywood melodrama -- is in some ways his most   
important achievement.

Title
Review for Clean, Shaven (1995)
Written and Directed by Lodge H. Kerrigan
Cinematography by Teodoro Maniaci
Starring Peter Greene (Peter Winter), Robert Albert (Jack McNally),
 Megan Owen (Mrs. Winter), Jennifer MacDonald (Nicole Winter),
Molly Castelloe (Melinda Frayne)
_Clean, Shaven_ is a minor miracle of a movie; it's risky and
innovative, and yet it's not esoteric, since the director's aim --
to put you inside the head of a schizophrenic man -- is
immediately obvious, and the occasionally obscure way the
story unfolds is no impediment to understanding what the
film is really about.  This is a film that almost no one will
enjoy watching, exactly -- and yet it's hard to imagine
anyone walking away from it unaffected.  It's not an easy
or a pleasant film to watch, but it will repay the effort many
times over.  Because while it is, on the one hand, a
fascinating and utterly horrifying trip into the mind of a
schizophrenic man, it's also a story about loneliness,
isolation, and the vast spaces that lie between ordinary
people.
The story revolves around the efforts of a schizophrenic man,
Peter Winter (played with astonishing power by Peter Greene)
to locate his daughter.  Along the way, we meet several lesser
players -- Peter's mother, his daughter, and Jack McNally,
the detective who is pursuing him on suspicion of a brutal murder.
We follow Peter as he is released (or escapes) from a hospital
and steals an ancient, decrepit car.  We remain in large part
attached to Peter's point of view, and Kerrigan makes good
use of all the arthouse techniques at his disposal -- eerie
close-ups on mundane objects combine with bizarre sound
effects and half-intelligible dialogue offscreen, and even the
rather ordinary processes of shaving and pouring cream into
coffee become genuinely disturbing.
What makes Greene's performance so compelling is the
fear and desperation that bleed into his every gesture,
each twitch, each blink of a wide, terrified eye.  Peter
is profoundly alone -- cut off not just from other people
but from the stability of daily reality that we all take for
granted.  The film's most startling effect is to take all
these fairly stock film techniques and transform them
into something that helps us experience some of that
isolation and fear.
This effect is intensified by the enigmatic way in which
the story unfolds; the film provides us with nothing
especially stable to cling to, either, except for Peter's
terrified presence.  We identify with him because we
have nothing else to cling to.  Peter, unfortunately,
doesn't have anything to cling to but a damaged
photograph of his daughter.  In his loneliness and
despair, he's drawn to her -- perhaps the only person
alive to whom he feels any sense of connection.
Intercut with Peter's search are sequences, often no less
disturbing, that focus on the secondary players.  These
characters are, in their own ways, no less alone than
Peter, and the fact that they are "normal" makes their
isolation is all the more unsettling.  In various sequences
we see Peter's mother biding her time alone in her large
house; Peter's daughter waiting by herself for her adoptive
mother to pick her up after school; Detective Jack McNally
drinking alone in a noisy bar.  Each of these scenes is
created using the same cinematic tools that create Peter's
reality -- an erratic soundtrack, disorienting close-ups --
and the consistency of this technique emphasizes the
isolation that these characters all have in common.
Ultimately, Kerrigan's emphasis on loneliness and
what keeps us apart feels utterly hopeless.  The
movie creates a feeling that nothing can be
accomplished, that serious human contact -- real
intimacy -- is impossible, or at least rare.  Even the
most poignant emotional connection made between
characters in this film -- the powerful, immediate bond
between Peter and his daughter in the movie's final
scenes -- seems to founder on misunderstandings and
incompatible illusions.  I'm not at all sure I like that
hopelessness, particularly after the film has taken such
pains to show us that we can get inside another person's
head -- that while every man may be an island, we're all
capable of building bridges.  But that's a minor quibble.
The film's real achievement resides in helping us see
the world through the eyes of men and women who feel
alone; in that achievement lies something unbearably hopeful.  

Title
Review for She's Gotta Have It (1986)
At a time when so-called independent cinema appears to be
experiencing something of a renaissance, it's refreshing to
turn back the clock and look at a few _really_ independent
films -- shot, edited, and marketed without any support or
guidance from the major corporate players in the film industry
on budgets that sound more like household budgets than public
works outlays.  These films, not surprisingly, don't always 
have the cut and dried spit and polish tidiness of even a more
low-key Hollywood production, but what they lack in grace they
often make up for in originality, wit, and energy.  All this
could certainly be said of Spike Lee's first feature, _She's 
Gotta Have It_, which he shot with mostly amateur actors for
less than $200,000.  The film has countless flaws -- I certainly
won't bother to recount them all here, since most of them are
immediately obvious and none of them take anything away from the
things that make the film worth seeing -- the freshness and 
energy it draws from its independence and originality.
The storyline of _She's Gotta_ is fairly straightforward; girl 
meets boy, girl meets another boy, girl meets yet another boy,
girl enjoys the company of all three and refuses to give any of 
them up.  In this case the girl is Nola Darling (a charismatic
performance by Tracy Camilla Johns), an independent-minded, free-
spirited graphic designer living in a spacious apartment in Brooklyn
with lots of candles and a bed where she sleeps every night -- rarely
alone.  As the film opens, she's narrowed her stable of men down to
three regulars -- the shallow, narcissistic Greer Childs (John Canada
Terrell); the goofy, juvenile Mars Blackmon (played without much
stretching by Spike Lee himself); and the stable, committed Jamie
Overstreet (Tommy Redmond Hicks).  Nola finds satisfactions in each
of her lovers, seeing them as somehow parts of one whole.  She is
consistently straightforward and honest with all three men about where
they stand:  she will not part with any of them.  As she puts it, "It's
really about control, my body, my mind. Who was going to own it? Them?
Or me? I'm not a one-man woman. Bottom line."  
This, in a nutshell, is the film's plot.  The narrative isn't
emphatically linear; the primary tension is located more in short jolts
and sequences which drive the males' (rather ironic) desire for monogamy
into the immovable force of Nola's libido.  Nola will not give in, not
even for Jamie, the only one of the three for whom she feels a real
adult
love.  The results often walk along that fence that divides comic
territory
from tragedy, as when Nola invites her three partners over for
Thanksgiving
dinner.  The proceedings, spiced up by Greer's hysterical parody of
self-
satisfaction and Mars's comedy of insecurity, are often sharply funny,
but
Jamie's more straightforward pain combines with Nola's earnest desire
for
peace and harmony to season the comedy with genuine pain and a sense of
loss.
In the end, it's not clear that all this laughter and pain add up to a
great
deal.  Lee here hasn't yet mastered his storytelling skills, and the
film's
conclusion, in particular, feels arbitrary -- a cop-out in which
tensions are
resolved and then magically un-resolved again.  But the way Lee
constructs
individual scenes is a real pleasure to watch.  Much of the story is
told in a
series of pseudo-documentary flashbacks, with actors often addressing
the
camera directly to explain their point of view.  This technique gives a
flavor
of authenticity to the film -- it feels "real" -- and gives the film a
touch of
informality and looseness, inviting us to relax and stop worrying --
after all,
we're all just talking here, right?  Indeed, even the film's failings
(the 
rough-hewn acting, the sometimes clumsy writing) enhance this feeling of
informality, leaving the impression of something less processed and less 
sterile than the typical Hollywood market-tested product.

Title
Review for Titanic (1997)
Written and directed by James Cameron
Starring Leonardo DiCaprio (Jack Dawson), Kate Winslet (Rose DeWitt
Bukater), Billy Zane (Cal Hockley), Kathy Bates (Molly Brown), Frances
Fisher (Ruth DeWitt Bukater)
_Titanic_ is twice the film it should be and only half the
film it wants to be.  It's a strange piece of work, half
_Gone with the Wind_, half _Poseidon Adventure_, half
_Pygmalion_, half _Shawshank Redemption_.  That's a lot to
pack into a single movie, even one that runs as long as
this one.
All this to say:  Cameron has tried to make the film of his
career here, and it shows.  He has succeeded, to the extent
that this film has entertained tens of thousands of people,
and to the extent that it will make him rich beyond imagining.
He has failed, though, to the extent that the film he has made,
although impressive and adventuresome, is some distance from
being his best work; in spite of its strong cast and its much-
vaunted special effects, the film is hardly as taut and exciting
as, say, _Terminator_, and in a lot of ways has less substance
and moral weight as well.  You should go see _Titanic_ (if,
indeed, there is anyone left who hasn't).  Go see it -- you'll
have a good-to-great time watching it, for despite its many
failings, its story hangs together better than any blockbuster
project of recent years -- so far beyond _ID4_ and _Jurassic
Park_ as to be almost incomparable.  But Cameron's film is
also a serious disappointment.  Its opening sequences hint
at, threaten us with, even promise us something like artistic
achievement, a meditation on time and memory and loss.  In
the end, we're left with a disaster flick -- maybe the best
disaster movie ever, but a disaster movie nonetheless.
The story is told in flashback.  We open in the present day,
with actual footage of the wreckage of the real-life _Titanic_.
These first scenes are the finest in the film.  We're shown
images of once-luxuriant rooms, and there's something haunting
about the image of this sort of luxury fallen into decay.
Cameron plays on this effect by recreating these same rooms in
lavish detail later in the film.
The explorer who shows us this wreckage (played competently by
Bill Paxton) soon meets up with a survivor of the wreck -- Rose
DeWitt Bukater (played in the present day by Gloria Stuart and
in flashback by Kate Winslet).  Rose is in the present day
something of a bohemian artist, but once upon a time was the
only child of a financially-troubled aristocratic family.  Her
mother (Frances Fisher) sees the family's only hope in marrying
her child to the affluent, arrogant Cal Hockley (Billy Zane)  --
a match for which Rose displays something less than enthusiasm.
Our flashback commences with Rose, Cal, and their entourage
arranging to have their immense array of luggage placed aboard
the ship; we then cut to a sharply contrasting scene, where
the adventurous, impoverished, seat-of-the-pants Jack Dawson
(Leonardo DiCaprio) is busy winning his passage to America in
a high-stakes poker game.  He and his companion win just as
the ship is disembarking, and scurry aboard carrying a single
bag.
These two scenes really tell you everything you need to know
about the two social worlds that Cameron presents here.  The
one, symbolized by Hockley and his class, are affluent, complacent,
sterile, and completely unreal; the other, on display below
decks, is poverty-stricken but very much alive.  Our story here
revolves around Rose's disenchantment with the first world, and
her attraction to the second.  For she looks forward to a life
with Hockley as one might look at a prison sentence; it's only
when she meets and begins to fall in love with Jack Dawson, who
sees life as a gift to be appreciated anew each day, that she
starts to imagine that life might hold some pleasures after all.
Kate Winslet is really just heartbreakingly good as Rose.
She's left me a little cold in the past -- especially in her
recent appearance as Ophelia in Kenneth Branagh's _Hamlet_ --
but perhaps that's just because she's never been used quite so
effectively before.  If Cameron is good at anything, it's in
seeing the ability of his female leads to project strength, and
Winslet projects it here, in a much more convincing and human
way than, say, Sigourney Weaver.  And DiCaprio isn't bad either;
what he lacks in presence, depth, and real charisma, he more
than makes up for with his energy and his winning smile.  He
doesn't really need to portray a character here, anyway; Jack
Dawson is really more of an idea than a real person.  He is
the embodiment of freedom and risk, a symbol of the American
dream, and icon of everything that Cal Hockley is not, of
everything the rich in general are presumed not to be.  In
any case, he and Winslet are fun to watch on screen together;
their chemistry is rather low-wattage, but it has a kind of
pleasant flirty sparkle, and they have a few sequences together
that are genuinely moving.
The rest of the tale unfolds rather like a road map, without
much in the way of real surprises.  This isn't a bad thing; it's
pleasant and intermittently exciting watching Jack and Rose
fall for each other, and it's especially fun watching Rose lose
her inhibitions and let her hair down a little.  Winslet uses her
face very effectively in this transition, moving ably from a
stiff, unsmiling British mask to a face that's unreserved and
laughing out loud.  But while there are a few surprises in the
performances, there aren't any in the plot; the pair fall in love,
Hockley learns of their relationship and becomes enraged, and the
powers that be separate the two by force.
It's at this point in the story that the _Titanic_ strikes that
infamous iceberg; and, at this point, both the ship and the film
start sinking rapidly.  For Cameron can't seem to resist letting
the physical drama of the sinking ship drown out the emotional
drama of what is unfolding between Jack and Rose.  There are
some fine moments between the two even in this final hour, and
the entire sequence works pretty well as a simple disaster movie
sequence, but the two types of action don't harmonize especially
well.  Ultimately, and inevitably, the more delicate dynamics of
the love story sink along with the ship.  The balance is restored
during some fine, quiet moments after the ship goes down, but by
then, for me, it was already too late.  The audience I saw the
film with agreed with me, I think; the theater, which had been
largely silent and absorbed in the story for the film's first
two-thirds, started to erupt in giggling at inappropriate moments
and began to offer snide comments to the corpses on the screen.
Cameron's handling of this whole sequence breaks the spell that he,
Winslet, and DiCaprio have managed to cast, and so my attention
wanders, leaving what could be a lyrical moment at the film's end
looking slightly maudlin, even ludicrous.
The film's other serious disappointment comes in the form of its
much-touted special effects.  I know I'm in the minority here, but
I simply have to say that _Titanic_ is not a better film for having
indulged itself with a bloated FX budget.  Any number of computer-
generated effects in this film could have been created less
expensively and more convincingly with other means.  Many of the
effects in this film look, to me, cheesy or downright shoddy (check
out, for example, what passes for a night sky in the North Atlantic;
whether computer-generated or not, it wouldn't convince anyone who
had ever left the confines of Los Angeles).  And even the best effects
don't really have much in the way of visual artistry.  Cameron is a
skilled director of people; he made his reputation with his innovative
and almost subversive use of Arnold Schwarzenegger in _Terminator_,
and throughout his career I've continued to admire the way he's used
all sorts of performers -- whether straight-up, like Ed Harris, or
ironically, like Jamie Lee Curtis.  He's much less impressive when he
doesn't have actors to work with; it's therefore a painful irony that so
much of his reputation rests on his lavish use of effects.
On the other hand, the score that Cameron has chosen is unusually good
for an epic romance -- varied and energetic, without seeming intrusive.
And he does back up his leads with a very passable group of supporting
performers (though Kathy Bates is really not at her best as the
Unsinkable Molly Brown).
_Titanic_, then, is twice the film it should be and only half the film
it wants to be.  It's at least twice as good as any historical disaster
epic has any right to be, with its occasionally powerful performances
and likable story.  But it never quite reaches the majesty of what is
hinted at in the opening sequences -- the haunting images of the ship's
wreckage dissolving seamlessly into the living, breathing decadence of
the early twentieth century.  Those images will stay with me; and, if
I'm unhappy about what Cameron has done here, it's perhaps only
because he has promised so much more than he actually delivers.

Title
Review for In the Name of the Father (1993)
Starring Daniel Day-Lewis (Gerry Conlon), Pete Postlethwaite (Giuseppe   
Conlon), Emma Thompson (Gareth Peirce)
Directed by Jim Sheridan
Written by Terry George and Jim Sheridan, based on PROVED INNOCENT by   
Gerry Conlon
One of the ironies of the late 20th century -- when the news of the world   
is only a click of the remote away and politics is in our living room   
every night -- is that all that information threatens to drown us.  The   
news can come to seem meaningless, and the political events that affect   
the lives of millions of people often seem frighteningly abstract.  One   
function art can serve -- even in such a pop art form as film -- is to   
humanize those events for us, to make them real, to restore our ability   
to care about them.
That's what IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER does for us, beginning with its   
opening sequence -- the explosion in a Guildford pub that sets the story   
in motion.  The camera shows us some young men and women entering the   
pub, chuckling and laughing.  We linger on this happy scene for a   
heartbeat -- and then, just as the explosion tears the
place apart, the camera cuts to a shot of a young woman's purse.  An   
ordinary object in the midst of extraordinary events, that purse   
humanizes the explosion and sets the tone for the entire film.
The film then skips ahead fifteen years to Gareth Peirce (Emma Thompson,   
in a small but important role), an attorney handling an appeal for the   
Irish convicted of that bombing.  We begin to get the story as told to   
her by Gerry Conlon (Daniel Day-Lewis), who has already served fifteen   
years of a life sentence.  Gerry's story is told to us in flashback,   
beginning with his late adolescence in Belfast, circa 1974.  The   
political climate is hot in the city, with tanks in the streets and   
soldiers everywhere.  Gerry is just a kid (looking a little old for his   
age -- makeup and fine acting can only go so far) who, exposed to more   
bad influences than any rebellious youth could resist, has turned to   
petty crime, stealing scrap metal, trying to dodge both the British Army   
and IRA militias.  After Gerry inadvertently provokes a minor riot and   
seriously irritates the IRA, his father, Giuseppe (Pete Postlethwaite),   
decides it's time to send the boy away -- to London, away from the   
horrific scene that is Belfast.  Gerry isn't troubled by this -- it's a   
chance to score some dope, meet some hippies, and hang out.
Gerry is definitely in the wrong place at the wrong time, however.   
 London is turning into a hot zone in its own right, and it's Gerry's   
misfortune to leave London to return to England shortly after the   
Guildford bomb explodes  -- which, to the British, makes him the obvious   
suspect.  He, his associates, and his family are arrested and convicted   
of the bombing -- despite their protests that they are "not political."   
 Gerry takes up residence in a maximum security cell with his father.
It's this time dwelling in prison that takes up most of the film and that   
packs the real emotional and narrative muscle.  Day-Lewis and   
Postlethwaite both deliver phenomenal performances and generate some   
extraordinary screen chemistry.  Of course, they have a good scenario and   
script to work with; for what makes this film unusual is its willingness   
to step back from the political heat that places these two in prison and   
take a serious look at their relationship, which is complex, as   
father-son relations often are.  Gerry loves his father and yet hates him   
for his frailty; Giuseppe loves his son but is angered and disappointed   
by his rebelliousness and immaturity.  What makes this film distinctive   
is that it is not really a political or legal thriller, although it has   
the makings of either, or both.  Instead, director Jim Sheridan (who also   
co-adapted the screenplay) puts the emphasis on Gerry's development from   
a hippie teenager into a full-grown man.
It's rare to see real character development in a film, and a lesser actor   
than Day-Lewis might not have been able to pull it off.  Lewis went to   
extraordinary lengths for the role, (as he always does); he starved   
himself and had himself interrogated by a real police officer to prepare.   
 How much these antics really help I'm not sure, but I do know that   
Day-Lewis is one of the finest craftsman-actors going; rather than   
allowing his presence and charisma to carry him through (and he has   
plenty of both), he manipulates his face, his voice, and his posture to   
show us what it's like for a young Irish thief to be forcibly politicized   
and aged.  Postlethwaite's role is somewhat less demanding, but is   
handled with equal skill; with his portrayal of Giuseppe he shows us a   
man who claims his dignity in spite of his weakness, and makes us ask   
legitimately what it means to be a coward, and what it means to be a   
hero.
And yet, the film never forgets its politics.  In fact, the very human   
drama in the cell could be taken as an endorsement of a certain kind of   
political rebellion; of righteous anger tempered by reason and the rule   
of law.  But thanks to the skill of the directors and the cast, that sort   
of metaphor is swamped by the human-scale story at the center of the   
film.  It's a fine piece of work; don't miss it.
