Authors
John Robertson
Number of Reviews
7

Title
Review for Twelve Monkeys (1995)
Directed by: Terry Gilliam
Starring: Bruce Willis, Madeline Stowe, Brad Pitt, Frank Gorshin, 
Michael Malone, David Morse, and Christopher Plummer.  
Perfect Person Rating*: The Perfect Person for this film is is a 
person with an appreciation for Terry Gilliam's sense of style, a 
lover of science fiction, and The Twilight Zone as well as the top 
three stars of the film.  The Perfect Person would probably give this 
film a 10 out of 10.  
Twelve Monkeys is a remake of the film La Jetee (1962), and although I 
have not seen the original, I think I understand what it is about, and 
have a new appreciation for it.  Twelve Monkeys has a plot that we 
have seen before, though not often in a Hollywood film.  
Bruce Willis plays a man from a horrible future, where mankind has 
almost been wiped out by a virus which ravaged the earth in 1996.  A 
convicted felon, he is volunteered to perform a mission in the not so 
distant past, to try and find the origin of the plague so scientists 
of his time can create a cure in their time.  
Willis' time travel is slightly off the mark, and he ends up arriving 
in 1991 instead of 1996, and to make matters worse, he assaults a 
policeman and finds himself in an insane asylum after babbling about 
his "mission" to find the Army of the Twelve Monkeys and stop a virus 
that will wipe out humanity in six years.  
Madeline Stowe is Willis' psychiatrist, and Brad Pitt is a fellow 
resident of the insane asylum.  After several days of treatment, 
followed by a return to the future and several trips back into several 
pasts, Willis, Stowe and Pitt's lives become intertwined in a web of 
causality, flashbacks and flash forwards, and questions about just who 
is insane and who isn't.  
All three main actors give surprising performances, particularly Pitt, 
who although not shy about taking non-leading man, non-beefcake roles 
in the past, plays a role that is something of a departure for him.  
Twelve Monkeys is a fine film and I recommend it highly to anyone who 
comes close to the Perfect Person profile above.  Although there are 
holes in the film, what time travel film is without them?  

* Perfect Person Rating: The Perfect Person Rating is an attempt to 
give the reader a new way of understanding my rating.  Rather than 
give a film a score, either overall, or on several attributes, the 
Perfect Person Rating tries to identify the type of person would enjoy 
this movie the most.  Since a reviewer is by nature someone with a 
great deal of experience in what they are reviewing, their experience 
may not be the same as someone who is less informed, less jaded, or 
more attuned to the subject.  Hopefully the Perfect Person Rating will 
go further toward eliminating reviewer bias than a simple rating 
scale.  Comments are appreciated.  

Title
Review for Mission: Impossible (1996)
Starring: Tom Cruise, Jon Voight, Emilio Estevez, Emmanuelle Beart, Henry 
Czerny, Jean Reno, Ving Rhames, Kristin Scott Thomas, Vanessa Redgrave, 
Ingeborge Dapkunaite 
Perfect Person Rating*: The Perfect Person for Mission: Impossible is someone 
in the mood for an action thriller, with a keen mind for details coupled with 
the ability to suspend disbelief for a little while.  The Perfect Person for 
this film would probably give it a 9 out of 10.
There is an episode of The Simpsons, when Marge and Homer go to a movie called 
"The Stockholm Affair", a taut, political thriller.  As the movie progresses, 
Homer makes comment after comment, like:
Misison: Impossible made me feel alot like Homer Simpson.  
Mission: Impossible is a fast moving, stylish thriller, based on the 
television show of the sixties.  Tom Cruise plays Ethan Hunt, disguise expert 
and point man of an expert team of super spies with a reputation for doing the 
impossible.  The movie begins with Cruise and his team of experts performing 
another mission -- only this one goes horribly wrong.
Cruise escapes, only to discover that he's now considered a traitor.  How will 
he get his clean name back?  By performing another impossible mission, of 
course!
There are several different types of scenes to this movie, and they all work 
in different ways.  When Cruise and his pals are performing missions, it's a 
tight suspenseful film, very well-done.  When Cruise is trying to figure out 
what's really going on, it's a cerebral film.  When Cruise is forced to 
abandon plans and improvise, it becomes a top-notch action film.  I have no 
complaints with any of the three types of scenes you see in Mission: 
Impossible, but you do need to be able to follow closely and use your mind or 
suspend your disbelief in turns, something that isn't too easy to do.
Cruise works well as the charismatic lead of the film, though his acting is 
strained at times.  The supporting actors acquit themselves similarly -- 
effectively, but not flawlessly.  Interestingly, Emelio Esteves appears 
uncredited in the film, only to make a rather quick and brutal exit.  
When you talk about summer blockbusters, Mission: Impossible fits the bill.  
It's not a perfect film, but it thrills you, engages your mind, and lets you 
leave the theater thinking.  It's pretty hard to follow at times, and you do 
start to feel like a certain member of the Simpsons, but you could do much 
worse.
Copyright 1996 by John Robertson. Retransmit freely if unedited. My opinions 
are solely my own, and in no way reflect those of my employer. 
* Perfect Person Rating: The Perfect Person Rating is an attempt to give the 
reader a new way of understanding my rating. Rather than give a film a score, 
either overall, or on several attributes, the Perfect Person Rating tries to 
identify the type of person would enjoy this movie the most. Since a reviewer 
is by nature someone with a great deal of experience in what they are 
reviewing, their experience may not be the same as someone who has less 
experience, is less jaded, or more attuned to the subject. Hopefully the 
Perfect Person Rating will go further toward eliminating reviewer bias than a 
simple rating scale. Comments are appreciated. 

Title
Review for That Thing You Do! (1996)
Directed by: Tom Hanks 
Starring: Tom Everett Scott Steve Zahn, Charlize Theron, Johnathon Schaech, 
Ethan Embry, Liv Tyler, Tom Hanks 
Perfect Person Rating*: The Perfect Person for this film is someone who wants 
a toe-tapping, no complications, feel-good movie.  I mean all of the previous 
descriptives literally.  If you want SOME complications, you won't like this 
movie.  The Perfect Person for this movie would probably give it a 10 out of 
10. See the review below for more information. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------- 
That Thing You Do is, as you are all aware by now, the pet project of Tom 
Hanks, probably the most likable guy in Hollywood.  I can just picture the 
scene in Hollywood, as Tom proposed this picture to "the studio people", and 
they all bent over backwards to let him make it.  I'm glad he got the chance, 
because although That Thing You Do isn't exactly high cinema, it's certainly 
better than most things that Hollywood spits out, and it's nice to see nice 
guys finishing where they belong.
That Thing You Do is set in 60s Erie Pennsylvania, home of Guy Patterson, a 
wannabe jazz drummer, and a garage band called the "One-ders".  The One-ders 
are about to enter a talent competition, and when their drummer hurts his arm 
jumping over a parking meter, they call on Guy, the town's only beatnik, to 
help them out.  At the competition, Guy starts their big song, "That Thing You 
Do" much faster than they are used to, but what do you know?  The crowd loves 
it and the band's career is launched.   The song is pretty special, and you 
would have to really not like music to not get your toe tapping to it.
That's about all you need to know about That Thing You Do.  The rest of the 
movie follows their career to the top, and in a way, it's a refreshing story 
never told before.  Their agent lives in a motor home and doesn't seem to have 
two dimes to rub together, but he doesn't exploit them, betray them or do 
anything except make them famous and turn them over to a record exec, who 
doesn't exploit them, betray them or do anything except make them MORE famous! 
 Does that sound surprising to you?  It was to me!
In a way, this movie was almost like a thriller, in that I couldn't predict 
what going to happen until it was all over.  We have been so programmed to 
think the worst of entertainment people, especially in the movies, that when 
everyone, and I mean everyone, is on the level, it seems like a daring plot 
twist.
It wasn't until That Thing You Do was over that I felt a little disappointed.  
I had a vague feeling of "Is that it?"  There is not very much in the way of 
conflict in this movie.  Jimmy, the band's front man, is sullen and 
argumentative, but seems to relent almost instantly.  The final couple of 
conflicts at the end seem almost implausible and completely manufactured -- 
but let's be honest, you needed some sort of conflict to bring this movie to a 
close, and they were in keeping with the overall tone of the movie.  
I think this is a good movie for the Perfect Person rating system, because  I 
think it will be VERY popular with most of the moviegoing public, but quite 
frankly, it will probably drive most reviewers crazy.  
--------------------------------------------------------------------- 
Copyright 1996 by John Robertson. 
Retransmit freely if unedited. My opinions are solely my own, and in no way 
reflect those of my employer.  
* Perfect Person Rating: The Perfect Person Rating is an attempt to give the 
reader a new way of understanding my rating. Rather than give a film a score, 
either overall, or on several attributes, the Perfect Person Rating tries to 
identify the type of person would enjoy this movie the most. Since a reviewer 
is by nature someone with a great deal of experience in what they are 
reviewing, their experience may not be the same as someone who is less jaded, 
or more attuned to the subject. Hopefully the Perfect Person Rating will go 
further toward eliminating reviewer bias than a simple rating scale. Comments 
are appreciated. 

Title
Review for From Dusk Till Dawn (1996)
Directed by: Robert Rodriguez
Screenplay by: Quentin Tarantino
Starring: George Clooney, Quentin Tarantino, Harvey Keitel, 
          Juliette Lewis, Cheech Marin
Perfect Person Rating*: The Perfect Person for this film is Joe Bob 
Briggs.  Although I haven't heard what Joe Bob thinks of this movie, 
my guess would be that he likes it, a lot.  See the review below for 
more information.  
Joe Bob Briggs is a fictional persona who writes movie reviews and 
books.  Though it may surprise some, much of what I learned about 
reviewing comes from him.  To Joe Bob, the most important things in a 
movie are, roughly, 'What's the body count?', 'How many breasts do you 
see?', 'Do heads roll?' and 'Can any person in this movie die at any 
moment?'.  Though Joe Bob traditionally rates drive-in movies, I have 
a feeling that he would really, really like this movie.  
>From Dusk Till Dawn is thought by many to be the next Quentin 
Tarantino film, when in fact, it's really the next Paul Rodriguez 
film.  Appropriately, expect style over substance, even though there 
is a great deal of substance in this film.  One thing that is central 
to this film that I would expect from neither Rodriguez nor Tarantino 
is the huge plot and tone shift that the film makes approximately two 
thirds of the way through.  
The film begins in a typically Tarantino way, with clever dialog that 
you wish would make up the whole movie.  In this case, it's a Texas 
ranger talking with a clerk in a liquor store.  The ranger is so 
gritty, and his speech is so interesting, you wish the movie was about 
him, but as you might suspect, this ranger is not going to be in the 
movie long.  The film is really about Seth and Richie Gecko, played by 
George Clooney and Quentin Tarantino, two men hiding in the back of 
the liquor store with hostages, waiting for the ranger to leave.  Seth 
is tattooed, tough and cool, while Richie is clever, brutal, and a 
psychopath.  Thanks to Richie's dementia, the ranger and the clerk 
meet sudden, violent, and in one case, very spectacular deaths.  Scene 
one ends, the rock music starts, and the opening credits roll.  Up 
until this point, the movie is as good as either Tarantino or 
Rodriguez have ever done.  
Seth and Richie are headed to Mexico with a hostage in their trunk, 
after Richie broke Seth out of prison and the two of them held up a 
bank.  Along the way, they kidnap the family and motor home of a 
preacher, played by Harvey Keitel, who has abandoned his faith.  Using 
the RV and the preacher's family as cover, Seth and Richie make it to 
Mexico, where they are scheduled to rendezvous with a local crime boss 
who will take them in and help them launder their money.  The meeting 
is scheduled to happen at a bar called the Titty Twister, and it's 
here that things soon get out of hand.  
Outside the bar is Cheech Marin, playing a barker of sorts, trying to 
attract bikers and truckers to the bar.  Marin actually plays three 
roles in this film, but this one is the most memorable, mostly because 
his chant uses the word "pussy" more times that anyone would think is 
possible.  
Inside the bar, which seems like paradise to Seth and Richie and hell 
to the preacher, Jacob, and his family; topless women gyrate, bikers 
brawl, and the locals menace in a feast for the eyes and ears.  After 
some scene building, the main attraction, a dancer who is called the 
queen of evil appears and dances for Richie.  Soon, Richie's psychoses 
and some extra attention from the locals lead to a deadly fight 
between Seth, Richie and the bouncers.  After the fight, Richie is 
bleeding profusely from his hand, and this mesmerizes the dancer.  At 
this point, the movie takes the aforementioned plot and tone shift 
that had my jaw dropping to the floor.  
Before describing what happens next, I should say that I have never 
seen a movie make a "left turn" like this.  If you can imagine an 
Ingmar Bergman film suddenly turning into a Zucker brothers' Naked Gun 
movie two thirds through, you can maybe imagine the change in tone.  
The dancer, enthralled with the blood dripping from Richie's wound, 
can take no more, and morphs into a bat-like vampire, attacking 
Richie.  This signals feeding time to the many other vampires in the 
room, and soon you have a supernatural barfight of epic proportions 
underway.  Camp, kitsch and non-sequiters rule the film suddenly, as 
the movie turns into a monster movie extraordinaire.  If you've seen 
Evil Dead, or Dead Alive, you're about ready for the type and tempo of 
the action that ensues, but if you're not prepared, you'll be shocked.
There are more deaths per minute than a Rambo movie suddenly, and it's 
all done with very impressive effects.  
The climax of the movie is as violent and over the top as any I've 
ever seen, and then slowly winds down to tone that was present before, 
literally, all hell broke loose.  Shaking my head, I left the theatre 
awed and puzzled by what I'd seen.  
This movie isn't for everyone, clearly, and so the "Perfect Person 
Rating" is pretty important here.  Obviously, someone who likes their 
movies visceral, with lots of violence, nudity, and gore will love 
this movie, particularly the latter half.  There is more here though, 
both in things to attract people to the movie and in things to warn 
about.  The acting of all characters, but particularly Clooney and, 
surprisingly, Tarantino, is very impressive.  Only Keitel and Juliette 
Lewis seem stiff, and it's easy to understand.  As mentioned before, 
the special effects are very good, as is the score and the screenplay, 
which is the main strength of the first half of the movie.  The main 
reason that someone wouldn't like this movie is the abrupt tone change 
when the vampires make their presence known.  Throughout the latter 
half of the movie, I kept thinking to myself that this movie was 
violating some unwritten rule that a movie should put itself into a 
category and stay there.  Some people might appreciate the daring it 
took to make a movie like this, but others will probably just be 
unpleasantly confused.  
--------------------------------------------------------------------- 
Copyright 1996 by John Robertson.  Retransmit freely if unedited.  My 
opinions are solely my own, and in no way reflect those of my 
employer.  
* Perfect Person Rating: The Perfect Person Rating is an attempt to 
give the reader a new way of understanding my rating.  Rather than 
give a film a score, either overall, or on several attributes, the 
Perfect Person Rating tries to identify the type of person would enjoy 
this movie the most.  Since a reviewer is by nature someone with a 
great deal of experience in what they are reviewing, their experience 
may not be the same as someone who is less informed, less jaded, or 
more attuned to the subject.  Hopefully the Perfect Person Rating will 
go further toward eliminating reviewer bias than a simple rating 
scale.  Comments are appreciated.  

Title
Review for Jing cha gu shi III: Chao ji jing cha (1992)
Starring: Jackie Chan, Michelle Khan, Maggie Cheung, Ken Tsang, Yuen Wah,
Bill Tung.
Perfect Person Rating*: The Perfect Person for Supercop is someone in the mood 
for an action film that doesn't pull any punches (or use stuntmen!), who also 
gets a kick out of campy humour and bad overdubbing.  This film's perfect 
person would give Supercop 10 out of 10.
For those whose first experience with Jackie Chan was this year's Rumble in 
the Bronx (Cannonball Run notwithstanding), Supercop will be both a surprise 
and a delight.  Everything that there was to love about Rumble in the Bronx, 
namely the action, the incredible fight choreography and the charisma of 
Jackie Chan, are to be found in Supercop.  The surprise for people familiar 
with Rumble is that Supercop is actually a much better movie.  Where Rumble 
was something of a comedy that scored many of its laughs through the absurdity 
of the plot and setting, Supercop is a more straightforward action flick in 
the summer blockbuster vein that gives you smiles along the way.
The plot of Supercop isn't too important, but a brief summary for those who 
are interested. Chan plays Kevin, a Hong Kong cop with an impressive resume in 
the martial arts.  He volunteers for a mission infiltrating a drug ring that 
has its tendrils spread all through southeast Asia.  He suceeds, and makes his 
way to the inner circle of the gang along with his sister "Hanna" (Michelle 
Khan), the second best thing about the movie (after Chan himself).
Supercop isn't a typical action movie, and one of the ways this is most 
apparent is the character played by Khan.  Most females in action movies are 
ornaments typically, who slow up the hero, trip when being chased, and maybe 
kick someone in the groin for humour near the end of the movie. Sure I'm over 
generalizing, but compared to Khan that's what every female action movie 
sidekick seems like.  She not only keeps pace with Chan in the fighting and 
humour department, she does her own stunts as well, and at least one of hers 
is better than anything Jackie does.
If you had to find a flaw with Supercop, you don't have to look far -- or 
listen far as the case may be.  Made in Hong Kong, the movie is overdubbed 
into English, but whoa, the audio on the dubbing is REALLY bad.  It sounds 
like it was done through a couple of tin cans tied together with string, and 
that's just not what you expect for your eight bucks. 
Next movie Miramax decides to bring us from Chan's repetoire, I'll buy the 
microphones for the dubbing if they let me meet Jackie. :)
Copyright 1996 by John Robertson. Retransmit freely if unedited. My opinions 
are solely my own, and in no way reflect those of my employer. 
* Perfect Person Rating: The Perfect Person Rating is an attempt to give the 
reader a new way of understanding my rating. Rather than give a film a score, 
either overall, or on several attributes, the Perfect Person Rating tries to 
identify the type of person would enjoy this movie the most. Since a reviewer 
is by nature someone with a great deal of experience in what they are 
reviewing, their experience may not be the same as someone who has less 
experience, is less jaded, or more attuned to the subject. Hopefully the 
Perfect Person Rating will go further toward eliminating reviewer bias than a 
simple rating scale. Comments are appreciated. 

Title
Review for Kids in the Hall: Brain Candy (1996)
Starring: The Kids in the Hall (David Foley, Bruce McCulloch, Kevin McDonald, 
Mark McKinney, Scott Thompson)  
Perfect Person Rating*: The Perfect Person for this film is a devotee of The 
Kids in the Hall, or someone in the mood for their comedy served up with doses 
of satire, sarcasm, and occasionally poor taste.  The Perfect Person would 
probably give this film a rating around 7 out of 10.
Ever since the Kids in the Hall went off national TV here in Canada,
devotees of the group have been waiting for the Kids in the Hall movie to
come out.  Since they stopped making new shows for the CBC in Canada, the
Kids have actually gotten bigger, through reruns on cable in the US.  All
this has led to terrific anticipation from fans north and south of the
border.  With the release of Brain Candy, that anticipation has been
lessened, but not without some surprises.
The Kids in the Hall's television show was sketch comedy, where the five
members played various roles, some recurring, some in drag.  In recent
years, where Saturday Night Live has been terrible, The Kids stood out
like a bright light.  Always on the edge, sometimes over it, it was
always trying new things, and though it sometimes missed a mark tastewise,
it was never unfunny because it was just plain lame.
The same can be said of The Kids' new movie, Brain Candy.  Although I
don't know if I could say in all honesty that it was always funny, I can
say that it was never unfunny because it was lame.  If anything, the movie
was too subdued and satirical and even too artistic for what I had
expected from the Kids.
Plot summary: The company who make and market Stummies (tm) is on the
rocks, and they need a new product to put them back on top.  Combing their
R&D division, they discover that a bright young scientist has developed a
drug that completely cures depression.  They pressure him into giving it
the thumbs up, and then market it as Gleemonex, the drug that makes you
feel like it's 72 degrees in your head all the time.
Of course the drug has side effects, like putting its users into blissful
comas some of the time, but that's not important to a multinational
corporation only interested in greed is it?
As mentioned before, one of the things that caught me off guard about this
movie was the fact that at times it was so serious.  The Kids obviously
made this film to have a serious message, and they deliver it through
satire.  One of the things that I liked about the Kids in the Hall
television show was that they were so over the top, and they have gone
over the top in this movie as well, but not in a comedic sense.  To push
home their message, they went a little too far over the top in satirizing
drugs like Prozac, and didn't spend enough time being farcical.
As usual, the actors play a multitude of roles, and all of them are well
done.  There aren't as many characters from the original series as the
audience seemed to want, but the ones that were there were a welcome
sight.
Bottom line:  If you're in the mood for a clever satire of the drug
industry, or you're a self-professed die-hard Kids in the Hall fan, don't
miss it.  If you're just looking for a good comedy, find a Kids in the
Hall rerun on TV, you'll probably be far more pleased.
Copyright 1996 by John Robertson. Retransmit freely if unedited. My opinions 
are solely my own, and in no way reflect those of my employer. 
* Perfect Person Rating: The Perfect Person Rating is an attempt to give the 
reader a new way of understanding my rating. Rather than give a film a score, 
either overall, or on several attributes, the Perfect Person Rating tries to 
identify the type of person would enjoy this movie the most. Since a reviewer 
is by nature someone with a great deal of experience in what they are 
reviewing, their experience may not be the same as someone who is less 
informed, less jaded, or more attuned to the subject. Hopefully the Perfect 
Person Rating will go further toward eliminating reviewer bias than a simple 
rating scale. Comments are appreciated. 

Title
Review for Twister (1996)
Starring: Helen Hunt, Bill Pullman, Cary Elwes, Jamie Gertz
Perfect Person Rating*: The Perfect Person for this film is a fan of action, a 
fan of Helen Hunt or Bill Paxton, and above all, a fan of jaw dropping special 
effects.  The Perfect Person for this film would probably give it a 8 out of 
10.
Twister tries to be Speed meets Jurassic Park.  I could just be saying that 
because it's directed by Jan de Bont (Speed) and written by Michael Crichton 
(Jurassic Park), but it's not just that.  Twister is a film that uses arguably 
the most amazing special effects of any film to try and put the viewer on a 
roller coaster that won't let them off - sound like a melding of the two 
films?  Well, Twister works well on one of the two levels it attempts, and 
fails on the other.  
There is no denying the power of the visual and audio effects in Twister. 
There were times that even though I'd seen the previews, and prepared myself 
for what the movie would throw at me, I just couldn't believe what I was 
seeing and hearing.  The film's use of computer generated effects, 
particularly the way they can take a broad landscape shot and insert a tornado 
and the carnage it creates was very impressive.  
The other thing that the film tried to accomplish, namely putting the viewer 
on a non-stop roller coaster, just wasn't accomplished.  When there were 
tornados on the screen, the action was the best around.  When the tornados 
were sleeping, so was the audience.  Bill Paxton and Helen Hunt turn in fine 
performances (better than I expected, to be honest), but the plot strung 
around the tornados, particularly the human plot, the characterizations, was 
very weak.
Helen Hunt is a tornado chaser, a scientist dedicated to understanding 
twisters, so families won't be destroyed by the sudden funnel of death that 
drops without warning and without reason.  Bill Paxton is her estranged 
husband, who used to work at her side, but left for some reason to become a 
weather man.  His return to obtain the divorce papers sets the plot in motion, 
as Helen Hunt's character is about to attempt to launch an experimental device 
into the next twister that will let scientists learn more about tornados than 
they ever have before.  
As tornado after tornado appears around the characters, scene after scene of 
energizing action occurs.  But when the tornados leave, we're left with Paxton 
and Hunt attempting to fill in the scientists personal motives, and the 
horrible acting of Elwes (the evil CORPORATE scientist) and Gertz (Paxton's 
new fiancee).
One thing that was amusing but puzzling was the array of NBC actors who had 
small roles.  Some, but not all, were the big guy from E.R, Cameron from 
Ferris Beuhler's Day Off (now on Mad About You), and Sam from The Single Guy. 
 Although none of these people put in a bad performance, you had to wonder why 
they were there at all, their roles were so small.  
One last piece of advice, if you're going to see this movie (and I do 
recommend it if you fit the Perfect Person description at all), is to see it 
in the theater, where the sounds and sights will hit you with the force they 
were intended to hit with.  
Copyright 1996 by John Robertson. Retransmit freely if unedited. My opinions 
are solely my own, and in no way reflect those of my employer. 
* Perfect Person Rating: The Perfect Person Rating is an attempt to give the 
reader a new way of understanding my rating. Rather than give a film a score, 
either overall, or on several attributes, the Perfect Person Rating tries to 
identify the type of person would enjoy this movie the most. Since a reviewer 
is by nature someone with a great deal of experience in what they are 
reviewing, their experience may not be the same as someone who is less 
informed, less jaded, or more attuned to the subject. Hopefully the Perfect 
Person Rating will go further toward eliminating reviewer bias than a simple 
rating scale. Comments are appreciated. 
