Authors
David Alba Jr.
Number of Reviews
2

Title
Review for Godfather: Part III, The (1990)
     It is here.  Yes, after sixteen years Francis Ford Coppola has
decided to complete the epic story of the Corleone family.  For those
who can remember back to THE GODFATHER PART II, we last left Michael
Corleone sitting alone contemplating the fact that he had ordered the
execution of his own brother, Fredo.
     The third installment of the Godfather trilogy takes place twenty
years after THE GODFATHER PART II.  Aging Michael Corleone is trying to
turn his dream into a reality.  His dream has been to make the Corleone
family completely legitimate.  Michael has been attempting to do this
ever since he took over control of the family at the end of the first
film, THE GODFATHER.
     The film opens with Michael Corleone receiving a humanitarian award
from the Archbishop.  Michael is later approached by the Archbishop,
who has been placed in financial charge of the Vatican.  In an effort to
help the Vatican overcome their financial trouble Michael offers to
donate 600  million dollars in exchange for the Vatican's controlling
interest in a company called Imobilare.  It is Michael's belief that if
he can gain control of the financially strong company he would finally
be able to make the Corleone family legitimate.  Michael encounters
problems when several members of The Vatican council refuse to give
controlling interest of Imobilare to Michael because his family is
involved in organized crime.
     Al Pacino returns to his familiar role as Michael Corleone, along
with Diane Keaton who reprises her role as Michael's estranged wife Kay.
Also returning, as Connie Corleone, is Talia Shire.  The film also stars
newcomers Andy Garcia as Sonny Corleone's illegitimate son, and Sophia
Coppola as Michael's daughter.  The fine cast is also joined by veteran
actors Eli Wallach, George Hamilton and Joe Mantegna.  There is also a
small role played by Don Novello who is best remembered as Father Guido
Sarducci on "Saturday Night Live."
     This film is beautifully filmed with splendid cinematography of New
York and Sicily, but it also contains the violence that has become a
trademark of the Godfather films.  The performance of Pacino was
adequate--he portrayed an aging and sick Michael who couldn't overcome
the guilt of having his brother killed--but it is the performances of
Andy Garcia and Talia Shire that really stand out in this movie.
     This film is unarguably not as good as its two predecessors, but I
believe this film is good enough to stand on its own as a continuation
of the Corleone saga.  See this film before someone makes you an offer
you can't refuse.

Title
Review for Darkman (1990)
     When I first entered the theater, I had somewhat mediocre
expectations for the film DARKMAN.  The trailers looked good but I
really didn't know much about the director (I have never seen any of the
EVIL DEAD movies), but when I left the theater I was glad I took a
chance on seeing this excellent movie.  
     The story involves a scientist Dr. Peyton Westlake (Liam Neeson)
who is working on an invention that will create realistic synthetic
skin.  His girlfriend, Julie Hastings (Frances McDormand) who works for
the District Attorney's office uncovers a document revealing some
illegal transactions between Trask Industries and Robert Durant (Larry
Drake).  One night when Westlake is on the brink of perfecting his
invention, Durant and his hoods break into Peyton's lab in search of the
document.  After roughing up Westlake they find the document.  Durant's
henchmen dunk Westlake's hands and face into a vat of acid, afterward
they blow up his lab.  Julie arriving home after work sees this
explosion and assumes Peyton is dead.  Later we find out that Peyton
wasn't killed, instead he was taken to the Hospital Burn Unit with
severe burns over 40% of his body, the worst being on his face and
hands.  After Peyton regains consciousness he escapes from the hospital
and becomes DARKMAN.
     DARKMAN has the ability by using his invention, to assume the 
identity of anyone he chooses simply by using their photograph.  He also
possesses incredible strength and no longer has the capability of
feeling any physical pain, due to an operation that was performed in the
hospital.
     The visual effects in this film were quite good.  I also enjoyed
the directorial style of Sam Raimi.  The performances of the actors were
also very good, especially Liam Neeson.
     The latest trend in films today is making movies about comic 
heroes.  We have been treated to BATMAN and DICK TRACY.  CBS has a
television series called THE FLASH due for its fall season, and the
films CAPTAIN AMERICA, SPIDERMAN and the BATMAN sequel are also in the
planning stages.  DARKMAN had the look of a comic book that BATMAN was
missing and DICK TRACY never achieved.
     So, the next time a stranger bumps into you on the street or your
loved one doesn't seem to be themselves.  You might want to ask
yourself: is it really them or could it be DARKMAN??  I give this film a
rating of +2.
