Authors
Greg Bole
Number of Reviews
3

Title
Review for Sniper (1993)
     Saw an advanced screening of the movie SNIPER last night, and I
have to say I wasn't too impressed.
     This film is about an expert marine sniper, played by Tom Berenger,
who is teamed with a hot-shot-young-no-experience-never-killed-a-man new
partner to take out some drug-kingpins and military strong men in
Panama.  Sound cliche?  That's only the beginning.
     Billy Zane (MEMPHIS BELLE) played the rookie, and never seemed to
get a handle on his character.  He was so contrary and pig-headed in
the beginning, you just wanted to smack him.  Then he goes "crazy" from
the pressure, but seems to immediately snap out of it.  I'm not sure if
the blame should lie with the directing, editing, scriptwriting, or
acting ... but it didn't all come together.
     I think Berenger is a pretty good actor, and he looked great in the
part, covered in camo, face painted, stalking through the jungle with
his high-power rifle ... but once again, his character was given some
pretty bad dialogue, and didn't react too logically to many of the
situations.  There was very little logical development in these
characters.
     My biggest problem with this film was it's tendency to put these
two snipers in as *many* inches-from-death situations as possible.  They
began to resemble G. I. Joes, the Greatest American Hero.  And of course
their almost supernatural accuracy with their guns was called upon to
get them out of far too many close calls.  Now a lot of movies are
stamped out of this mold, in fact that's what made DIE HARD so much
fun: the super-hero avenger type.  So some will enjoy the action hero
heroics, but I didn't think it fit with the nice tension that was built
up in the earlier scenes, and the "real life" feel of covert operations
in Panama.
     A word must be said on the camera work, much of it was very nice.
The jungles of Panama (or their stand-ins in this case) formed a very
picturesque background ... and the drama of speeding bullets was captured
using some nice trick photography.  Many have seen the slowed down
"bullet-cam" following the projectile to its target.  This was used well
in the beginning to show the feverish nightmares Berenger gets when
remembering the moment of the kill.  It was dramatic when used in
flashback...but it seems the director liked the technique so much he
started inserting these shots (pardon the pun) into the real time
action...then it just seemed silly.
     All in all, not a real dog: there is some nice action, good
atmosphere, and pretty photography.  But the plot is pretty lame, the
acting didn't form a cohesive whole, and far too much
thisclosefromdeath heroics.

Title
Review for Philadelphia (1993)
     Wow, what an experience.  Tonight I got to see what I suppose
could be considered the world premiere of PHILADELPHIA, the new
courtroom drama about AIDS by Jonathan Demme.  The official premiere of
the film will be in a week or two (also in this city) but there was a
special free sneak-preview of the movie at the International House on
the campus of the University of Pennsylvania.  The place was *packed*,
people were sitting on the floor about four rows deep in front of the
first row of seats.  It was a thrill to watch the opening of the film,
which consists of shots of this city, and listen to the wild applause.
Plus of course everyone went nuts whenever Penn was mentioned (Tom
Hanks plays a gay lawyer who graduated from Penn's law school and is
dying of AIDS) and when shots near the campus were shown (there is a
very important scene supposedly in a law library that was filmed in
Furness, our library of Fine Arts ... I may have messed up the spelling,
I've never been in there, but it looked great).
     Okay, enough about that, let's get to the movie itself.  It was
very powerful.  It was the first movie that brought tears to my eyes in
a long time.  (I haven't seen THE JOY LUCK CLUB or SCHINDLER'S LIST yet
however) It really was a very fine film.  Most of it centered around
the actual trial (Tom Hanks' character hires Denzel Washington's to sue
his law firm firm when they fire him for having AIDS).  There are also
quite a few scenes documenting Hanks' experiences before and after his
being fired, and some excellent scenes showing more about Washington's
homophobic character.
     The movie isn't strictly about AIDS or about the fact the main
character is gay, but does focus on what these things mean to him and
his family, partner, and friends.  There are problems with the film; I
think Demme went a bit overboard here and there, one scene in
particular turned me off because of its heavy-handed approach, but over
all the movie was excellent.
     The performances were top-notch, Hanks was absolutely incredible
in the main role, Washington was excellent, but his character could
have used a bit more investigation.  Jason Robards did a fine job as
the head of the law firm who took Hanks in, then completely turned his
back on him.  I thought too many of the "negative" characters were
drawn a little strongly negative, but Demme certainly wanted to bring
out all the elements of society's feelings towards gays, especially
those who are HIV-infected.
     The movie really makes you think, and feel, and puts you into the
middle of what I feel is a very important topic.  I give it my full
recommendation.  (Also go to see some beautiful shots of my home city,
one I really feel will benefit from the exposure)  It really makes one
appreciate life and those you care about.  (A big hug to the one I
really care about.)  Go see it and enjoy.

Title
Review for Last of the Mohicans, The (1992)
          Mini review: A stunning action picture with a love story
     weaving the epic framework together.  Breath-taking visuals,
     and pulse-racing brutality.  Day-Lewis immersed himself in
     the role with obvious vigor, and his co-stars rise to the
     occasion.  Not absolutely flawless, but vastly impressive.  I
     rate this film with 4 stars out of five.
     Nathaniel Bumppo, the first American hero, also known as Hawkeye,
Deerslayer, Pathfinder...a mythic figure of epic proportions.  The
screenplay by Christopher Crowe, with re-writes by the director Michael
Mann, manages to capture perfectly James Fenimore Cooper's most famous
character.  The considerable acting and vocal talents of Daniel
Day-Lewis were added to create one of the most stirring screen heros of
recent history.
     Hawkeye is an orphaned white raised by a native American,
Chingachgook, as a brother to Uncas ... those two being the "Last" that
the title refers to.  The intensity of Day-Lewis' performance must be
noted.  And was boosted by his noble stone-faced "family."  The role of
his Indian father was filled by activist Russell Means, adding another
link to the current respect paid to issues of native Americans.
     Mann's background in visual-oriented projects such as MIAMI VICE
and MANHUNTER is still very much evident.  The action of the film is
conveyed through many cuts and hand-held shots.  The beauty of North
Carolina's Burke County in the the Blue Ridge mountains stands in for
the headwaters of Lake Huron, and it is a sight to behold.
     The film moves along at a good clip, and has many intense battle
scenes.  The graphic nature of the conflicts serve as important a role
in this film as did the violence in such films as UNFORGIVEN and THE
DEERSLAYER.  (Allusion intentional)  :^)  The frontier is seen as a
brutal place and the combatants are each fighting strong reasons: greed
and survival.  Still a good deal of the bloodiest acts happen out of
the view of the camera, but the results can be shocking.  These were
hardy men that could survive under such conditions.
     Madeleine Stowe seems to have found a choice female role in Cora
Munro, and she gives a touching portrayal of this strong-willed
heroine.  Cora provides the personal focus that involves the viewer in
this sweeping epic.  Steven Waddington is also a wonderful addition as
the noble but close-minded English officer Duncan Heywood.
     There are flaws of logic and editing, but none that can't be
overlooked with a little dramatic license.  The only other problem was
that the story really picks up right in the middle of Hawkeye's life
with little explanation of who he is until later.  Personally I enjoyed
this because he *is* a cipher, especially to Cora, and we get to know
him gradually, thus creating a greater impact.  The plot is also a
little convoluted, but can be followed with the attention that it
demands.
     Excellent use is made of subtitling the language of the Native
Americans, and it adds a very realistic feel.  The bright orange print
is also helpful in making them "viewer friendly."  The obvious detail
paid to costumes, make-up, and props deepens the reality.
     This movie is a real Oscar contender.  Possibly a shoe-in for
costume and make-up.  (But we'll have to wait for DRACULA and 1492 to be
sure.)  And it will definitely garner nominations in both acting and
production areas.  Will Day-Lewis grab his second Best Actor statue?
I would not be in the least disappointed or surprised.
