Authors
Kevin W. Welch
Number of Reviews
9

Title
Review for Wild Man Blues (1998)
Woody Allen has an interesting job: He makes movies which are, to
say the least, interesting. That does not mean that he himself is
an especially interesting person.
We see a lot of Woody Allen in Barbara Kopple's documentary about
Allen's European jazz tour. Mostly, we see one of three things.
There is a lot of footage of the concerts themselves; there is a
limited amount of film of the crowds and their reaction; and
there is an awful lot of Allen backstage, mostly with Soon Yi
Previn.
The concert footage is entertaining up to a point. New Orleans
jazz is niche music in America, but I'm willing to believe that
it's more popular in Europe, where most forms of traditional
American jazz and blues have been better received. Still, I'm not
a fan and I honestly can't say how well Allen plays (his
instrument is the relatively obscure clarinet).  He certainly
seems competent, and he should be, given the length of time he's
been playing, but I simply have no reference. I also have to
admit that by the end the film I'm fairly sick of New Orleans
music. This is my fault, but I found the music, and the concerts
rather monotonous.
Somewhere in the middle of the film, Wild Man Blues concentrates
on the crowds that come out to see Allen's touring unit. They
seem large and admiring. I also understand that, like New Orleans
jazz, Allen is more popular over there. That's worth knowing;
still, these scenes seemed a little too admiring, too
hagiographic, too fannish.
Then there is the behind the scenes stuff that occupies most of
the movie. Wild Man Blues is the diary of Woody Allen on the
road. He is in every scene, mostly with Soon Yi Previn, and he is
almost constantly talking. He's pretty much the way you would
expect him to be--smart, complaining, a little overwhelmed by
everything. The problem is that you almost expect him to launch
into shtick, and he never quite does. He's never very funny;
instead, he strikes you as stressed out.
The heart of the movie is Soon Yi Previn and Woody Allen, how
they get along and what they say to each other. For having such a
great difference in ages, they seem like an almost normal couple.
If anything, Ms. Previn is the solid emotional anchor of the
relationship, the one who makes sure that Allen doesn't fly
apart. She reassures him some, and spends a lot of time
explaining to him what other people think or what they feel,
which seems to mean that Allen himself doesn't have a good grasp
on the feelings of the people around him.
But this is about all we get to see of the two. There is
remarkably little insight about Allen or his relationship with
Ms. Previn here. We learn a few things--music is the love of his
life (which is easy for him to say because he doesn't have to
make a living doing it), he plays the music he does because
that's what he listened to when he was growing up, and he makes
the movies he make for similar reasons, because he liked foreign
films when he was a kid. Nothing remarkable, really. For the
rest, all we see is Allen talking nonstop, making trivial
observations, complaining, worrying, just going about his daily
life.
The problem is that the documentary style here-the informal
camerawork,  the behind-the-scenes approach, the interviews-gives
the day-to-day stuff a weight that it really doesn't deserve.
When you watch a movie like this for 103 minutes, you expect to
learn a little about the subject, and you just don't get that.
The point of this movie seems to be that you get to watch Woody
Allen for an hour and a half.
The questions left unexplored are surprising. There is no sense
of what the band members feel about all this. They are largely
ciphers, as is Allen's sister, Lefty Aronson, who went along on
the tour apparently as some kind of road manager. The movie never
explains just why this tour happened. Was it the money? A
celebrity vanity project? A chance for Allen to get out of the
country and play in front of adoring audiences while picking up a
couple of awards?
And I get no sense for why this movie was made. Let's face it; it
wasn't for the music, because nobody would make a road diary film
about a generic New Orleans band. The movie is about Woody Allen,
and yet it really doesn't have much to say about its subject,
more than just showing what Allen did for a few interesting weeks
in Europe. Wild Man Blues doesn't take a critical enough look at
Allen to yield any insights or new knowledge about the man. Given
the generally admiring tone of the project (we are reminded many
times of Allen's credentials) you wonder whether this was an
attempt to rehabilitate the man's reputation, or simply the
project of an overly enthusiastic fan.
The end of Wild Man Blues shows Allen with his parents, both of
whom are still alive, remarkably. There are a couple of nice bits
here--Allen's mother would have preferred that he had met a nice
Jewish girl.  He spent his adolescence living in his bedroom and
she doesn't seem to remember anything special about his musical
interests back then. She knew he was smart, but she seems
surprised by his success. Still, she doesn't seem to have a
handle on her son, either. There's really nothing here, either.
Overall, Wild Man Blues is a pleasant but ultimately unnecessary
documentary.

Title
Review for Zero Effect (1998)
The thriller is one of Hollywood's go-to genres and has been ever
since Hitchcock and film noir. The thriller has it all--action,
violence, a little sex and desperate characters who provide the
occasion for a medition on the evil that men and women do. The
thriller can be formulaic, of course, but the genre has a lot of
life in it, as Fargo and A Simple Plan show.
Zero Effect is not a thriller.  Instead, it belongs to a related
genre that you don't see that much of these days, the detective
story. It's short on atmosphere and action but very, very long on
quirky characters and elegent puzzle plotting. It's not L.A.
Confidential or The Usual Suspects by any means. Rather, it's a
well- constructed mystery in the literary tradition of Sue
Grafton or Donald Westlake.
Actually, the literary source for Zero Effect is Rex Stout. Daryl
Zero is the greatest private investigator in the world. Honestly.
He's also a paranoid lunatic without any social skills at all,
who spends all his time in his heavily secured apartment solving
mysteries from his desk and writing terrible love songs. He lives
on Tab and tuna fish eaten straight from the can, and behaves
rudely whenever he does have occasion to meet people. He only
goes out in heavy disguise. He's Nero Wolfe without the orchids
and the gourmet cooking and the clas and the general good taste.
(Zero even rhymes with Nero).
Steve Arlo is Zero's long suffering Archie Goodwin. He's a former
lawyer who hates working for Zero--his extreme quirkiness is just
too wearing--but apparently he finds the money good. Besides, he
feels needed in some deep way. Unfortunately, his fiance wants to
feel needed, too.
Zero and Arlo are hired by a Portland businessman named Gregory
Stark. Stark is being blackmailed by someone who gives him
incredibly baroque instructions for each money drop. Stark feels
strongly that has something to do with a lockbox key that he lost
a year earlier. What's in the lock box he refuses to say. The
ever-observant Zero knows something smells here.
Zero actually identifies the blackmailer early on--it's not
giving much away to say that is is a young woman named Gloria
whom he met at Stark's health club. Zero has a number of axioms,
though, one of which is that any moron can figure out who or what
or when but you need research to figure out why, and research
means following the passion, which Zero does for the rest of the
movie. He solves the key puzzle. Stark gets desparate. Arlo tries
to get out of the life. Zero falls in love with Gloria. By the
end, everything falls into place as a twenty-five year old family
mystery is solved. It's almost worthy of Ross MacDonald.
Bill Pullman plays Zero not as a figure of fun but as a human
being of surpassing skill and terriblle flaws. It's one thing to
say that Zero is the greatest P.I. alive, but it's another thing
to show that he is. The script uses tricks as old as Arthur Conan
Doyle to show Zero's omnicompetence, and Pullman pulls it off
perfectly. At the same time, he makes it plausible that the Super
Detective is also a sad little emotional cripple.  Ben Stiller is
the conflicted yuppie Arlo, aware that Zero needs him but equally
aware that he has to leave Zero if he's going to have any life
for himself. Ryan O'Neal give a weak performance as Stark. He's
not really evil, he's just a rich person who thinks he can get
away with things because he has a lot of money. Kim Dickens
brings intensity to the role of Gloria. She's had a rough life,
as we find out, and she is very serious about what she is doing.
Zero Effect is aware of the mystery genre and shows this by
gently spoofing some of the conventions of the detective story.
It pays tribute to the genre by constructing an elaborate plot
that has no holes, where everything is wrapped up at the end, and
where there are plenty of surprises, even if you've been watching
closely. You should watch the movie carefully, because everything
is significant; the well-written script uses every detail to
convincing effect. Zero Effect is short on action and menace, but
the plot and some of the well-drawn characters make up for that.
This is definitely a movie that any fan of well-written literary
mysteries ought to see.

Title
Review for Deconstructing Harry (1997)
Woody Allen's films have been an acquired taste for a while now and it's
always tempting to think this has something to do with the man himself.
Deconstructing Harry makes the argument that both man and films have become
too hard to take. Everybody knows Allen's personal problems; given some of
the obsessions of this film, a viewer might well wonder, Why bother? If you
do bother, though, you get a surprisingly tough-minded analysis of the
off-the-shelf Woody Allen character.
Harry Block is a successful novelist in the literary sense of the word
(i.e., he doesn't write romance novels like Jack Nicholson's Melvin Udall
in As Good as It Gets). He's a cruddy person all the way through, whose
success comes from rewriting his life as "thinly disguised" fiction. What a
life. Harry has three ex-wives, an alienated half-sister, a long, long
string of hookers and an obsession with oral sex. Harry Block is the most
needy, manipulative, selfish bastard in the whole world. He's as nutty as
Melvin Udall, but Melvin's obsessive-compulsion is downright cuddly next to
Harry's less specific disorder. At least Melvin insults people in new and
original ways; Harry just whines and wheedles and nags and never
understands for a second what it must be like to be anyone but Harry Block.
You get sick of him very fast, and that's the point.
Harry is the end of the line for the classic Woody Allen neurotic Jewish
intellectual. They've all been self-obsessed creeps who date women half
their age, but luckily, they've all had moorings--a job or a supportive
family or something. Harry has nothing but his work (and the writing life
is not the same thing as a job) and unfortunately his work consists mostly
of sitting in a room by himself making up stuff. When you look at it this
way, the world really does revolve around Harry.
The movie has a lot of actors because many of the characters appear twice,
once as fiction, once as reality. This is a gimmick that works, in that it
shows how Harry's mind functions. Far from a distraction, the intercuts
between fiction and real life are good story telling and necessary for
setting up the ending. The technique is disorienting at times, but then
it's probably disorienting just being Harry Block.
There is a plot to all this, involving an award that Harry receives from
the upstate college which expelled him years earlier, and which he attends
with an acquaintance, a hooker and his young son, whom he kidnaps
(thinking, How can it be kidnapping when it's your own son). It all turns
out badly of course. Jack Nicholson found redemption at the end in a the
arms of a woman half his age. Harry Block winds up in a solipsistic
nightmare, which is about where he belongs.
Deconstructing Harry is raw and vicious; there's even a little gun play.
The sordid sexuality and the language really make this an atypical Woody
Allen film. There are words here that you seldom hear in a movie, even
these days, and it wouldn't be surprising if Deconstructing Harry flirted
with an NC-17.
It's a tough movie to take, because of it's uncompromising and relentless
approach to its subject. It lost the critics, perhaps unfairly. Look at it
this way--everyone knows the standard rap on the stock Woody Allen
character. Woody Allen is just jumping in with the newest and harshest rap
of all.

Title
Review for Last Days of Disco, The (1998)
The Last Days of Disco is the middle part of Whit Stillmans
yuppie trilogy, bookended by Metropolitan and Barcelona. Though
it is chronologically the earliest of the three, Disco shows what
happens to the characters in Metropolitan once they get out of
college, and it anticipates the Spanish setting of Barcelona.
None of the three movies have characters in common, of course,
but thats just a technicality.
Whit Stillmans films are all of a piece. The characters are
generically the same brainy, well-off Eastern kids living in the
big city, inhabiting a scene, making witty dialog. Its like
Friends with a brain. Dialog is key, and always wonderfully
written. These people talk a lot, they are smart, often too
smart, and they tend to be rather mean to each other. As such
Stillman is an acquired taste. I like him, but I wouldnt force
him on anyone else. 
The time is the very early 80s. Disco covers six months in the
lives of a handful of post-college kids living and working in New
York. Two work in publishing, one in advertising, another is an
assistant District Attorney, and the last is a manager at a club
based loosely on the old Studio 54. They all have a history
dating back years or at least months, and they all hang around
the club, which is run by a tax-evading scumbag. They work during
the day, go clubbing at night, share apartments, have sex and
talk and talk and talk. 
Now I always like two things about a Stillman film.  I like the
crisp, pseudo-intellectual dialog (a deconstruction of Lady and
the Tramp is hilarious) and I like the characters themselves,
their relations with each other, the way they insult each other
and fall in and out of love with each other and bother each other
until whatever it was holding them together falls apart and they
all go their separate ways with a feeling of regret. I shouldnt
like them, because they are all rich (or at least come from
affluent families) and somewhat snobbish and they all have
certain expectations out of life and are at least a little
resentful of outsiders. Stillman was one of them, by the way, and
thats probably why hes able to portray rich kids so
sympathetically. He doesnt take them altogether seriously, of
course, but neither does he treat them like cardboard cutouts in
a class warfare morality play.  Stillman allows his characters
all the dignity that they deserve, which is not to say that he
finds them particularly admirable.  Theyre just people.
The ending is no surprise, of course; everyone knows disco died,
and these people felt it. Felt it hard, actually. They like disco
and the ending explains a little why some people might actually
find such a thing valuable. It was a stage in their lives and
when it ended they all moved on, to another scene or another
stage, with, as I said, regret, and even a little wisdom. Life
has a way of happening like that.  Highly recommended, if you
liked Metropolitan.

Title
Review for Hurlyburly (1998)
This is a buddy movie, pure and simple. It's different from the
usual buddy flick in that it is based on a play (by David Rabe)
and therefore has a more sophisticated theme and snappier dialog
than, say, Lethal Weapon. Still, it's all about a bunch of guys
who would rather not deal with women too seriously.
Eddie is a talent agent in Hollywood. He's very tightly wound and
does way too many drugs as well, which makes him a pain in the
ass to be around. He talks all the time, mostly to his roommates,
Mickey and Phil, both of whom have been thrown out of the house
by their wives. Mickey works with Eddie in some capacity, while
Phil is a low level actor typecast as the quiet muscular type.
They're opposites in many ways--Mickey is together, smart,
urbane, Phil is an excon and a goon. All of them are very
ambivalent about women (while remaining ardently straight, of
course) and all of them are extraordinarily verbal, even the
inarticulate Phil, unfortunately.
These three fellows, along with buddy Artie who drops by a lot,
would spend all of their time talking and blowing weed if it
weren't for the women that move in and out of their sad little
frat-house existence. There is Darlene, who is nominally Eddie's
girl friend, though Mickey has had a fling with her. Phil is
married and desperately wants to get back with his wife while
seeming to want to strangle her at the same time. There is a
performance artist-cum-stripper who likes to hang around. And
there is a jailbait street kid that seems to like casual sex very
much (these fellows show  bad judgement as a matter of course).
That's the whole movie. A few important things happen, but I
shouldn't give them away. By the end, things have changed and
there is an epiphany and even a little redemption. Mostly,
Hurlyburly is about the characters.
The movie has the star power for a character study. Sean Penn
plays Eddie as someone who is trying so hard to understand the
meaning of everything going on around him and failing miserably
because he is hung up on the words. He thinks that we create
meaning by putting it all into words, by creating verbal symbols,
yet he is too concrete, too literal minded, and as a result he
gets hung up on semantics and definitions. (He actually has an
argument with Darlene over whether she is indifferent or just
doesn't care). Penn takes chances with Eddie, portraying him as a
self-abused loser with barely a shred of self-respect; in one key
scene Eddie is left literally holding his tool.
Kevin Spacey is perfect for the self-contained and knowing
Mickey, unflappable, in control and always ready to joust with
Eddy. Of course, if Mickey is really all that together, you
wonder why his wife threw him out to live with Eddy. He's built a
wall of sarcasm around himself. Ordinarily, you'd think that this
was all defense, that there was a vulnerable and scared Mickey
behind the Flip Mickey. I don't believe so--I think there's
nothing there, or else he's Flip Mickey alll the way down to his
core.
The best performance is Chaz Palminteri as the pathetic thug
Phil. He's trying to figure out what's going on around him and he
puts it all into words, but nothing comes out that makes any
sense. Watching Phil is like watching Zippy the Pinhead. In spite
of the funny sounds that come out of his mouth, he's a character
of extreme menace who might go off at any minute. Whenever he's
in a scene, you're afraid he might kill somebody.
The women in the film are played by Robin Wright Penn, Anna
Paquin and Meg Ryan, each of whom does a fine job in three very
different roles. I don't want to slight their work here, but the
movie is clearly about the boys; these fine actresses have enough
to do but their characters are clearly satellites. The verbal and
inarticulate Eddy is really in love with the verbal and
inarticulate Phil. That's the emotional heart of Hurlyburly.
In the end, Phil tries to make himself a better person and fails.
Eddie learns a little bit more about what life is really about.
Mickey is still Mickey.
Hurlyburly is a good character movie and it's really a lot of fun
to watch all these stars do their work. Still, the movie is
relatively plotless and the movement at the end is all small and
relative. Hurlyburly betrays its theatrical roots. It's very
intellectual, very talky, and not much happens. The resolution at
the end is small and you have to think about it. There's nothing
wrong with that, as far as I'm concerned, but I've seen a lot of
this sort of thing over the last few years. In a way, Hurlyburly
seems like a remake of Glengary Glen Ross, and I'm not sure how
many of those we need. I'd recommend Hurlyburly highly to anyone
who likes this sort of thing, and not at all to anybody who
doesn't.

Title
Review for Price Above Rubies, A (1998)
The popular culture likes to think that community is good, family
is good, all those emotional things that keep people bound to
each other whether or not they want to be are good. If A Price
Above Rubies has a message, its a cautionary one. Be especially
careful of the ethnic group you are born into--it might bite you
hard.
Sophia is married to a young up-and-coming scholar and yeshiva
teacher; they are members of an otherwise unidentified Orthodox
sect in Brooklyn. Sophia's father was a gemologist who taught his
daughter a thing or two, but she has had to give that up until
her brother-in-law, who owns a jewelry store in Manhattan and a
smalller one with an elite clientele in the neighborhood, hires
her on as a buyer. He has a rather novel way of conducting a job
interview and Sophia and the brother-in-law are having an affair,
a one-sided affair conducted mostly on one desktop or another.
Sophia's marriage is barren of passion--she has to subordinate
her needs, especially her sexual needs to her husband, who is
quite aware that God is in the bedroom watching them have sex.
They have an infant son. Sophia wanted to name him Yossi, after
her brother who died when he was ten (and who is still very much
present). The husband instead names him after the Rebbe.
Everything the husband does seems calculted to ingratiate himself
to the Rebbe. The bright young scholar comes across as a brown
nosing careerist.
Sophia is a good buyer, one who can spot a composite jewel ten
yards away. She spots a gorgeous piece that she traces to a
jeweler named Ramon, who works as a jewelry clerk by day and as a
sculptor by night. She thinks he does the most beautiful work in
the world and she wants to take him on, for either her good or
for his. At this point, of course, everybody thinks she is having
an affair with Ramon and she loses everything, absolutely
everything. Such is the price of pursuing your muse.
The ethic of A Price Above Rubies is old-fashioned, in the sense
that 70s-era look-at-me-ism is old-fashioned. It's a
do-you-own-thing movie, where if you are in any sense a creative
person you will find that any number of sacrifices are justified
in the pursuit of who you are. Although I can strongly sympathize
with Sophia, who is almost a dictionary definition of repression,
I find that this message is out of place in the 90s where at
least part of the popular culture celebrates family and origins
and roots and responsibility and another part of the culture
celebrates license.  The movie has a quaint sensibility in its
stance of sacrifice in the pursuit of the self.
Overall, Rubies gives a close look at a deeply religious milieu
of the sort not often seen in recent movies. It looks at that
milieu respectfully, though with full awareness of the damage it
can inflict on nonconformist members. The plotting is a little
too formulaic and some of the characterizations are a little too
blunt and stereotyped (Juliana Margulies as the sister-in-law in
particular plays an authority figure with little depth). The
story relies a little too heavily on magic realism to get from
point to point--the vision of the dead Yossi in particular seems
like a crutch. Renee Zelwiger is good as Sophia, mixing just the
right blend of frustration and edgy competence that blossoms when
she gets a chance to show her stuff. The scholarly husband is a
cypher, however, and that seems to make the choices Sophia faces
too easy. With no sense of what she might be missing by leaving
the Orthodox community, the film has to resort to extremes to
show that her choice has costs. This is director Boaz Yakim's
second film. His first, Fresh, was a far different look at a far
different life and community. Fresh was one of the best films of
the 90s. A Price Above Rubies is just sophomore slump.

Title
Review for Simple Plan, A (1998)
Sam Raimi has directed a harsh, depressing thriller here. Like
all good thrillers, A Simple Plan has a strong caution for us
all: Be careful about wishing for too much money, because you
might actually  get it and then you have to try to keep it.
Hank Mitchell works in a feed mill in a small Minnesota town. His
wife, Sarah, is pregnant. His brother Jake is sort of slow but is
a good, loyal sibling whošs been denied a lot in his life. Jake
is best friends with Lou, the loutish town drunk who isnšt nearly
as funny as he thinks he is. On New Yearsš Eve  the three of them
visit the Mitchellšs parentšs gravesite and by dumb luck (a fox
runs in front of their truck, causing an accident), they discover
a crashed airplane with a corpse and 4.5 million dollars in cash.
They think briefly about turning it in to the cops but they
quickly decide to keep it, as long as Hank holds the money. If no
one comes looking for it by the spring, theyll all split the
money and leave town. In the meantime, they promise to keep quiet
about everything. This is the simple plan, the first of many.
Everything is so simple--at any given moment, they are just this
far from having the plan work.
Nothing works, of course. This first plan unravels almost
immediately. These arenšt the brightest characters ever to grace
the silver screen. By that I donšt mean that this is an idiot
plot that relies on everyone acting very stupid. Rather, these
people are by turns cunning and blind to the flaws in their plans
in ways that are agonizingly realistic. You know that any three
men who found four and a half million dollars would really act
this way. You also know that their plans will unravel, in this
way or some other way, leaving behind a great deal of misery.
Hank always thinks of a new plan, or else Sarah thinks of a plan
for him. Every new plan has a problem, and every problem ends up
with someone getting killed. The movie moves, slowly and
painfully, to what seems like an inevitable conclusion, when
suddenly the plot twists and twists again. You know all along the
broad outlines of  the ending. What actually happens, though, 
heats up the plot more than you would think possible while also
revealing unsuspected depths in the main characters.
A Simple Plan is filmed in winter weather so dreary it almost
seems like a black and white movie. While Bill Paxton as Hank is
a little flat as a reluctant schemer, Billy Bob Thornton nails
Jakešs village idiot role to the wall, and Bridget Fonda is
astounding as a small town Lady MacBeth. The plot is tightly
woven for the most part, though certain key elements seem to rely
on shoddy police work (one professionally conducted autopsy
should bring the whole Simple Plan to a screeching halt, for
example). Overall, though, A Simple Plan is well-made, intense
and harrowing in the extreme.

Title
Review for Pi (1998)
Max Cohen is a paranoid loner in a small apartment jammed to the
gunwales with sophisticated homebrew computer equipment. As such,
hešs both more likable and more dangerous than a gun-obsessed
wacko like Travis Bickle. For, unlike Travis, Max isn't looking
for respect, or a girl friend, or money. He's looking for the
meaning of life, which, based on a reasonable set of assumptions
that he postulates and repeats over an over, he is pretty sure
exists. He almost had me believing it.
Max is a pretty smart guy with a Ph.D. in number theory from
Columbia University. He looks for patterns in pi, which famously
has none as far as anyone can figure (until Max, that is). He
applies these patterns to understanding the stock market. He's
not interested in the money, of course; he just wants to
understand the underlying structure.
Max is also a pretty sick guy. When he was a kid he stared at the
sun for several minutes, resulting in temporary blindness and a
permanent susceptibility to devastating headaches. He does what
he can to treat them but they won't go away, and they plague his
work. He's Icarus, of course, and the movie makes sure that you
catch the reference.
Pi is director Darren Aronovsky's first feature. It's low, low,
budget--filmed in a harsh, overexposed black and white which
portrays Max' state of mind quite well. There are no effects in
Pi, just images, all of them disturbing. The streets and the
apartments look cramped, ugly, dirty and dangerous (and really,
the movie implies that you are much safer on a New York subway at
2.00 a.m. than in Max' apartment at high noon). The music is an
insistent techno dance soundtrack that complements the gritty
visuals, giving the movie a reckless driving energy. Together
they effectively portray Max as a lonely, focused man living a
very dangerous life.
Unfortunately, Max is being chased. By people, for one. It seems
that he came upon a 216 digit number when his computer blew out
during a critical analysis of stock market fluctuations. He
tosses away that number in frustration, but certain people want
it--a cartel of stock market investors, for one, who think that
number holds a key to the rise and fall of share prices. Max is
also chased by a group of Jewish mystics looking for the name of
God. Max resists both groups at first but then gives in. The
financiers give him a military grade computer chip as big as your
fist. The Kaballists show him that the Torah is really a long
string of numbers. (Max gets hooked when he finds the Fibonacci
sequence in the Hebrew words for father, mother and child). Max
decides to give both sides what they think they want.
The human bad guys here are not especially convincing. The leader
of the cartel comes off mostly as cranky and out of sorts, and
Orthodox Jews are not typically a group a screenwriter will go to
when the desired effect is heavy menace. Yet there is something
else out there that is really scary, and its mixed up with that
216 digit number (which Max commits to memory). That's what Pi is
all about at the end.
There are a couple of ways to read Pi. On the one hand, it works
as pure science fiction. It's not billed as such, but director
Aronovsky seems to have read a fair amount of the stuff; I saw,
or thought I saw references to Dick, Van Vogt, Gibson, Stephenson
and a whole raft of others. As sf, Pi is straighforward but
scary, with few special effects and relatively straightforward
violence. Pi is idea-based sf.
If you donšt like the science fiction reading of the movie, Pi
also works as a study of paranoid obsession. A paranoid sees
patterns everywhere. So do conspiracy theorists, religious
mystics and stock market players. A lot of these patterns do
exist, as mathematics shows. When you take these clean patterns
from number theory to everyday human behavior, you risk becoming
a kook. If you can't take a break from this sort of thing (as
Max' old graduate advisor suggests) you become a dangerous kook,
if only to yourself.

Title
Review for American History X (1998)
Racism and hatred are bad, we all know. Still, it can't be as
easy as all that, because hatred and racism exist and even
flourish. American History X is as good a take on the source of
bigotry as you are likely to see.
Derek Vinyard is getting out of prison, where he's served three
years on a manslaughter charge after killing two black gangsters
who were stealing his car. He's leaving prison a changed man,
changed in ways you wouldn't believe if you'd known him earlier.
To bring home that change, the movie weaves the story of Derek's
first day out of prison with his pre-prison life told in
black-and-white flashback, with narration by Derek's admiring kid
brother.
Derek is a racist skinhead with a prominant swastika tatooed to
his chest. He's not your run of the mill gene pool hate monger.
Instead, Derek is smart, articulate, charismatic, courageous and
principled. This is American History X's subversive triumph. You
are repelled by Derek (at least I hope you are) but at the same
time, you see his virtues, you find him admirable in some way. He
is a real man, a standup guy, born to lead, a guy you'd want on
your side under ordinary circumstances.
Derek was recruited by an older white supremicist to recruit and
organize a gang of skinhead toughs in Venice Beach, where the
older white middle class is feeling beleaugured by Hispanics and
Blacks. Derek is effective, terribly effective, and quite
successful at his job. The script gives him speeches and his
speeches are the usual stuff about the white race being dragged
down by lazy immigrants, but there are delivered with hypnotic
intensity. Derek is a compelling leader and you understand
immediately why people follow him.
Then there are the killings. Derek kills the two car thieves, one
of them horrifically. In a stunning scene, you realize that the
man is an animal. It is one of the most fully rounded portraits
of evil I've ever seen.
This takes place half way through the movie. The rest of the film
is devoted to Derek explaining to his kid brother, a
proto-skinhead himself, just why he wants out of the life. The
prison story is another long flashback sequence that tells
another gripping story through a series of harrowing scenes and
graphic images. The story is so well done that at the end Derek's
transformation seems not just plausible but inevitable.
Now that Derek's out of prison, he has to break free of his past
(his release is eagerly awaited by his old colleagues) and save
his kid brother from being drawn further in. He does what he can.
American History X is a white Boyz N the Hood. It is the same
traditional story structure of kids getting in trouble and trying
to get themselves out, and the same edginess. The direction and
writing, by Tony Banks, brings a freshness to the material and
keeps you thinking that anything is hokey or contrived. Edward
Norton gives a remarkable performance as Derek, and Edward
Furlong does well as the kid brother. Avery Brooks is Dr.
Sweeney, the teacher who still gives a damn, and he doesn't load
down the part with a lot of sincere platitudes. Even though
they're on the opposite side of everything, there is still a
plausible bond of respect between Sweeney and Derek. There's not
a bad performance in the movie, and every gangster and skinhead
gives off just the right mix of menace and contempt, while every
family member is vulnerable and worn out in just the right way. A
surprising Elliott Gould plays a minor role as an English teacher
who just gave up on the Vinyard brothers. Amazingly well
directed, American History X is a mine of striking scenes and
memorable images. Besides Boyz N the Hood, it does not appear to
pay homage to any other movie but relies instead on its own
internal logic. That's the mark of a great,original movie, I
think.
