Authors
Gharlane of Eddore
Number of Reviews
4

Title
Review for Species (1995)
     John Von Neumann, progenitor of the computer age and critically
important mathematician on the Manhattan Project, pointed out long ago
that there is a great way to explore the cosmos, even without recourse
to faster-than light travel. You send out self-replicating robot ships
which explore and radio back information.  It may take decades,
centuries, or millennia, but it can be done with achievable
technology, and doesn't require a magical faster-than-light drive.
     In the Fifties, British astronomer Fred Hoyle improved on this
plan by suggesting that it would be better to radio plans for a complex
computer and a program for it; any civilization capable of receiving
the transmission could build the computer, which would then engage in a
real-time dialog with the aliens, exchanging information and
technologies, and hopefully arranging to send back what it had
learned.
     About thirty-five years ago, the BBC contracted with
astronomer/writer Fred Hoyle and writer Frank Elliot to create the
scripts for a mini-series called A FOR ANDROMEDA.  AFA concerned the
reception of a Hoyle transmission, the construction of a huge computer,
the computer's analysis of life on Earth, and its creation of an
apparently human intermediary to facilitate communication.  She was
played with ethereally inhuman perfection by the then-unknown Julie
Christie.  Audience response was so strong that the BBC contracted for
a sequel, ANDROMEDA BREAKTHROUGH, which played to equally high
ratings.
     Dennis Feldman, whose previous credits include THE GOLDEN CHILD,
has never been noted for coherent, well-structured movie scripts; they
start out great, and then disintegrate into a morass of chase and
action, mitigated only by the presence of the obligatory Beautiful
Girl.  Feldman writes good scenes, but has no idea how to tell a story
or write a movie, even with a previous version to use as a model.
     Now, in SPECIES, we have a mundane retread of the ANDROMEDA
plotline, derailed by a preoccupation with removing the clothes from
the leading lady and further ruined by a mediocre attempt to emulate
several recent horror films in terms of splatter, gore, and chases.
     SPECIES features Ben Kingsley, who is completely wasted in a
badly-written portrayal of a feebly amoral scientist.  Forest Whitaker
and Alfred Molina are also served poorly by the script.
     The SPECIES story is relatively simple; we have been radioing
information about ourselves and our DNA out into space since 1971, and
have been receiving answers for two years.  (Note that, in the 1970's,
we really didn't know diddly about the human genome structure, and were
hardly in a position to radio out a set of blueprints for human
beings.  Even today, all we can do is give information about DNA and
how it works, not a copy of human DNA, because we don't have it
analyzed YET.)
     The answers we get from the unknown alien source are plans for
recreating a member of the alien race, and Doctor Xavier Finch, played
by Ben Kingsley, is placed in charge of the attempt.  The script begins
to go off the deep end at this point, when the result is a beautiful
young girl who can shape-shift into any of several ugly alien life
forms.  The first half of the film has something to offer, as "Sil,"
the alien girl, struggles with her multi-form existence, changing from
Beauty to Lizard to Giant Cockroach and back again, all while trying to
understand her own place in the cosmos.  She seems oddly knowledgeable
about human society, with glaring gaps where her social skills should
be.  Her instincts are to mate and procreate, and some of the best
scenes deal with her attempts in this area.  Escaping from her birth
laboratory in Utah, Sil is pursued by a team of drafted civilians with
orders to find her and kill her.  She goes on an eating binge, spins
herself a cocoon, and emerges as an adult, played by Natasha
Henstridge, who goes a long way toward re-creating the sheerly inhuman
beauty Julie Christie achieved in 1960.
     The pursuers:  Michael Madsen is an assassin/exterminator; Forrest
Whitaker is a convenient empath/psychic, just as though the U.S.
government actually had such people on call.  Neither is able to do
much with the writing and directing provided.  Whitaker's role seems
to be aimed at making Whitaker a male copy of STAR TREK: THE NEXT
GENERATION's "Counselor Cleavage."  The other members of the strike
team are played by Marg Helgenberger and Alfred Molina.
     Kingsley and Whitaker are both consummate professionals, too good
to not work to the best of their abilities; but the performances
Donaldson elicited from the rest of the cast are disappointing and
bland, and it is apparent that the direction was a bit weak.
     H.R. Giger's design for the main form of the alien creature is
actually a bit boring when we finally get to see it, although previous
digital effects were done quite smoothly.
     The main fault of SPECIES is lack of originality; it starts out
with a wonderful, albeit borrowed, premise, and then doesn't live up to
it.   All we get are chase scenes and a few nice sex scenes, with a few
monsters tossed in.  There is no buildup of tension and suspense, no
climax worthy of the name; SPECIES is just a sequence of "scare" scenes
stuck together.
     The movie is carried by its chase and sex scenes, but not rescued
by them.  On the other hand, as an exercise in Sci-Fi action/
adventure, it certainly beats the ichor out of JUDGE DREDD.
     SPECIES earns an extra rating point or two for having Ben Kingsley
and Natasha Henstridge on board, but by and large, it's fun only for
those of us who really like this sort of thing.  My personal rating is
three stars, but knock one or two of those off if you don't enjoy
pretty unclothed ladies and bloodthirsty alien monsters.
MPAA Classification: R (Violence, gore, nudity, sex, language) 
Stars:  Ben Kingsley, Michael Madsen, Forest Whitaker, Alfred Molina, 
        Marg Helgenberger, Natasha Henstridge 
Directed by: Roger Donaldson 
Produced by: Frank Mancuso Jr. and Dennis Feldman 
Typed by: Dennis Feldman 
Cinematography: Andrzej Bartkowiak 
Music: Christopher Young 
Run Time: 108 minutes
Aspect Ratio: 2.35:1 
from MGM, opens 7 July 1995

Title
Review for True Lies (1994)
TRUE LIES  -- Romantic Comedy's Finest Hour.   ***+ out of four.
     If you've seen any of the "four-walled" TV ads, any of the "Making
Of" one-hour commercials shown in prime time, or the twelve-foot
posters they're using to cover up some of the buildings downtown,
you're aware of this movie, and you probably already have a good idea
of the plot.
     Since it's a re-processed version of a previous movie script by
Claude Zidi, Simon Michael, and Didier Kaminka, there are no huge
surprises; movie is a long, pleasant exploration of scenes and themes
we've come to expect from any "B" spy flick.   What lifts the movie out
of the ordinary is that James Cameron re-wrote the original version of
the script, got some decent production budgeting, and directed at the
top of his typically excellent form.
     TRUE LIES is not a realistic spy movie.  It's a comedy that opens
with an homage to the Connery Bond films, and then goes even a little
crazier.
     Without giving too much of the plot away, Harry (played by Arnold
Schwarzenegger) is what movies call a spy.  (In real life, a spy rarely
carries a gun, or does anything that gets into the papers.)   Harry
pretends to be a computer salesman who's even more boring than Clark
Kent.   He has a beautiful bored wife, an out-of-control teen-aged
daughter, and his life is disintegrating without him even being aware
that he's spending too much time on his job.
     By accident, Harry discovers that his wife is seeing another man, a
man who seems to lead the exciting life of a spy.   He sees red, and
uses the power of his position to toy with the seducer and put his wife
on the spot, trying to get even in a more subtle way than merely
twisting the lout's head off.
     In the process, he discovers how much his wife loves him and how
much he loves her, and precipitates them both into the middle of a
Bondian nightmare involving terrorists in possession of nuclear
weapons.
     There is great humor throughout; Schwarzenegger's command of comedic
timing has been improving steadily for decades, and his screen presence
has come to project as much warmth and humor as physical power and
threat.  This role is a solid step in his career development, a worthy
sequel to his work in THE LAST ACTION HERO, the most under-rated
children's fantasy since THE NEVER-ENDING STORY.
     Jamie Lee Curtis, normally underutilized in dramatic roles, proves
once again that talent and intelligence can make you simultaneously
cringe and get a stitch from laughing.  In one of her best scenes, her
character pretends to be a hooker dancing for someone she thinks is a
paying customer.  Lithely slinking up against a canopied bedstead, she
loses her balance and does a classic pratfall and high-hauteur recovery
that would get a standing ovation from Charlie Chaplin.  In the hands
of a lesser performer, Curtis' part would have degenerated into a
series of low-comedy reaction shot mugging sequences, but her acting
imbues her character with complete believability; she is totally
acceptable as an athletic housewife trying to cope with an incredible
situation.   Even while you're laughing, her character comes across
solidly, as a real person.
     The producers managed to get the cooperation of the U.S. Marine
Corps for the use of a couple of Hawker "Harrier" jets in the climactic
action sequences; these will rank as some of the best high-tech
suspense work put on film in this decade.   The Director of
Photography, Russell Carpenter, already justly famed for his work on
movies like THE WIZARD OF SPEED AND TIME, may well be up for an Oscar
for some of the things he pulled off in this movie.
     Having a national icon like Charleton Heston suddenly pop up in a
perfectly executed role adds to the richness of the movie; his
character is the consummate quintessence of the movie spymaster, a joy
to behold.
     TRUE LIES has topnotch supporting performances by the likes of Tia
Carrere, Tom Arnold, and Art Malik and Bill Paxton.   Brad Fiedel's
music is worthy of mention, since it's light, imaginative, and
contributive.  (Of course, you may wish to bring ear plugs to wear
during the end credits; like most current movies, TRUE LIES suddenly
develops a raucous "rock" soundtrack during the end credits, completely
out of keeping with the rest of the movie, and *not* the product of the
movie's composer.)
     You won't feel like you wasted your time and your money if you
have to see this one at evening-movie prices.   It's worth the trip,
and the photography and production values make it worthwhile to see it
on a large screen, with a 70mm print.   However, this movie is good
enough that it will play well on any size screen; you're not paying for
just the cinematography.   James Cameron Did Good, and this is probably
the Good Movie this summer.
TRUE LIES    ***+   (three and a half stars out of four)
  A 20th Century Fox release from Lightstorm, starring Arnold
  Schwarzenegger, Jamie Lee Curtis; also starring good direction and
  good script from Cameron, and Russ Carpenter's superb photography.
  Rated -R-, primarily due to language and total body count.
  (But, as "Harry" says during the movie, "They were all Bad Guys.")
This is a positive, happy fantasy, and much more fun than anything 
you'll ever see from Disney.   Enjoy!

Title
Review for Showgirls (1995)
     SHOWGIRLS is the second major outing for the production team of
Pual Verhoeven, director, and Joe Eszterhas, writer.   Their last
effort, BASIC INSTINCT, played like the most sumptuous of classic
Hitchcock, with a dash of raw sex and sensuality that made it come
across with a hit like curry-spiced Tabasco sauce; a dish not to
everyone's taste, but certainly a well-crafted movie.  Possibly that
movie's greatest strength was that the most important events happened
offstage, prior to the movie, during the movie, and after the movie...
and that, after bringing all the plotlines together neatly, it left the
viewer with full knowledge of what *would* happen in the characters'
future, so there was no need to film it.   There was actually about
four hours' worth of screen story there, but Eszterhas found ways to
get it all on-screen in two, by leading his audience into analyzing
what was really going on; and by still holding their interest with
clever misdirection and false trails.
     The major elements that made BASIC INSTINCT work so well are
present in SHOWGIRLS.  We have attractive, sympathetic, but still
highly repellent characters; we have shows for the eyes and the ears,
plotlines that play on several levels, we have beautifully delineated
characters who are drawn from life and very believable, and we have a
story of an innocent (who may not be so innocent) who's trying to play
straight, trying to improve her station in life, who slips into
behaving the way those around her do... but recovers with a flourish,
and quits a winner.
     In this sense, the movie is a bit of a departure for Verhoeven,
who's not known for treating his characters well; but Nomi, the part
played by Elizabeth Berkley, definitely opts out of the game in a
positive way, and we're left feeling good about her future.  This is
not one of the great movies, but it's far better than we'd been led to
expect by all the negative pre-release publicity.  Verhoeven got his
first Oscar nomination in 1971, and in the last quarter-century has
pushed farther and farther, experimenting with the socially-acceptable
limits to movie-making.  His most recent three movies, ROBOCOP, TOTAL
RECALL, and BASIC INSTINCT, have been a progression of back-door access
to American culture, moving from the fantastic through the merely
psychotic to the underlying basic drives; and now he's exploring the
sleeze.  This movie may be the first movie ever made for which the
director's contract contained a specific provision that he would not
have to deliver an R rated movie.  (Verhoeven had to cut several parts
of BASIC INSTINCT to get an R rating, although his original version is
available on video.)
     Many reviewers have taken the Politically-Correct stance that any
movie which uses naked ladies as scenery is a Bad Thing; but they miss
the fact that this movie is not about naked ladies, it's about people
in an environment where naked ladies are common, and WHY such an
environment should exist.  It's about the scum who use other people as
power-trip toys, and the need to escape their power.  It's about a
world where sex is nothing and normal human values don't pertain; and
the lack of sexual excitement and passionate heat in even the most
blatant scenes is something of an accomplishment.  An NC-17 movie which
isn't sexually exciting says a great deal about the phoniness and
emptiness of a social stratum where sex has been robbed of any kind of
beauty, power, or value.  The one scene in the movie that *could* have
been a good sex scene, Berkley and MacLachlan in a swimming pool, is
not exciting, because by then we already know his character is a
callous manipulator.  If anything, it's a rape scene with a victim
who's been duped into cooperation.
     You don't make a movie about the history of black people in
America without using a few black actors; you don't make a movie about
World War II without a few guns going off and a few people getting
killed; and you don't make a movie about Las Vegas showgirls without
showing a few Las Vegas showgirls ... and in an awful lot of Vegas
shows, an awful lot of ladies wear very little clothing.  This is a
legitimate portrayal of a rather seamy side of the entertainment
industry, in a town where sex is simply a negotiable commodity.
     SHOWGIRLS de-glamorizes the Las Vegas show and sex industries with
great effectiveness.
     Nomi is played, in a very good performance, by Elizabeth Berkley,
who gives us a solid picture of a woman with limited talents who's at
the end of her rope, desperate to live a life better than the one she's
known.  She has nothing to market except her body and her limited
dancing ability, and is trying desperately not to to be a hooker,
trying to be something better than she seems destined to be.  When Nomi
realizes she's gone too far for too little, she catches herself just in
time to save the most essential part of who she wants to be.
     Gina Rivera plays Molly, a dressmaker and costumer who befriends
Nomi, providing her with what may be the one solid, positive
relationship in Nomi's entire life.  Molly is the one who makes the
difference, and provides the role model and framework Nomi needs to
verify the value system she'll be using for the REST of her life, and
Nomi's feelings for Molly are the spur that forces Nomi's decision.
Gina Gershon plays Cristal, an aging, but still very attractive
starring dancer, a reflexively competitive manipulator who's become a
villainess by internalizing the ethos of the crooks and scum around
her.  Gershon plays Cristal as a cross between Ava Gardner and Raquel
Welch; a fading talent made bitter by self-awareness.  Her character is
very well drawn and performed; in a major scene in a hospital room, she
acknowledges what she is, and, in essence, passes the torch to Nomi.
The relationship between the two of them is the most honest one in the
movie, and provides part of the impetus Nomi needs to follow a
different path.
     It is no accident that the three important parts in this movie are
women of different stripe; Molly is an honest, hard-working person who
means well, and nearly dies because she confuses the glitter and the
image with reality.  Cristal is a talented dancer who's compromised her
ideals and sold herself to be a co-operating part of the system,
exchanging self-respect for the species of stardom that can be had in
Las Vegas.  Nomi believes she can make it without selling herself,
succumbs to a degree, and then realizes she CAN make it without selling
herself, and doesn't need Las Vegas or its brand of "stardom."
     The male parts in this movie are simply props; they exist only to
demonstrate and explicate the cultural milieu against which showgirls
exist.  Kyle MacLachlan, whose single best previous work was as an
inhumanly emotionless cop in THE HIDDEN, gives us a nicely reptilian
bit of pond scum on two legs, camouflaged as a nice guy.  Glenn Plummer
plays a dancer who's working as a bellboy, and provides a bit of
alternate perspective.  Plummer's character is the only one in the
movie who's maintaining an interest in dance as a performing art, but
even he's succumbed to the cult of manipulation.  Plummer's character
is the closest thing to a sympathetic male character in the whole
movie.
     Some of Jost Vacano's cinematography is fantastic, and one
particular delineation of Nomi's character alteration, a no-dialog
scene using nothing but color changes in the lighting, is utterly
terrifying.
     This movie is rated NC-17 due to language, sexual situations, full
frontal nudity, violence, and probably the costuming as well.  I don't
see a way this particular story could have been told well without it,
and I regard it as a legitimate exercise in movie-making.  But don't go
see it if you're not in a tough mood; the only person it's possible to
like in this movie ends up in an I.C.U. on life support, and there is
probably not one character in this movie you'd enjoy meeting in
person.
Starring:  Elizabeth Berkley, Gina Gershon, and Gina Ravera,
           with Kyle MacLachlan, Glenn Plummer, and Alan Rachins.
Producers: Alan Marshall and Charles Evans, with Mario Kassar
Director:  Paul Verhoeven
Writer:    Joe Eszterhas
Cinematographer:  Jost Vacano
Music:     David A. Stewart
Choreography:  Marguerite Pomerhn-Derricks
Production Designer:  Allan Cameron
Costumes:  Ellen Mirojnick
Edited by: Mark Goldblatt and Mark Helfrich
Rating:    NC-17 (i.e. "X")
A "Chargeurs" film from MGM/Carolco, opening date 22 Sep 95.

Title
Review for Waterworld (1995)
"Something is fishy in the state of Universal."
     About ten years back, with the unexpected success of MAD MAX and
THE ROAD WARRIOR, post-apocalypse nitty-gritty survival yarns became
popular at the movies.   We've always had movies of this nature; ON
THE BEACH, THE END OF THE WORLD, DAMNATION ALLEY, THE ULTIMATE
WARRIOR, and so on.
     To date, the most smoothly done were straightforward "haircuts" of
the classic western plot, like the lone gunman who comes to town and
protects the widow and the son against an evil organization, usually
one in possession of some critical resource, like water, feed range, or
a mining claim.  Most of these grew out of venerable, but solid hero
yarns like THE VIRGINIAN and SHANE.  (My personal favorite is a
Patrick Swayze movie called STEEL DAWN, which was fairly well made on a
small budget.)
     Now we have WATERWORLD, which again brings the traditional lone
gunman to town to rescue the young widow and her daughter.  (Well,
she's not a widow, and the kid isn't her daughter, but you
 get the idea.)  The lady is Helen, played by the stunning Jean
Tripplehorn, who isn't given a chance to be stunning, or even
interesting, by the mediocre and unimaginative script.  The child
Enola, played by Tina Majorino, is living proof that a child actor need
not be a bad thing to have in a movie; she outshines her material all
the way through.
     In simple, the scene is Earth, hundreds of years from now.  The
polar ice caps have melted, and somehow produced enough water to
inundate the entire planet.  The few remaining people live in boats and
floating colonies, and survive by trade, theft, or piracy.  Somehow an
oil tanker has survived the centuries, and its inhabitants, called
"Smokers," are able to keep gasoline engines running despite the dearth
of replacement parts and raw materials, so the Bad Guys have outboard
engines, and fast-moving boats, airplanes, and jet skis.
     Enola, found at sea as a young girl, has a mysterious map no one
can read tattooed on her back.  We suspect early on that it is the way
to the mythical "Dryland," the place where trees, crops, and animals
grow, and what plot there is hinges on Who Has Enola.  The psycho ruler
of the Smokers, the "Deacon," is trying to get her and find his way to
Dryland.  Played with typical self-lampooning, rug-chewing histrionics
by Dennis Hopper, "Deacon" is the only thing in the movie that's close
to amusing.  His performance is *almost* laughable, but there just
isn't enough there to be funny.
     The star (and a co-producer) is Kevin Costner.  He's playing an
un-named lone denizen of the sea, a man called the "mariner," who turns
out to be a gilled, water-breathing mutant with webbed feet.  Very
little is done with this.  The script ignores the ineffectuality of
gills in supplying enough oxygen to support a human metabolism; it
ignores the fact that even with both ice caps completely melted, much
of the Earth's surface would still be above water; and it ignores the
blatant impossibility of the cultures and technology shown.  (Canned
meat does *not* last for centuries; ammunition does *not* fire after
it's more than a few decades old; and so on, and so on...)
     I'm quite fond of Tina Majorino's previous work, very impressed by
Jean Tripplehorn's past accomplishments, and still speechless over
Costner's DANCES WITH WOLVES.
     But this movie could destroy the careers of anyone associated with
it!  This movie cost ONE HUNDRED AND EIGHTY-TWO MILLION DOLLARS, and
there's *nothing* in it we haven't seen before, done better on only a
few percent of the cost of this turkey.  At 125 minutes of material,
this movie cost over ONE POINT FOUR MILLION DOLLARS PER MINUTE to
make.  The budget of this movie *could* have given us over THIRTY
movies; it could have paid for SIX YEARS OF A PRIME-TIME SF TV SERIES
WITH EXPENSIVE FX WORK, OR TEN YEARS OF AN SF TV SERIES WITH GOOD
DIGITAL FX.
     In sum, this movie is beneath contempt.  It has nothing new to
offer, it has a script that could easily have been bettered by the
people who write comic books for DC, and it spent more money than the
national budget of a small nation.
     If you *have* to go see it, see it on a four-dollar matinee.
Otherwise you'll find yourself sneering at you every time you pass a
reflective surface, for weeks.
Cast:      Kevin Costner, Jeanne Tripplehorn, Tina Majorino, 
           Dennis Hopper, Michael Jeter 
Director:  Kevin Reynolds 
Producers: Charles Gordon, John Davis, and Kevin Costner 
Screenplay: Peter Rader and David Twohy 
Cinematography: Dean Semler 
Music: James Newton Howard 
>From Universal Pictures 
