Authors
Roger Snappy Rubio
Number of Reviews
23

Title
Review for GoldenEye (1995)
     Today I went to see GOLDENEYE, and then I came home and saw two
reviews on CNN about the movie (one from Peter Travers and the other
person I can't remeber).  They completely missed the point.  They said
the new Bond is a total bust.  They said Pierce Brosnan shows too much
restraint and does not carry off his lines with the energy he did in
REMINGTON STEELE.  Boy, are they cynics.
     They maintained that a whole generation of people will not see any
of these problems.  They said they will just accept the new Bond for
who he is in GOLDENEYE and never complain that he was any worse or any
better.  OH BOY, are they wrong!
     I personally was raised with James Bond.  James Bond for me was
Roger Moore, but when I got older I got a chance to see Sean Connery as
Bond, and I can see why they say he is the best.  Peter Travers and
others would have you believe that a person like me would not see
anything wrong with Pierce Brosnan as the new James Bond.  As a movie
and James Bond lover, I take great exception to everything they have
said.
     GOLDENEYE is one of the best Bond movies I have seen.  It is
consistent with every previous Bond film in the characters, plot,
storyline, action, romance, and thrills.  Pierce Brosnan is remarkably
yet appropriately restrained as the new James Bond, the way Bond has
always been.  Peter Travers would have James Bond act like REMINGTON
STEELE.  I think not.  We are talking about the ultimate stud of the
universe here.  A man who can sleep with any woman, never use birth
control, and make the women feel like they'll never have any better.
James Bond has been, is, and always will be the greatest fantasy of men
everywhere (most notably American).  GOLDENEYE does not skimp on this
fantasy.
     My take on the Bonds of yesteryear:  Sean Connery was the best
because he was the first and, because he's Sean Connery.  George
Lazenby was a little underrated.  Roger Moore was good for a while, and
then his movies deteriorated into too much special-effects model
destroying and far too many one liners.  Timothy Dalton was brought in
because he was cheap, did his own stunts, and tried a more strict
interpretation of Ian Fleming's Bond, which is not what movie audiences
wanted to see.  Brosnan looks the part, feels the part, and I believe
carries the part much like Connery did in the early days of Bond (a la
DR. NO).  If Peter Travers and others like to come close to panning him
now, wait until he really gets his feet into this role.  They'll take
another look at GOLDENEYE.
     GOLDENEYE is a very good statring vehicle for Pierce Brosnan.  If
you take a look at the movies where there is a new actor bearing the
mantle of James Bond, you will see that they are all like this movie.
THE LIVING DAYLIGHTS was such a movie, even though Timothy Dalton
seemed like he was forcing every scene to come out.  ON HER MAJESTY'S
SECRET SERVICE was similar.  The cars are fast, the women are
beautiful, and the action is breathtaking.  Everything a fantasy like
this is supposed to be.  If you take it too seriously, you might come
out of the theater thinking that you were ripped off from your seven
dollars (or whatever your admission price may be).  If you were raised
with James Bond like I was, and you go in expecting an early
Connery-type James Bond, you won't be disappointed.  This is Brosnan's
introduction into the James Bond world; don't be too hard on him.  With
a little film history and what I like to call "future hindsight" under
your belt, it becomes easy to see that Brosnan will be recognized as a
very good Bond.  Sure Brosnan is nervous; if you were handed the role
of James Bond and were told you had to live up to its place in film
history and its institution-like status, wouldn't you be too?

Title
Review for Sleeping with the Enemy (1991)
     Thanks to 20th Century Fox, I had the chance to see SLEEPING WITH
THE ENEMY before its release.  It stars Julia Roberts as a young
housewife who is married to a man who both physically and emotionally
abuses her.  In order to escape, during a small trip out to sail, she
fakes her own drowning, and then proceeds to change her entire
appearance and identity.  She then moves to Iowa, where she becomes
involved with another man, who is not totally oblivious to the
mysterious manner about her.  Her husband eventually gets indications
that she is still alive, and proceeds to track her down.
     This film is expertly executed, with all the necessary
doom-impending camera angles and dim lights, and if one has seen a lot
of thrillers, SLEEPING WITH THE ENEMY could be considered
run-of-the-mill.  One recent thriller this film may be compared to is
PACIFIC HEIGHTS which, although having a different plot outline, has the
same basic thrills.  My attempt here is not to belittle this film; in my
opinion, in most respects it is better than PACIFIC HEIGHTS (one
respect, for example, is the thriller-lover's favorite: how they get rid
of the baddie at the end).  It is a well-planned and an altogether
convincing film that one should not miss if on likes a good thriller.
Julia Roberts delivers a admirable performance as the tortured wife of
this man she so desperately wants to get away from.  Joseph Ruben as a
director effectively manages to contribute something if not the same
type of thrills over again to the thriller genre, although in my opinion
this was not a great contribution.
     Don't get me wrong--all in all, as far as thrillers go, this one is
good.  If there is anyone out there who goes to the movies to latch on
to some character to hate, then this movie is definitely for them.  It
manages to show how the good intentions of some people manages to
further the bad intentions of other people.  In layman's terms, I would
consider this movie to be a popcorn-crunching movies; if you buy a bag
before the show, I assure you it will be gone by the end.

Title
Review for Star Trek VI: The Undiscovered Country (1991)
[I am posting five reviews of STAR TREK VI.  I could easily swamp the group
with reviews of this movie, so I will probably not post any more unless
they say something very different than those posted here (e.g., a review
of the fashions in STAR TREK VI :-) ).  Followups are directed to
rec.arts.startrek to keep the discussion in the appropriate group.
-Moderator]
Starring William Shatner, Leonard Nimoy, DeForest Kelley, James Doohan,
         Nichelle Nichols, Walter Koenig, and George Takei
Also Starring Kim Catrall, Christopher Plummer, Michael Dorn, and
              David Warner
Directed by Nicholas Meyer
     I'm glad I waited.  STAR TREK VI does not disappoint its fans.
This supposedly last installment of the STAR TREK movies is a worthy
ending to the saga that is STAR TREK.  And although it is not better
than STAR TREK II (my personal favorite), among all six I would rate it
as the second best in the series.
     STVI (or, as I like to call it, the apology for STAR TREK V) is a
effective blending of elements of episodes from the old STAR TREK and
elements which have made the movie series so successful: adventure,
sensationalism, humor, a good plot, and an overall good time.  It is
also a huge metaphor for what is going on the world today.  Anyone who
goes to see this movie can quite easily recognize which character
represents who in today's world.  Captain Kirk and General Chang (played
by Christopher Plummer) can be construed as the hard-liners, while
Captain Spock and Chancellor Gorkon (played by David Warner) could be
seen as Reagan and Gorbachev.  There are a lot of parallels in this
movie towards the Soviets, and it makes me think that they couldn't
think of a good plotline, so they used what's happening in the world
today.  But don't let that phase you--it's still a good movie.  In this
movie as in today's world, there are those who would lose by peace, and
would do almost anything to protect the prospect of imminent war.  But
despite the hidden message and likeness to today's goings-on, this movie
is still a romp through space, where we meet and see all kinds of races
and places.
     But back to the "blending" part.  I won't tell you exactly what
goes on, but I can tell you there are elements in this film from old
STAR TREK episodes like "Whom the Gods Destroy" and "Court-Martial," and
things from the previous movies, like Meyer as a director (he directed
STII, for those of you who don't know); ILM doing the special effects
(not those cut-and-paste effects of STV), which where damn good, as
always; Leonard Nimoy as a writer; and other than the technical aspects,
the basic (and not fabricated and abused) spirit of the STAR TREK
series.
     The only thing I was apprehensive about was the addition of Kim
Catrall as Lt. Valeris.  But she does a pretty good job, and was, in my
opinion, fairly convincing.  Christopher Plummer and David Warner have
established themselves too solidly as human actors instead of alien
actors, so I didn't really see them as Klingons, but they still manage
to do a good job acting like them.  There's even a surprise cameo, but I
won't tell you who it is of course.  As for the rest of the crew, they
all did a fine job (now that they had a solid script).
     All in all, if you like STAR TREK, go see this movie.  You'll have
a good time, and most of all, you won't be disappointed.

Title
Review for Career Opportunities (1991)
CAREER OPPORTUNITIES
Starring: Frank Whaley, Jennifer Connelly, and Dermot Mulroney
Written  and Produced by John Hughes
Directed by Bryan Gordon
     CAREER OPPORTUNITIES is a story about a 21-year old who really
hasn't done anything with his life; he is also not liked very much
around town.  It is also about a girl who is very unhappy with her home
life and wants very much to escape.  They find themselves one night
locked inside of a Target store, they get to talking, and consider
whether or not they should just run off out of town to L.A.  These are
basically the highlights of the film (it does not elaborate on them much
further); the rest is mostly antics.  This movie could have been a first
draft script for HOME ALONE that got rewritten by John Hughes, thrown
out, and then revitalized somehow by Bryan Gordon.  Gordon probably
figured that since this script was written by Hughes, it was sure to be
a hit.  He got Hughes to produce it, and figured he couldn't go wrong.
Well, I'm sorry to say, I think he did anyway.
     CAREER OPPORTUNITIES is a movie full of overpowering rock music,
sensational film credits, and very little plot and/or character
development.  This film has an interesting premise, but I believe it was
underexecuted by Gordon and his crew.  This film is advertised under the
following headings: "A new comedy from John Hughes, creator of HOME
ALONE," "He took the job that no one wanted...and got the girl that
everyone did," and "Maximum comedy at minimum wage!"  Unfortunately,
this movie lives up to none of these tag lines.  It's not much of a
comedy; it doesn't even have it's "moments."  There are only one or two
funny lines, and only one or two funny sight gags.  The two hoods in
this movie gave me the impression that they were the prototyype
characters for the two hoods in HOME ALONE (which makes me believe even
more that this script was a preliminary throw-out version of HOME
ALONE), and even they are not convincing.  This movie doesn't even live
up to it's name.  It seems the biggest star of this movie is Hughes,
rather than Connelly or Whaley.
     Frank Whaley is not very convincing as Jim Dodge, the "Town Liar,"
who seems to be a rip-off of Ferris Bueller.  Second, Jennifer
Connelly's looks are perfect for the character she plays, but she fails
to display any real depth.  I think that if this film had been cast
better, the characters might have been more convincing (and I stress
might).  There is nothing in this movie that does real justice to
Connelly's acting talents (and I know she's got talent, I've seen it, it
just hasn't been tapped by any of her roles; the closest would have to
be SEVEN MINUTES IN HEAVEN) and I don't remember if I have seen Frank
Whaley anywhere before.  If I have, he didn't make much of an impression
on me.  Connelly, however, did, and I hate to see her so poorly used.
For the purposes of this movie, Connelly was merely beautiful, and
Whaley was merely a wisecracker.
     I am basing this review on the previous films spawned by John
Hughes.  Even though HOME ALONE is getting lukewarm reviews from the
"critics," I believe the basic appeal of the movie is that it is pure
fun; it's like a big Looney Tunes cartoon in flesh and blood, and it
embodies everything you go to the movies for.  On the other hand, we
have the Hughes' fan's all-time favorite, THE BREAKFAST CLUB, where the
characters do have fun, but they also display some depth and substance.
A good example of a combination of the two is FERRIS BUELLER'S DAY OFF.
CAREER OPPORTUNITIES emulates only ghosts of these things.  I think the
basic problem with CAREER OPPORTUNITIES is that it was not directed by
Hughes.  I believe that when he does not direct the scripts he writes,
the results are lukewarm (with the granted exception of HOME ALONE).
One movie that exemplifies what I mean is SOME KIND OF WONDERFUL.  It
was not a bad film (it was better than this one), but I think it could
have been better under Hughes' tutelage.  The majority of Hughes' films
have some kind of sentimentality in them (and I mean that in the best
way), even among those which, upon first glance, you wouldn't expect to
have any, such as PLANES, TRAINS, AND AUTOMOBILES.  I'm afraid CAREER
OPPORTUNITIES just doesn't deliver what a Hughes fan would normally
expect in a Hughes movie.  After all, Hughes is the most advertised name
of this movie....
     There is a small attempt to furnish the characters with some traits
normal to the Hughes' characters (like people who are frustrated with
their lives and just want to break out of the routine), but Gordon just
doesn't do justice to what might have been a entertaining movie (again,
stressing might).  The movie is formulaic, which is in my opinion, what
sours the film.  It seems that Gordon believes that if you put enough
rock music and beautiful people in a movie, it doesn't matter if it
doesn't have a plot.  That's exactly what kills this movie.  It lacks
feeling.  A good telling of a John Hughes story is one where the music
is right, the actors play the parts right, and it leaves you, dare I
say, "fulfilled."  That's part of Hughes' appeal.  This one left me
"unfulfilled."  Maybe I should say shame on him for letting this movie
slide by!
     Unless you're a die-hard Jennifer Connelly fan, I would not
recommend seeing this movie.  This is a movie that might have been, but
just doesn't deliver what it should.  The Hughes' fan has higher
expectations than he/she had before, and this film does not live up to
those expectations.  It's too bad the actors can't see the finished film
before it comes out; I'm sure they all did it in good faith...

Title
Review for Aladdin (1992)
     Walt Disney and Company have done it again.  They've managed to
take a well-known tale of a boy and his lamp and infuse new life into
it.  This movie is the kind that all critics call an 'instant classic.'
Well, I don't know about that, but it will definitely take it's place
among the other Disney masterpieces.
     If you don't already know, ALADDIN is the story of a young street
rat who is the only one who can enter the Cave of Wonders and retrieve a
magic lamp, which, of course, houses the famous genie that this story is
so famous for.  Aladdin himself, however, doesn't know this, and the
only one who does know is the evil Jafar, counsel to the Sultan.
Meawhile, Princess Jasmine, daughter of the Sultan, is trying hard to
escape from any kind of arranged marriage, so she runs away, only to
bump into our hero, Aladdin.  The rest is, shall we say, a la Disney.
     Disney is famous for taking fairy tales and turning them into
movies so happy that audiences scream for them.  Not to be cynical, but
movies like this are in large demand and short supply.  You might think
that Hollywood would supply more of these kinds of movies, but I guess
there's all that killing and raping and psychological torture out there
to cover.  Hollywood can't forget about that.  If Hollywood can't
forget, then why is it that G-rated movies are among the top grossing
movies at the box office?  You would think Hollywood would get the
message.
     Well, Disney has certainly gotten the message.  Even though ALADDIN
has the prerequisite evil person (in this case Jafar) who's purpose is
to scare the beejeezers out of the little kids, the movie as a whole is
still a delight.  I've noticed that the Disney films as of late have
been getting a little violent even for their G-ratings, but I believe
it's just a function of society.  And society is demanding more violence
in their movies, mostly due to desensitization.
     But don't let that scare you away.  ALADDIN is still a treat.
Unfortunately, it is the last effort of Alan Menken and Howard Ashman as
a song-writing team, because Ashman died of AIDS during the making of
this film.  As a result, ALADDIN doesn't have as many songs as their
other collaborations, THE LITTLE MERMAID and BEAUTY AND THE BEAST.  It
is also a little different from those two.  But it stands on it's own,
and should not be discounted.  The animation is first-rate, the
characters are varied and, as usual, very distinct from each other, and
the story is the perfect vehicle for the Disney style.  The genie (voice
by Robin Williams) is hilarious, and it is he who really gives this
movie it's life.  After all, what is the story of ALADDIN really famous
for?

Title
Review for Highlander II: The Quickening (1991)
Starring Christopher Lambert, Sean Connery, Virginia Madsen, and
         Michael Ironside
Directed by Russell Mulcahey
     They say that patience is a virtue.  Well, for the most part, I
tried to stay virtuous all throughout this movie, and it was going well
until the bottom fell out.  I figured I should go see a moronic movie,
and I couldn't have picked a better one to go see.
     HIGHLANDER II: THE QUICKENING claims to be a sequel to HIGHLANDER,
also directed by Russell Mulcahey.  An interview of Chris Lambert I saw
on HBO explained why this sequel is so different from the original:
Mulcahey wanted to do something completely different, because most
sequels nowadays are virtual carbon copies of the original.  Ok, fine.
Commendable conjecture.  So I went into this movie expecting something
different, and I was not disappointed.  That is, on the difference part.
     This movie is interesting, to say the least, but after sitting
through the first twenty minutes of this movie, I could tell that this
was a cut and paste movie.  Oh, I'll put a scene here, paste a scene
there, throw in some of the old music from the first film, and not worry
about the editing.  Put it all together, slap it on a long roll of
celluloid, and voila, a movie so *bad* that it will probably become
another cult classic like HIGHLANDER did.  Or so the director thought.
     The only good thing about this movie is Sean Connery.  No matter
how bad the lines are, Connery always makes them sound good.  If you
*have* to see this movie, just see it for Sean.  When he's done with the
movie, that's your cue to leave.  After all, Virginia Madsen's character
is completely useless, Michael Ironside's resembles the Joker from
BATMAN too much, and this business about Zeist and flying immortals; I
mean c'mon!  Having a bad immortal's head land on a train track and then
having a train come by two seconds later just in time for McCleod to
have his immortal orgasm is, frankly, an all-out assault on my
intelligence (as if the original HIGHLANDER wasn't already).  But I can
forgive HIGHLANDER for being outrageous; HIGHLANDER II doesn't merit any
such charitable emotion.
     Now I have to tell the truth here.  The first few times I saw
HIGHLANDER I didn't like it.  The next few times I saw it, it kind of
grew on me.  As of now, I think it's an okay movie.  But after seeing
this collage of cutting room floor rejects, I believe HIGHLANDER was
overlooked for an Oscar nomination for Best Picture.  I could have
written a better script than this!  Hey Mulcahey!  RICOCHET was good,
why couldn't you have made this one good too?  You've got to adopt the
philosophy that Schwarzenegger has: give the people what they want, not
what you *think* they want.

Title
Review for Doors, The (1991)
REVIEW: THE DOORS
Starring: Val Kilmer, Meg Ryan, Kyle McLachlan, Kevin Dillon, Crispin Glover
     Oliver Stone's THE DOORS is the story of Jim Morrison: his rise to 
stardom, his turbulent life, and the man behind the music.  It is also
the story of the turbulent 60s, and the large role it played in
Morrison's life.  Oddly enough, it is not about the group The Doors; if
it were, it would have spent more time describing the lives of the other
group members, and not just Jim Morrison.  Nevertheless, it is an
interesting movie, and one worth checking out.  Compliments to Kilmer:
I think he "became" Morrison!
     Stone paints a surrealistic portrait of a man haunted by ghosts
from his past; a past of which the film tells little about, as much of
this film does with everything.  It is known that Morrison's family did
not cooperate with the makers of this film, so Stone and company are
only left to speculate about his childhood and adolescence.  So, to make
up for this lack of knowledge, the film focuses on his drug-taking and
alcoholic way of life and his overpowering obsession with death.  Oliver
Stone supplements his telling of Morrison's story with the equally
surrealistic poetry Morrison wrote while he was still alive.
     This film could be seen as a two-hour-and-twenty-minute music video
with nothing to offer as far as a plot, except how Jim Morrison lived
behind the scenes.  On the other hand, this film could be viewed as,
what I like to call, the 60s in a Valium capsule: take one dose and you
know everything there is to know about the 60s.  Something like a
decade immortalized in celluloid.
     Oliver Stone is known to make movies about things that affect him
personally.  He made PLATOON, which was based on his experiences in
Vietnam, and BORN ON THE FOURTH OF JULY, which was the story of Vietnam
Vet Ron Kovic.  The 60s must have affected him as equally as the
Vietnam War did.  This film makes you feel as though you are looking
through the mind of Jim Morrison, but you also feel as though Oliver
Stone is deliberately trying to put you there.  All the time-lapse
photography, frame superimposing, varying camera angles, and fades to
white, along with the subconscious sounds of The Doors make you make you
feel as if this is one big acid trip.  On the other hand, it makes you
feel as if you are having a vision of life in several radically
different perspectives.  This kind of filmmaking is always subject to
the personal tastes of the individual; some may find it engrossing and
innovative, and some may just wind up with a migraine headache by the end
of the movie.
     Perhaps a better title for this film would have been one from one
of the books about Jim Morrison, NO ONE GETS OUT OF HERE ALIVE.  Another
might have been THE MORRISON STORY, because this film is not really
about The Doors as much about Morrison himself.  Although Morrison is
the center of this story, Oliver Stone presents the setting of the 60s
to be a potent competitor for the title role.  Was he making a movie
about Jim Morrison, The Doors, or the 60s?  That's a question you will
have to figure out for yourself.
     I personally found THE DOORS to be somewhat entertaining.  It
provides some insight into why Jim Morrison was the way he was, and how
the turbulent 60s played a deciding role in his life.  It's not so much
the story that people may disagree over (after all, there's not that
much story *to* disagree about), but the way it is told.  This film is
what I consider to be true escapist entertainment.  It places you in a
different setting, a different place, and a different time.  If that's
what you crave in movie, THE DOORS is a good vehicle for consideration.
Go see it; it's worth at least a matinee.

Title
Review for Blown Away (1994)
Starring Jeff Bridges, Tommy Lee Jones, Forrest Whittaker, and Lloyd Bridges
Directed by Stephen Hopkins
     I'll say the explosions in this movie are breathtaking.  But the
rest of the movie was lacking something.  Hopkins tends to direct his
movies too much like music videos (don't know if he was a video
director before, but it seems like it), and this movie is not immune.
And maybe I'm too used to Tommy Lee Jones in other movies, but I
couldn't see him as an Irishman (let alone that accent).  BLOWN AWAY
could have been better, but wasn't.
     I would assume the bombs are the main focus of this film, because
I had a hard time finding exactly what the focus was.  These intricate,
somewhat confusing contraptions are supposed to be intimidating and
frightening, are to some extent they are, but there is too much to be
really plausible.  I can understand cutting the right color wire,
determining the type of explosive, etc.  I think everyone can
understand the reasoning behind that.  But when the bombs reach the
type of complexity they did in this movie, it's hard to feel any
suspense because you don't know if Bridges is really in over his head
or just does this thing everyday.  I know that was the point--the
audience is not supposed to know if the bombs are being disarmed
correctly, but it's hard to feel tension when there's a million wires,
switches, traps, connections, and contraptions.  In reality, nothing
could help you figure out which wires to cut or which switch to
disable.
     Do you see my point?  If there were four wires of different
colors, you would know that cutting one or two of them might disarm the
bomb.  If there are 50, well, I can't believe even the best bomb
disposal expert would know which one to cut in that instance.  The best
use of suspense this year would have had to have been SPEED, because
the bombs in that movie were a little more plausible.  But BLOWN AWAY
is just too complicated.
     Tommy Lee Jones does his best with what is essentially a madman,
but Jeff Bridges seems a little confused.  He even lapses into an Irish
accent midway through the film that threw me off (I know why he did it,
I just think it wasn't necessary).  The history between these two was
presented at a breakneck pace, which led me to believe that it was only
presented in the first place so that there would be some motivation for
blowing things up.  In SPEED, the relationship between Keanu Reeves
character and Dennis Hopper's is established early in the film, in
BLOWN AWAY it's scattered all over the place.
     BLOWN AWAY needed some more organization.  It has it's good
points, like the explosions, some of the bombs, and a grueling sequence
where any household item could be a trigger for explosives.  But I
believe the movie lacked focus.  Were we here to see the explosions,
the drama, or the whole movie as something neat to look at?  I don't
know.  I would have to say this is a good dollar flick, but paying
matinee or regular prices would be questionable.

Title
Review for Mannequin 2: On the Move (1991)
MANNEQUIN TWO: ON THE MOVE
Starring: Kristy Swanson, William Ragsdale, Terry Kiser,
          Stuart Pankin, and Meshach Taylor as "Hollywood"
Produced by Edward Rugoff
Directed by Stewart Raffill
     MANNEQUIN ON THE MOVE (which is its title; MANNEQUIN TWO was its
advertising title to let people know that this movie is a sequel) is the
story of a young prince and a peasant girl who, about one thousand years
ago, fell hopelessly in love with each other, much to the princes'
mother's dismay.  As punishment for falling in love with peasantry, the
prince's mother has a sorcerer cast a spell on the peasant girl, which
is enforced by a necklace she wears around her neck.  It cannot be
removed by anyone for a thousand years, and if she is to become human
again after that period of time, she must find true love at the end of
it.  Her story eventually becomes a legend which no one really believes,
except for the great-great-great-(and a lot of other greats) grandson of
the sorcerer, who just happens to look just like his great-great-great-
(and so on) grandfather.  The now "Enchanted Peasant Girl," who now
closely resembles a mannequin, is the center of a show for foreign
fashions at Prince & Co. (fans of the original MANNEQUIN will recognize
this store); a store at which a young man, who just happens to look
exactly like the prince the peasant girl fell in love with a thousand
years ago, is a trainee.  Hence the story.  It is really hard to
articulate the plot without making it seem ridiculous.  But that is what
it is supposed to be...ridiculous.  No one would go to see a structured,
intelligent, epic love story about a man who was a prince in a past life
and a woman who has been on ice for the last ten centuries.  Where would
be the fun in that?
     This movie is a formulaic, run-of-the-mill, and probably studio-
controlled movie that the studio believes the people want to see.  Since
the story is about two people who have already fallen in love, the
audience doesn't get the same feeling as the first movie, where the two
are in the process (really) of falling in love.  The first also provided
for more funny scenes, because Jonathan Switcher (Andrew McCarthy) was
the only one who could see Emmy (Kim Catrall) alive.  Everyone else saw
her as a mannequin.  In this movie, the mannequin is played by Kristy
Swanson, and she alternates between humanness and mannequinness (due to
the necklace she wears, whether it is on or off).  In the first movie,
Switcher is an unappreciated artist who finally gets a break at Prince
& Co. by getting a great job and a beautiful woman.  I got no sense of
anything like that in this movie.  I got the feeling that this movie is
just "there" for anybody that wants it.
     Maybe it was just me, but Kristy Swanson didn't really come across
as a woman who was transplanted from the Tenth Century into the
Twentieth.  Maybe, because of pathological Hollywood stereotyping, I was
hoping for or expecting some kind of accent (after all, she did come
from a foreign land).  Swanson is not at all hard to look at (she's very
attractive, in my humble opinion), but she did not convince me very well
that she was a foreigner in a different time and place.  I don't know if
she is a good actress or not; I've only seen her in FERRIS BUELLER'S DAY
OFF, as Simone (correct spelling?), the girl who told that history
teacher what she heard about Ferris Bueller ("My best friends' sisters'
boyfriends' brothers' girlfriend heard from this guy who knows this kid
who's going with a girl who saw Ferris pass out at 31 Flavors last
night.  I guess it's pretty serious.").  William Ragsdale was, on the
whole, average.
     Meshach Taylor, however, was great.  Taylor plays the character of
"Hollywood" in both films.  I loved him in the first one, and in this
one, he's toned down a little bit, but he is still as funny as ever.  I
heard somewhere that the gay community did not like the character of
"Hollywood" at all from the first film, and I think maybe that's why he
is toned down in this one, but otherwise he is hilarious.  I think he
makes the entire movie.  He gets to play another character briefly in
this one (I won't say who).  I think this is good; it shows that Meshach
Taylor doesn't just play "Hollywood."  
     This movie has a different director, casting agency, and three new
writers (Edward Rugoff is the fourth, and the only original writer
returning).  I have always been cautious about movies with four writers
(if one or two couldn't get it together, why should three or four);
movies of the type I mean are movies like SEE NO EVIL, HEAR NO EVIL and
TWINS, both of which had four writers.  They weren't exactly bad movies,
but they weren't that great either.  In my experience, movies with two
writers have always fared better than others, but that may just be
coincidental.  I am especially cautious of movies with overhauled film
crews (like this one).  The sequels that have done as well or better
than their predecessors have usually been the ones that bring back the
crew that made the first one successful.  When a whole new crew makes a
sequel to a successful movie, I start hearing the cries of blasphemy
from the down-trodden fans of the original.  Don't get me wrong, these
"blasphemers" occasionally do a good job, but it nevertheless makes
fans cautious.  In this movie, only a skeleton of the original crew is
present.  But as I am writing this review on the day it premieres
nationwide, I may be forced to eat my words--who knows.
     If I were paranoid, I would say that this movie is insulting to my
very intelligence.  But since I'm not, I'll say that this movie is just
something you can go see without having to really think about anything.
It's not that great compared to the first one, but it is not that bad
either.  It's sort of a "fuzzy carbon copy" of the first one.  If I were
to give a recommendation of some sort, I would say to go see it if for
nothing else but Meshach Taylor.  I thought he was hilarious in the
first movie, and even though he doesn't have as many funny lines in this
one, it's worth seeing just for him.  And if you liked Kristy Swanson
from the very small role she played in FERRIS BUELLER'S DAY OFF, I'm
sure you will not be disappointed by the way she looks in this one.

Title
Review for True Lies (1994)
Starring Arnold Schwarzenegger, Jamie Lee Curtis, Tom Arnold, and
         Charlton Heston
Directed by James Cameron
     Wow!  This movie was an amazing flick.  Jaw-dropping special
effects, action sequences, light-hearted humor, something for
everyone.  Schwarzenegger is on the come-back trail, but this movie
doesn't quite do it yet.  Keep it going, Arnie, you're doing good.
     TRUE LIES is the story of Harry Tasker, a secret agent busy
thwarting nuclear threats and saving the world from certain
destruction, while convincingly lying to his wife that he's a computer
sales representative for fifteen years.  A little implausible, but
pulled off expertly by both Cameron and Schwarzenegger.  TRUE LIES is
based on a French film (the name escapes me right now) of the same
plot.  Arnie suggested that Cameron remake it, and TRUE LIES is the
result.  It took seven months to shoot the entire thing, costing a
reported $100 million.  The result is worth watching.
     Jamie Lee Curtis was not the actress I would have picked for the
role of Helen Tasker, Harry's wife, but she proved me wrong.  Curtis
pulls off both a shy, reserved wife, and later, a sexy, desirable woman
that can play all kinds of roles.  Tom Arnold steals the show with all
the good, snide remarks he has, and finally proves he can act.  Arnie
is back in full form as a gun-toting action hero, and finally
acknowledges not to make fun of the genre that made him famous.  Every
character in this movie has character, which is a trait lacking in most
action movies nowadays, and is a little refreshing.
     TRUE LIES marks the first film where Digital Domain took over for
the digital special effects, and they are a sight to see for their
first outing.  An overall good start for a fledgling special effects
house.  Most of the effects are hard to find, which is the way it
should be.  The use of the effects is outstanding, and nothing looks
too hokey.  You can always tell where they had to use special effects,
but Cameron uses them so well you don't care.
     A definite recommendation.  It's definitely worth full price at
the box office.

Title
Review for Only the Lonely (1991)
ONLY THE LONELY
Starring: John Candy, Maureen O'Hara, Ally Sheedy, Anthony Quinn, and
          James Belushi
Produced by John Hughes and Hunt Lowry
Written and Directed by Chris Columbus
     This movie is the kind of movie you take a date to ... really funny
and really romantic at the same time.  It's advertised as a comedy, but
it has all the elements of a good story: love, humor, romance, conflict,
sentimentality, drama, and overall good fun.  I would definitely
recommend seeing this movie.
     ONLY THE LONELY is the story of Danny (John Hughes), a Chicago cop
who won't admit that his mother is running his life.  His mother Rose
(Maureen O'Hara) is a prejudiced, brash, and rather blunt woman who
doesn't have any qualms about saying EXACTLY what she is thinking to
anyone and everyone.  Danny meets Theresa (Ally Sheedy), a rather
introverted individual who is trying to break out of her own mold.  They
eventually fall in love, and that is something that Rose is not going to
stand for, so she makes sure to try to break them up in her own sort of
way.  I won't ruin the rest of the story, but I assure you, it is worth
seeing.
     It looks like Hollywood is responding to the call of the people for
more human stories instead of the shoot 'em up kill 'em all type of
movie with nothing to offer except violence and bloodshed.  ONLY THE
LONELY certainly delivers with good performances, a good storyline, and
for that matter, an ORIGINAL storyline.  It's not completely original,
but it does provide some refreshment amidst run-of-the-mill romances and
comedies.
     I always knew Chris Columbus was a good writer, and he didn't
disappoint me with this movie, either.  Chris Columbus is responsible
(whether in whole or in part) for some really good celluloid; for
example, he wrote the scripts for GREMLINS and YOUNG SHERLOCK HOLMES
(which, in my humble opinion, is one of his best scripts), and he helmed
the mega-hit HOME ALONE.  John Hughes almost precedes himself nowadays.
And even though his logo is on this film, it is really Columbus that
deserves the credit.
     John Candy is charismatic, funny, and a little vulnerable in this
movie, which might make him as attractive as, say, Bill Murray.  Bill
Murray is not exactly the sexiest man alive, but it is his humor that
makes him attractive to most women, and I think if John Candy keeps
going the way he is going, he just might attain Murray's status as a
comedian.  Of course, everything Murray had to say that was funny was
usually written for him, but let's stay optimistic now!  Maureen O'Hara
comes off as a slightly vicious character, compared to Ally Sheedy's
shyness.  James Belushi has a small part in this movie as Danny's
partner in the police wagon business of picking up stiffs and criminals
and hauling them away.  He is constantly talking in some way about sex,
whether advertently or inadvertently.  Anthony Quinn plays a lonely,
elderly bachelor hopelessly in love with Rose, and always attempting to
gain her heart.  All together, they make for an interesting entourage,
and one well worth seeing.
     To sum it all up: good writing, good directing, good acting, good
story.  What more could you want?  Maybe a free pass to see it like I
got, but it is worth paying your six or seven dollars or whatever you
have to pay where you are to go see it.  Take your boyfriend,
girlfriend, wife, husband, best friend, family, whoever, and treat
yourself to a good movie called ONLY THE LONELY.  I'm pretty sure you'll
like it.

Title
Review for Switch (1991)
     An interesting movie.  That's the least I could say about SWITCH, a
new comedy from the man who brought us VICTOR/VICTORIA and 10, the one
and only Blake Edwards.  Blake Edwards has quite a reputation for 
directing the awkward and uncomfortable, and he has done a good job
directing Ellen Barkin in this film.  I humbly think that this movie
could do wonders for Barkin, but for Edwards, I don't think it will have
such a profound impact.
     SWITCH is the story of womanizer Steve Brooks.  Steve has been
rotten to women all his life, treating them as if they were objects to
be played with and enjoyed.  Every female he has ever come in contact
with hates his guts.  So one night, three of his former girlfriends
decide to throw him a surprise party, which they notify him of.  The
surprise, however, is a big one--it's his death.
     Now that Steve is stuck in purgatory, God must decide whether or
not he goes to heaven or hell (good move by Edwards making God's voice
both male and female--it satisfies everyone).  Since he is on equal
footing on both good and bad deeds, God decides to send him back to
Earth,  and  challenges him to find just one female that likes him.  If
he does, he goes to heaven.  If not... well, you know.  But the devil
intervenes, saying he has as much a right to Steve as God does, and if
he comes back as a man, it will be too easy for him.  So the devil
suggests a rather interesting idea ... he should come back as a woman.
     So I've spoiled the first part of the story; I won't spoil the rest
of it.  This movie had enormous potential for even more funny scenes
than the ones already in it (don't get me wrong, it has it's fair
share), and it explores several issues about what it's like being a
woman, but it never really follows through on most of them.  I think the
problem is that there is so much that can happen to a man in a woman's
body that every possible situation could not fit into one movie.  The
ones Edwards does explore are some pretty awkward situations, and he
handles them quite well.
     I cannot say enough about Ellen Barkin's performance.  She always
had a little touch of stereotypical masculinity in her acting (which
makes me think Edwards wrote this screenplay with her in mind) and it
makes her perfect for this role.  She talks like a man, sits like a man,
and even walks like one very convincingly.  She does everything I think
a man would do in a woman's body without realizing it, and it provides
for some very funny scenes.  Barkin was superb--tremendous--excellent!
     The story, however, is a bit rushed.  As I said before, there's
only so much that can happen in one movie.  One thing happens right
after the other, as though Edwards wanted to get in as much as he can.
The closest movie to this one that Edwards had made previously would
have to be VICTOR/VICTORIA, which dealt with male homosexuality.  SWITCH
deals somewhat with female homosexuality, but in a relativistic sort of
way (in one way, it's not homosexuality, because the subject is a man in
a woman's body, but on the other hand, he is a woman through and
through!).  And in my opinion the film does not deal with it enough.
Perhaps Edwards should have focused only on what it's like to be a woman
and not have introduced the lesbian aspect.  That would have made room
for some more funny situations.  Also, although it might be trivial, I
must mention that I found the scenes where any of the characters are
drunk to be unconvincing.  They acted as if they had a subtle form of
hiccups.  But all in all, they did pretty good.
     SWITCH is definitely better than some of Edwards' previous movies
(a la A FINE MESS), but not better than all of them.  I believe it is a
worthy candidate for induction into the Blake Edwards Hall of Fame.  I
think this film might wind up being compared extensively to TOOTSIE
(with Dustin Hoffman) by the critics (as it is the closest relative as
far as the plot line goes).  As far as this comparison is concerned,
SWITCH does not stand on its own.  Nevertheless, it is a good movie, and
worthy of at least matinee price at the box office.

Title
Review for Last of the Mohicans, The (1992)
     I have it on good word that this is one of the most historically
accurate pictures made today (as far as the costumes, mannerisms, etc.
are concerned).  As the director, Michael Mann, was a stickler for
detail, it does not surprise me.  And although this may be an
essentially fictional story, it nevertheless is told with gritty realism
and passionate imagery.
     THE LAST OF THE MOHICANS is a remake/film version of the Cooper
classic of the same name.  The first film was made in 1936 and the 1992
version is based both on the book and the 1936 screenplay.  I have never
read the book, and, being a movie marauder, the movies kept me from
reading my history books back in high school, so when it comes to
historical accuracy or content, my reputation is a little lackluster.
But I went with a former history major to see this film, and she told me
that this movie was one of the best, historically speaking.  So I will
not attempt to analyze it from that perspective, just strictly from a
filmmaker's perspective (something I know a little more about).  
     Daniel Day Lewis was great.  Madeline Stowe, I am sorry to say,
could have been replaced by any good actress with the same physical
build, but don't get me wrong...she was good also.  (I guess I'm too
used to seeing Daniel Day Lewis charging up a hill in the
advertisements.)  But all the actors played their parts well, and the
foreign accents (which weren't foreign at the time) were executed with a
professional demeanor.  The war scenes especially took my breath away.
There is one scene where one army gets ambushed by another (I won't say
who gets ambushed) and the film doesn't change scenes for a stint.  It
is just long enough for you to realize that there is nothing the
ambushed army can do, or for that matter, is capable of doing.  Scenes
and situations like that in this movie are very well done.
     I can't say much for story, realistically.  It's a good story, but
I found it to be a little dry.  The movie also tries to both excite you
and take your breath away, but it falls somewhere in the middle, and
cannot be called either a spectacle or a gripping drama.  Whether that's
good or bad, I'm not sure; I guess you'll have to judge for yourself.  I
guess the action (or war) scenes were filmed with the intent of making
the audience sympathetic to the cause or plight of the particular
situation.  I think it went a little too fast for that.  A good example
of appeal-for-audience-sympathy would be GLORY, which was a very well
done civil-war epic.  And a good example of spectacle would have to be
LAWRENCE OF ARABIA, where your jaw drops to the floor in every scene.
THE LAST OF THE MOHICANS tries to combine elements of both extremes, and
while it is effective, I wouldn't say it was really remarkable.
     But don't take my ramblings for it; see it for yourself.  It is a
good movie.  I don't believe it will win any major Oscars, but I have
been wrong about that before.  Check it out...that's what it's there
for!

Title
Review for Honeymoon in Vegas (1992)
Starring Nicholas Cage, Sarah Jessica Parker, James Caan, Pat Morita
Directed by Andrew Bergman
     All in all, a pretty solid piece of comic celluloid.  HONEYMOON IN
VEGAS is the latest flick from the man who brought you THE FRESHMAN.  In
this movie, Bergman throws in one bride, two grooms, and the outrageous
claim of "34 Flying Elvises."  Bergman is known for putting his main
characters into interesting predicaments that are not altogether
implausible.  He does not fail in this movie.
     Nicholas Cage plays the part of a private detective who abruptly
decides to get married to Sarah Jessica Parker, who plays a
schoolteacher.  They decide to get married and have their honeymoon in
Las Vegas.  While they are there, a professional gambler played by James
Caan, spots her and immediately set his sights on her.  Through a couple
of clever swings, Caan gets Cage to owe him a large sum of money, of
which cage doesn't have.  So Caan conveniently suggests that he borrow
his fiancee' for the weekend, and then the fun begins.
     When I say this is a solid piece of celluloid, I mean it is solid.
It is formulaic without really being formulaic.  That's what makes it
good.  It's got a couple of classic lines and some pretty outrageous
predicaments, but the best part about them is that they are all
believable.  Cage does wonderfully as a man who didn't know what he had
until he lost it.  I found both Parker and Caan to be ideally suited for
their roles, because they are not the most high-key of all actors and/or
actresses, and they do not have the most exciting roles in this movie.
But that's not putting them down; they did a fine job.
     If you want to see more of this kind of movie, check out THE
FRESHMAN if you haven't already seen it.  I believe HONEYMOON IN VEGAS
should have come earlier in the year.  It would have been more noticed
and more appreciated.  It a good flick, and worth at least a matinee
price at the box office.

Title
Review for Wayne's World (1992)
[Yes, I know Roger says one is not a comedy.  But it is marketed and
perecived by most as one, so ....  -Moderator]
Starring Chevy Chase, Daryl Hannah, and Sam Neill
Directed by John Carpenter
     The trailer of this film does its best *not* to make it look like a
comedy, but unfortunately, it succeeds.  If someone were to go into this
film expecting a comedy, they would probably be sadly disappointed.  I
mean after all, Chevy Chase is in it, right?
     I am sad to say, however, that MEMOIRS OF AN INVISIBLE MAN is *not*
a comedy.  It can be considered a curiosity, and is definitely much
better than some of John Carpenter's earlier ventures (THEY LIVE, PRINCE
OF DARKNESS, BIG TROUBLE IN LITTLE CHINA).  The special effects (done by
ILM) are of course first-rate, but I think casting Chevy Chase as an
invisible man and not making the film a comedy was a big mistake.
     The film is good if it is not considered as a comedy; this is the
kind of movie you just go to vegg out for.  Just watch as the invisible
man eavesdrops on conversations, chews gum, brushes his teeth, and even
digests food before your very eyes.  Don't pay attention to the story
too much--I don't think you will have as much fun.  This seems to be a
movie that is banking on the "Wow"-factor (like TERMINATOR 2), but I
don't think it has the budget nor the story to count on that too much.
Nevertheless, it is an interesting movie; worth at least a viewing at
the local dollar movie theater.
     MY COUSIN VINNY starts out slow--it's not the most gripping of
beginnings.  And when Joe Pesci's character comes into the picture, the
storyline shifts from Ralph Macchio's character and his buddy directly
to Joe Pesci.  Okay, we can forgive them a little digression.  But once
this movie gets going, it's not bad.
     I found this movie to be surprisingly funny.  Not hilarious, just
funny.  Joe Pesci hasn't been running a good streak of luck lately (THE
SUPER), which is why I was a little adamant about this venture.  But I
believe he succeeds in this movie, and the supporting cast is really
good.
     I have to admit that this movie took me by surprise.  I thought it
would be another run of the mill comedy that Hollywood churns out
because it believes it has the right formula.  But MY COUSIN VINNY is
worth at least a matinee price at the box office, if anything at all.
     WAYNE'S WORLD is a wonderfully stupid, offbeat, ridiculous kind of
farce that you want to watch at least a hundred times.  Given forty days
and twelve million dollars to work with, Penelope Schipps and the crew
of WAYNE'S WORLD have churned out a consistently stupid movie, one that
requires no brains and no intellect.
     The cameos in the film a in plenteous supply; some good, some just
plain silly.  This movie is truly WAYNE'S WORLD, not anyone else's.
When to go to see this movie, you are in his world, not your own.  And
WAYNE'S WORLD may delight you, or just outright repulse you.
     I have reviewed movies like this in the past; the kind that are
subject to interpretation.  Well, if you spend too much time trying to
interpret this movie, you'll be expending way too much energy and
missing the entire point.  This is a vegg-out movie, something so stupid
that you don't even have to know how to breathe in order to watch it.
     So if you're in that "in-limbo" kind of mood, go check out WAYNE'S
WORLD.  IMHO, it;s worth full price at the box office.  Who knows?  You
may wind up liking it!

Title
Review for Forrest Gump (1994)
Starring Tom Hanks, Sally Field, Robin Wright, and Gary Sinise
Directed by Robert Zemeckis
     What a surprise!  I cannot say enough about this film.  It didn't
seem to appetizing from it's ad campaign, but it sure has taken me
unawares.  I was glad I went to see it, even though it was strictly
from the curiosity factor.  A definite good time at the movies.
     FORREST GUMP is the story of a rather remarkable individual named,
as you might have already figured out, Forrest Gump.  He's a rather
unremarkable individual on the outside, but when you listen to the
things he's been through in his life, you sit there in amazement.  How
can a simpleton from Alabama get into so much that is happening in the
world?  How can someone so suggestible be so suggestive?  It's a feat
that makes for pure movie entertainment.
     Tom Hanks is, as always, superb as the not so smart Gump, who
through unlikely coincidences and very plausible scenarios gets to meet
three presidents, becomes a war hero, starts and maintains a
million-dollar business, and marries the girl of his dreams.  It all
sounds very fairy-tale-ish, but you have to see the movie to understand
how this all happens.  It's not all handed to Gump on a silver
platter.  Often times he just gets it without really trying.  But
that's his appeal--that a man so simple--simpler that the average
everyday Joe--can get into such extrordinary circumstances and still
come out shining.  Forrest Gump shows that life is how you look at it.
Even the most horrible things in the world can be looked at simply.
The character and the movie FORREST GUMP is a refreshing alternate look
at recent history and today's events, through the eyes of a man you
would have never thought would be affected by any of it.  It seems,
instead, that he had an effect on history, rather than history
affecting him.
     This movie is a pure treat.  It has something for everyone.  The
battle scenes are amazing, historical figures are made to say things
they never said, the story in just plain funny, and the special effects
are something to see (I challenge people to find *all* of the effects
in this movie--they were that good).  I came out of the theater with my
jaw in my lap.  I never thought I would come of out a theater like that
when it was playing a story about normal everyday events, but I just
did.  Go see it--it's worth any admission price!

Title
Review for Terminator 2: Judgment Day (1991)
Starring: Arnold Schwarzenegger, Linda Hamilton, Robert Patrick, and
          introducing Edward Furlong
Produced by Gale Anne Hurd
Written by James Cameron and William Wisher
Directed by James Cameron
     Kudos!  Kudos!  James Cameron has done it again.  All the rumors
about its humongous budget and all the hype about its special effects
have paid off.  This movie is a well done, well executed action
adventure movie worthy of "sequelizing" the first one.  The effects are
great, the action scenes are great, and the acting is great.  All in
all, one hell of a movie!
     TERMINATOR 2: JUDGMENT DAY is a sequel to the surprise hit of 1984,
THE TERMINATOR.  As the rumors of the budget of TERMINATOR 2
skyrocketed, the budget of THE TERMINATOR seemed to get more and more
insignificant (its budget was only $17 million, whereas T2's budget was
somewhere near $88 million).  THE TERMINATOR was a movie that got by not
only because of its special effects, but because it used them
effectively and it had a good plot to go along with it.  This has been
the major factor in the success of Cameron's movies.  Special effects
don't do it alone.  And this movie does not skimp on them.  They were so
amazing that I think I will devote a whole paragraph to them!
     TERMINATOR 2: JUDGMENT DAY is the continuing story of Sarah Connor,
who now has a son, John.  In THE TERMINATOR, she learned through Kyle
Reese (Michael Biehn) that the world is going to experience a nuclear
holocaust on August 29, 1997.  Since her encounter with Reese and the
T800 who was trying to kill her (to put it delicately), she has been
plagued by visions of the destruction to come.  She has been devoting
all her efforts to her son, to get him ready to be the ultimate rebel
leader.  In the process, she has gone mad, and has wound up in a mental
institution.  John is placed with foster parents, and has gone about his
own business, alienating himself from them.  Meanwhile, two Terminators
are arriving on the scene: a T1000, a new prototype sent by Skynet to
kill John Connor this time, and a T800, sent by John Connor to protect
himself as a child.  They both eventually find John, and then the sparks
begin to fly.
     TERMINATOR 2 is clearly a film aimed at promoting world peace.  If
it wasn't, the movie would only take about an hour and thirty minutes to
tell (as it is, the movie lasts two hours and twenty minutes).  Half of
the movie is devoted to the conflict between Sarah, John, the T800
(Schwarzenegger), and the T1000 (Patrick), and the other half is devoted
to Sarah's dealings with the destruction to come from the coming nuclear
holocaust.  In fact, the T1000 drops from the scene for a spell so the
film can focus on the holocaust.  Another aspect that promotes peace is
the "kinder, gentler" cyborg image of Schwarzenegger.  Cameron and
Schwarzenegger both feared that if the T800 was portrayed as a killing
machine again, it would ruin Schwarzenegger's present image of a
wholesome, humane muscleman, so they decided to present him as a
"learning" Terminator, who could adapt to human traits.  But for all you
die-hard action fans, don't let this get you down.  T2 certainly
delivers with flying colors.
     I believe Robert Patrick was an excellent choice for the T1000.  He
has what I would call a sort of 'neutral' looking face.  He can look
non-threatening and menacing at the same time.  He has this evil air
about his looks, and it makes him perfect for this role.  Arnie has
changed a lot from what he used to look like in the first movie, but he
manages to pull off the coldness of the first T800.  Linda Hamilton has
almost gone through a metamorphosis due to her character's changes in
this movie, and she executes them expertly (she's come a long way from
that soft little waitress in T1).  Edward Furlong does pretty well as
John Connor, considering Cameron's casting director found him playing
baseball at a Boys Club in Pasadena.  I thought if anything was going to
be wrong with this movie, it would have to be Furlong, but he did very
well for his time.  Overall, the acting was pretty good.
     The storyline is, of course, predictable.  But don't let that fool
you.  It's the execution that makes this movie so good.  All the action
scenes in here get you to thinking, how in the hell did they do that
one?  It's not like these type of scenes haven't been done before, but
there are a few that make you wonder how they did it without anyone
getting killed.  They are not overtly amazing, but they do have their
baffling qualities.  And all this talk about time travel and such; this
movie is only going to feed the fire.  But that's good--it's not often
that a movie like this one becomes a topic for household conversation.
Someone must be doing something right!
     And believe me, they are.  Everyone was saying ILM, ILM, ILM.  They
didn't do it alone, but when you see the movie, the only thing you tend
to notice IS the ILM effects.  ILM (Industrial Light & Magic) was
responsible for the amazing computer graphics effects that make the
T1000 so menacing.  ILM had the enormous task of animating pure liquid
metal (which is what the T1000 is made out of) and boy did they do a
number on this film!  This movie left me with my chin in my lap and
dragging out of the theater.  The most common question I asked
throughout the entire movie was 'how the hell did they do THAT?!?'  The
computer graphics were astounding, superb, and out of this world.  It
made the pseudopod in THE ABYSS look like a stop-motion Godzilla effect.
I'm sure potential Wall Street investors will have no qualms about
investing in the giant that is ILM.  You have to see them for yourself.
And if you're not impressed, then you are probably one of the guys who
worked on the film.
     Enough said, this is a definite must see.  Don't see it to
criticize it, don't see it casually, and don't see it alone.  This movie
is one to be experienced, not just seen.  If I seem ecstatic about this
movie, then it's because I am.  I can just see the 1991 Oscars now:  And
the Oscar for special achievement in special effects goes to...guess
who!

Title
Review for Cliffhanger (1993)
Starring Sylvester Stallone, Janine Turner, and Michael Rooker
Directed by Renny Harlin
     The return of Stallone?  I would assume this question is on the
mind of the wary movie-goer wondering whether or not he/she should put
down his/her $7-$9 and see Sly climbing on rocks and dodging bullets.
Well, if you're one of those wary viewers, I have two reviews to offer
you of this movie: the review for those looking for an art movie and
those looking to have a good time.  The first is the former, the second
is the latter.
     CLIFFHANGER is one those flicks that a total cynic would have a
ball tearing apart and ripping to shreds.  The dialogue is less than
intellectually intelligent, the acting is not Oscar caliber, and
sometimes you can tell that the actors are not five codzillion miles
into the air hanging by their very lives.  Most of the sequences are
implausible, the meanie villain doesn't do most of the dirty work, and
there are plenty of 'talking killers.'  Lots of foreign accents too (as
if only foreigners are bad).  One might think that this movie is a
clone of DIE HARD or the like, but ask even the most light-hearted
cynic and he/she will tell you even DIE HARD was ridiculous.  So why do
they compare all other action flicks such as CLIFFHANGER to DIE HARD,
if DIE HARD was so ridiculous?  (Answer in the second review.)  Yep,
there's lots to ridicule in this movie, and if you go to the movies
just to bitch and moan about plots, special effects, acting, blah blah
blah, DON'T go see this movie.
     As for the others, who like to have a good time at the movies
(this excludes most cynics), CLIFFHANGER just might be a good vehicle
for consideration.  Most of the stunt sequences in this movie are
amazing, and well worth the price of admission.  The story is mediocre;
it is enough to put the characters into some sticky situations, but
that's about all.  But the actions sequences make you feel like you're
on a roller coaster (which is what I believe was the intent).  Yes,
Stallone does do some acting, and it is tolerable, considering his
previous movies (OSCAR, STOP OR MY MOM WILL SHOOT).  I believe
Stallone's best acting is the subtle type, not the overtly comedic.
This movie is a good way to get back into the acting fray.  I don't
think he's Oscar material, but if he sticks to this kind of movie he
will be fine.  As for the rest of the movie, the action sequences are
the real star of this movie, and if you want a decent thrill, check
this movie out.  (By the way, cynics don't think DIE HARD was as
ridiculous as they would have you believe--it's merely convenient for
comparison purposes.)
     I have skimmed the gamut on this movie; some see it as an
adrenalin ride, others get sidetracked by Stallone and his previous
movies (interestingly, not this movie, but his previous ones).  If you
hate Stallone, of course, don't see this one.  But if you can tolerate
him, or if you like him (I'm sure there are some out there--the
silent minority), check this one out.  It's a good romp at the movies.

Title
Review for Piano, The (1993)
Starring Holly Hunter, Sam Neill, Harvey Keitel, and Anna Paquin
Written and Directed by Jane Campion
     I wanted to wait until after the Oscars to review this film, and I
am glad that I did.  I distinguish between the labels film and movie
here with great caution, as this "piece" or "text," if you will, was a
film, and *not* a movie.  JURASSIC PARK was a movie; THE PIANO is a
film.
     Allow me to digress so that I may describe what I believe a film
to be and a movie to be (before I get any flames from die-hard JURASSIC
fans).  A movie is what I would consider to be pure entertainment with
little or no artistic content (a la DIE HARD I & II, BACKDRAFT, E. T.,
etc.).  A film is an artistic venture with little or no entertainment
content (a la 8-1/2, L'ATALANTE, PERSONA, etc.).  These are the two
extremes, and as always with film in general, there are gray areas.
THE PIANO is what I would consider to be, without a doubt, an attempt
to make a film, and not a movie.
     Now that that's out of the way, on with the review.  I mentioned
that THE PIANO was an attempt to make a film, and not necessarily a
film in itself.  These may be just semantics, but I truly believe this
film to be an attempt, and nothing more.  THE PIANO is a very
image-oriented film, filled with symbolism but lacking in overt
substance.  I found this movie to be a very good-looking movie, but
found little else in the story or the characters.  I found myself
influenced by AN ANGEL AT MY TABLE, a previous Jane Campion film,
which, while not making me do cartwheels, was an altogether good film.
THE PIANO made me feel like I was being pulled this way and that.  I
felt like Campion was saying all throughout the writing and making of
this film "Let's try this" or "This might be good."  It felt haphazard
to me, in that the story didn't seem to go anywhere.
     It had a beginning, middle, and end.  A first, second, and third
act.  It had a setup, a number of confrontations, and a resolution.
Everything a typical Hollywood screenplay would require.  But what was
the point?  The cinematography was breathtaking, the acting was
satisfactory, and the images were highly symbolic.  But why?  Most
artistic films don't follow the established "norm" of the Hollywood
screenplay, mostly because artistic films usually don't have much of a
script.  This is not to belittle art films.  On the contrary, this
absence of established norms is what provides for the freedom of
expression and individuality; the means by which to make us think in a
different perspective.  THE PIANO gave me little to think about.  Why
did a film like this, which leans so heavily towards the artistic side
of the medium, choose such a common Hollywood cliche format in which
to tell its story?
     AN ANGEL AT MY TABLE had no big-name Hollywood stars in it, yet
carried itself very well.  THE PIANO has some relatively strong
Hollywood heavyweights (Harvey Keitel and Holly Hunter).  Why the
change?  I personally got nothing from Holly Hunter's performance.  I
thought she was good, but not deserving of an Oscar.  Anna Paquin was
very cute, but I didn't think she should have gotten the Oscar either
(based on merit; I liked that she got to upstage all the other
actresses).  Harvey Keitel, again, plays a weird individual (the only
really ordinary part I have seen him play was in THELMA & LOUISE), and,
as always, pulls it off convincingly.  Sam Neill is the only
"foreigner" in this group (to Hollywood, that is, barring Anna Paquin),
and was satisfactory at best.  But I hate to speak of such good actors
in this way, because I don't believe they were given really challenging
parts to play.  One may argue with me on this point, citing a "brave
performance" by Holly Hunter, but I believe Campion made a grave
mistake in creating this character:  she let us into her head.  We had
a piece of her real character with us throughout the rest of the
picture.  No amount of acting on any actress's part (including
Hunter's) would convince me that I am learning anything new about this
person through her sign language; I know she can speak; she doesn't
have to use it.  I know her real character; everything else becomes a
facade.  I would have liked it if she expressed herself through facial
or more subtle physical expressions (when she is injured [no spoiler
attempt intended], the only way I know that she is in great pain is
through Anna Paquin and through Harvey Keitel, and through other
unmentionable things (if I'm not to spoil the film); Hunter showed me
nothing, which led me to think that anyone could have played that
part).  I believe I can recognize good use of subtlety to make a point,
a la HOWARD'S END, but even that fine film made me wonder what the
point of all this was.
     Symbolism abounds in this film, which threw me from the telling of
the story.  Then the story kicked in, which threw me from the
appreciation of the images.  Torn between two places.  What exactly was
going on here?  Images of death and rebirth in this film are well-known
to the artistically inclined; maybe they were "neato" things to the
Academy and they awarded THE PIANO its share of Oscars based on that.
Unfortunately, the Academy always awards based on politics, popularity,
and career longevity.  Never, if ever, on merit.  Anna Paquin is cute,
Holly Hunter was due again, and everybody in the Academy seemed to be
taken aback by the screenplay to THE PIANO.  These are the only reasons
I can think of to award Oscars to the categories they did.  If they
awarded on pure merit, I think the Academy would have been confused
with this film.  I unfortunately did not have the opportunity to know
the artist's intentions beforehand (it's usually easier to review a
film based on the intentions of its creator), so all I can do is raise
questions.  "What was the point" is not meant as a harsh indictment of
THE PIANO; it is simply a question.  Even artistic films have a point!

Title
Review for Sneakers (1992)
Starring Robert Redford, Sidney Poitier, Dan Aykroyd, Mary McDonnell,
         River Phoenix, and David Strathairn
Directed by Phil Alden Robinson
     This movie was a pure treat.  It reminded me a lot of WARGAMES with
Matthew Broderick.  It's got a lot of humor and a lot of government
bashing.  Everything a movie-goer could want.  And its also got a lot of
gadgets.
     SNEAKERS is the story of two computer hackers who in the late 60's
set out to take on the world from behind their CRT's.  The only problem
is that one of them gets arrested, and through a stroke of luck, the
other gets away.  This other, played by Robert Redford, later gets
involved with a group of very talented people, all from different
vocations and all possessing some sort of secret.  Their job is to break
into people's places so that the people who had their place broken into
know how to prevent others from breaking in.  They are "hired" by the
National Security Agency to obtain an ultimate code-breaker, only to
find that the people that hired them are not from the NSA, and the rest
is secret.
     This movie is a very good execution of the now popular "ensemble
movie."  All the actors are believable in their roles, and there is
plenty of humor going around.  There is also plenty of talent (as far as
the characters are concerned), which is always a big draw at the box
office.  You can have humor, but you must also have professionalism and
realism.  The American audience demands it, and SNEAKERS delivers.  I
thought it was a wonderful movie because I love gadgets, especially ones
that can tell your stress level or ones that can decode any encryption.
But never fear to the average movie-goer; this movie is *not* loaded
down with a lot of techno-mumbo-jumbo.  It's basically a high-stakes
romp, and it is a good crowd pleaser.  After all, it scored very high in
test screenings!
     So if gadgetry, conspiracy, and humor are your game, check out
SNEAKERS.  If you don't, you may never know what the government is up
to....

Title
Review for Dracula (1992)
     Now I must admit I did read a lot about this movie before I went to
go see it; saw a lot of TV stuff on it, read about it in the newspaper,
read about it in magazines, even read another review about it (ack!  I
violated the ethics of all good reviewers).  So maybe I was a little
biased when I went in to see this movie.  Most movies like to embellish
or even enhance the image or the persona of the vampire in general, but
very few treat the vampire as a human being.  BRAM STOKER'S DRACULA
attempts to portray the vampire not only as a human being, but as a
tragic figure as well.  This attempted portrayal as both a human being
and a tragic figure is where I believe this film falls short.
     BRAM STOKER'S DRACULA is supposedly based on Bram Stoker's original
novel.  In the film story, Dracula is a knight called Prince Vlad the
Impaler, who comes home from battle only to find his beloved has killed
herself because she thought he was dead.  In his fury, he renounces God
and is banished to walk the Earth living only on the blood of others.
Four-hundred years later, he finds a woman who looks exactly like her,
and travels to London to see if she is the reincarnation of his beloved.
Of course, that's the story in a nutshell.  And I don't even know if
that's true to the original novel, for the following reason.
     I had heard through my 'biasing' foray to study this film before I
saw it that the screenplay was based on the novel, but during shooting
the actors pretty much had their way with the script.  Now I know movies
always allow for creative license, but I saw the original novel in a
bookstore with the movie's concrete logo on it, and another book based
on the SCREENPLAY with Gary Oldman and Winona Ryder on it.  Did they
change the story so much that they had to make a novel based on the
screenplay, or is this just some marketing technique to make more money?
Is this really Bram Stoker's incarnation or Hollywood's?  I would hate
to see Coppola stoop to Hollywood's level, even if he is bankrupt.
     I have no qualms with the movie as a whole--I hardly ever do when
Francis Ford Coppola is at the helm--but I believe this movie was a
little overdone.  Coppola tries so hard to pay homage to all the great
horror flicks of the past that in the process of paying tribute he
engages in overkill.  The same thing happened with THE GODFATHER PART
III.  This is not to say that it was not a great movie (in fact it's one
of the most beautifully filmed masterpieces I have ever seen) but did
you hear about the budget?  It was rumored at $60 million, mostly
because Coppola had to get the right shade of ivory for Al Pacino's
shirt and things like that.  The operatic climax at the end, while
trying to be suspenseful, dazzled the eye, but left the stomach settled.
And the ending!  The ending was fine, but I failed to feel as much as
the characters did.  GODFATHER III was a prime example of sentimentality
(in my humble opinion), and DRACULA is teetering on that edge.
     I think Coppola tried to do two things at the same time with
DRACULA.   He tried to make it a mainstream film, but at the same time
an art film.  In my opinion, mainstream movies leave everyone happy,
while art films leave everyone thinking.  BRAM STOKER'S DRACULA didn't
do either of these things to me, and that is where I think it falls
short.  But like I said, maybe I went into the movie biased by all I had
read and seen.  In my experience, most critics go into a movie to
criticize, not have any fun.  I try to temper my movie-viewing with a
little of both, but in this movie, I think I was left with more to
criticize than to have fun with.  The make-up was great, the story was
okay, and the acting ranged from dry to 'a-kid-in-a-candy-store'
eagerness, but it just didn't give me the chills or make me feel sad for
this poor creature stripped of his life and love.  It's great to look
at, but it's a little confused as to where it wants to go, and it
doesn't entertain.  At least it wasn't gratuitously bloody!

Title
Review for Twin Peaks: Fire Walk with Me (1992)
     I have read only one other review of this movie, and I thought it
was rather rash.  Yes, yes, I know, David Lynch has a reputation for
frustrating a lot of movie-goers into stupors, but I believe they only
fall into stupors because they can't possibly understand what Lynch is
doing, and quite possibly don't want to.  I had never really seen a
David Lynch movie all the way through (a victim of the Cable
Generation).  But I must say, the first one I saw completely (and in the
theater) made me think, if nothing else.  That movie was TWIN PEAKS:
FIRE WALK WITH ME.
     I'm not sure if this movie is getting a lot of flack or whether its
getting rave reviews, but I myself admire *any* movie that will make me
think.  I admit there have been a few movies which have made me think
that I thought sucked, but those are few and far between.  TWIN PEAKS:
FIRE WALK WITH ME is definitely a movie that made me think twice.  I
like it for just that simple little reason.  I can't claim to be a Twin
Peaks fan myself, but I always like the weird and offbeat.  Something to
rock your foundations a little, whether messy or organized, good or bad.
     TWIN PEAKS: FIRE WALK WITH ME is the story of Laura Palmer (the
famous corpse from the now cult series TWIN PEAKS) and the events that
led to her death.  In other words, a prequel to the television series.
It is a series of mismashed, surreal images and visions that Robert
Engels and David Lynch have concocted in order to explain why she died,
and if anything, fill in gaps left behind from the TV series.  Or so I'm
told.  This kind of movie-making reminds me a lot of THE DOORS; Oliver
Stone's vehicle.  Not that it's bad, just very subjective to opinion.
     Other than being a prequel, TWIN PEAKS: FIRE WALK WITH ME doesn't
get past being any more than a frenzied explanation of what really
happened to Laura Palmer.  It is a perfect vehicle for those who want to
read in anything they like.  There is plenty of symbolism, plenty of
images, dreams, realities, and overt weirdness that even the least
curious of people would want to take a crack at what Lynch is trying to
say.  On the other hand, most of the things that happen in this film
tend to drag, carry on, or make no sense at all (upon first glance).
This is not a movie for people with a short attention span.  You have to
really like ERASERHEAD in order to like this movie.
     But if you're a die-hard David Lynch fan, this movie shouldn't
disappoint you.  If you're just starting out with him, don't expect
wonders on the first try.  It's going to take a few viewings to tell
whether or not you can handle, or at the very least, tolerate this kind
of movie-making.  Not to put David Lynch down, but the man himself is a
little weird, too.

Title
Review for Beverly Hills Cop III (1994)
     Uh-oh.  The roman numerals are back.  I wonder what the next DIE
HARD sequel is going to have: 3 or III?  How about the next ALIEN
movie?  (Yes, I heard, they're making another one; but this was through
word of mouth, so my sources are not reliable).  Will that be ALIEN IV
or ALIEN to the fourth power or ALIENESESES?  Do people see my point
here?
     Money.  Most sequels coming out these days are *purely* for money.
I am sorry to say that, because some of these movies have characters
that I would love to see in different situations.  But BEVERLY HILLS
COP III was barely, if anything, close to a movie with my favorite
characters in different situations.  It had ANOTHER 48 HRS. written all
over it.
     Eddie Murphy is, as of late, trying to make a more mature name for
himself (or so it would seem).  I thought BOOMERANG was a response to a
huge guilt trip about BEVERLY HILLS COP II (I don't know how many times
he referred to women as bitches in that movie, but it was a lot).
ANOTHER 48 HRS. had all the elements of the first movie, but the
storyline was rather bland.  BEVERLY HILLS COP III suffers from the
same ailment.
     Murphy looks like he is trying to regain his 80's popularity and
gain a mature reputation at the same time.  This seems impossible to
me.  Part of the appeal of Murphy in the 80's (IMHO) was his
playfulness and immaturity.  He could make any situation hilarious.
Nowadays he just seems to watch as the world goes by.  The original
BEVERLY HILLS COP and 48 HRS. established his popularity as a vulgar
yet hilarious force of nature.  Now he appears drained.  It's too bad,
too.  Eddie Murphy always made me laugh.
     In BEVERLY HILLS COP III, we see sparks of the old Eddie: the
trademark smile, that characteristic laugh, a couple of good
one-liners.  But that's it.  COP II was loaded with this kind of stuff;
I believe it was what established Eddie as a comic force.  Axel Foley
was a clever cop; he could get in and out of almost anything.  In COP
III, there are no clever dodges, none of Eddie's hilarious assessments,
none of his snide remarks.  In COP II, Axel 'carried' in
multi-explosive sound-seeking projectiles into the Beverly Hills Gun
Club in order to gain access to the building.  I thought that whole
scene was hilarious.  In COP III, in order to get into Wonderworld, he
buys a ticket.  That's not Axel!  Where's the clever dodge?  In COP II,
a bartender tells Axel his coke will cost $7 (if I remember
correctly).  Axel says "I can get blown for seven dollars!"  When told
the price of admission for Wonderworld, he merely repeats the price.
What happend to the old Axel?  What happened to the old Eddie, for that
matter?
     I would consider COP III to be a really good dollar flick, but it
is not worth the full price of admission.  Keep trying Eddie; you're
getting closer, but this one didn't quite do the trick.
