Authors
Burke Cox
Number of Reviews
2

Title
Review for Cyborg (1989)
Recipe for CYBORG:
     Take one cup of CONAN THE BARBARIAN and two pints of MAD MAX and mix in a
large container.  Slowly add a tablespoon of the TERMINATOR and the slightest
dash of ESCAPE FROM NEW YORK.  Blend in poor directing, pitiful acting, and a
horrible script and plot.  Sit for an hour-and-a-half.  Serves: no purpose.
     CYBORG is set in a post-destruction earth.  Starvation, genocide, and the
plague have reduced the earth to an anarchist state.   The "few remaining
scientists" are nearing a cure for the plague, if only some data can be
retrieved from Atlanta.  But there are these bad guys, you see, who like the
pain and death...
     This is undisputedly the worst movie I have paid to see in the last five
years (and I've seen some poor movies).  The plot was embarrassingly
predictable.  The script was *terrible*.  This is a must-see film for a class on
"How *Not* to Write a Script".  The dialogue between characters sounded like
outtakes of every doom and destruction film produced in the last ten years.  
     Even the technical parts of this film were bad.  The special effects were
mediocre.  Three minutes after any major wounding of a character, the wounds
had healed and a nice neat scar had replaced them.  The sound during the fight
scenes was off, resulting in a punching sound followed immediately by the
punch.  The punches and kicks, by the way, were filmed so poorly that you could
see as much as a two-foot gap between the fist of the person throwing the punch
and the face of the person receiving the punch.
     This movie was so bad that it had a four-minute flashback that they showed
twice (in its entirety).  They had old rusted cars throughout the planet that
were smoldering (and had obviously been smoldering for the last ten or twelve
years).  In places where the special effects were particularly poor, they made
the picture blurry to cover up their errors.
     I recommend this movie to absolutely no one, not even fans of this type of
film.  Wait for RED SCORPIONS starring Dolph Lundgren, it looks as though it
will be exciting enough to hold you over until the next Schwarzenegger action
film.  This movie, on the other hand, will do nothing but disappoint you.  Rate
it a -3.5 on the Leeper scale.

Title
Review for Red Scorpion (1989)
RED SCORPION (R - violence, language)
     Dolph (ROCKY IV, MASTERS OF THE UNIVERSE) Lundgren stars as Nicolai, the
most respected and dangerous member of a super-elite Soviet military special
forces group.  Nicolai is ordered to end a growing rebellion in Soviet and
Cuban controlled Africa.  His mission is to befriend a captured member of the
African rebellion and use that friendship to gain entry into the rebels' main
camp.  As soon as Nicolai is trusted and in the camp, he is to assassinate their
leader.  
     The movie centers around Nicolai's struggle with his orders.  At first, he
is an unwavering soldier acting not on what he feels but on what he is told.
But he soon develops a growing resistance to the sanctity of his orders, and
finally a disgust for the Soviet and Cuban oppression in Africa.  
     Lundgren gives a respectable performance as Nicolai, making much of the
movie seem believable.  It is this performance that makes the movie worthwhile.
Removing Nicolai's personal struggle would reduce the quality and interest of
this film significantly.  But, Lundgren does portray a very human and
interesting character.  Of particular interest is his interaction with and old
African bushmen.  Without the benefits of a common language, these two develop
a unique bond between each another that provides the most memorable sequence in
the film.  
     But don't get too excited, this movie could have been better.   It was
unbelievable in a few parts, and technically poor in others.   However,
considering the budget and targeted audience, this movie reaches its goals.  It
is an entertaining and interesting film that, although somewhat predictable,
manages to interject little pieces of human nature into the somewhat tired and
worn subject of weak rebels led by a strong outsider against a common foe.  If
you like this type of movie, you will probably enjoy this film.  
