Authors
Jason Cline
Number of Reviews
2

Title
Review for Boot, Das (1981)
łDas Boot˛ (Directoršs Cut)
West German, 1981 - In German with English subtitles
210 minutes (3 hours 30 minutes)
Rated R (for language,  brief nudity, and mild violence)
Director: Wolfgang Petersen
Writer: Wolfgang Petersen (based on Lothar-Guenther Buchheimšs novel)
Cast:     Jurgen Prochnow (Captain) - Herbert Gronemeyer (Correspondent Werner)
     Klaus Wennemann (Cheif) - Hubertus Bengsch (1st Lieutenant)
     łDas Boot˛ is a thrilling war film about a German U-boat during the
last stages of World War II.  The painstaking life of a young,
inexperienced crew aboard a tiny submarine is presented expertly by
director Wolfgang Petersen (In The Line of Fire, Air Force One).  From
merry banter and numbing boredom, to incredible excitement and total panic,
all of the emotions of what it mustšve been like to be cramped up in one of
those small submarines is thoroughly explored.
     The plot is rather straight-forward.  A war-weary captain (Prochnow)
leads his fresh crew on a dangerous sea mission that could be their last. 
The captain has little faith in his Nazi superiors and seems to follow
their orders simply for the old thrill of the action, rather than the
ideology of the war.  This is obvious in many early scenes where he is seen
frowning at his 1st Lieutenantšs (Bengsch) stiff, Nazi protocol.
     A naive naval correspondent named Werner (Gronemeyer) provides a
central character to the story, and we see the events unfold from his point
of view.  From the opening scenes of a night-before party with drunken
officers, to the terrifying danger of later undersea dogfights, it is
through Werneršs eyes that we gauge the effects of the war.
     The fact that the setting is a German submarine (instead of a British
or American boat) is one of the interesting things about the film.  When
all is said and done, you realize that it doesnšt matter what country is
fighting for what cause, these are all young men going off to a strange
land (or sea) to fight, and very likely die.  To these men it seems nothing
more than a job, not a profound purpose, that drives them to survive.  At
least thatšs the way itšs looked at in this film.
     The battle scenes are as intense as they come; łThe Hunt for Red
Octoberšs˛ got nothing on this.  Mainly because of the technology of World
War II submarines, it was much easier to get killed than to survive.  It
makes all the more effective those long, silent pauses of waiting and
floating in the blackness of sea, waiting to see if that British Destroyer
is coming back around to drop a depth charge.  But the captain is amazed at
the durability of his U-boat, and seems hungry to test it again and again.
     łDas Boot˛ works on just about every level.  The acting is top-notch
across the board, even in the smaller roles like Klaus Wennemann as the
Chief Engineer.  The undubbed directoršs cut is really the only way to see
the film.  The subtitles are done fairly well and the German language lends
a special significance when the young German soldiers are heard singing a
British song; this effect would be lost if the film were seen entirely in
English.  
     Jost Vacanošs cinematography is also magnificent.  This is one of the
most skillfully photographed films you will ever see.  How the camera moves
so smoothly and captures all that it does in a 10 by 150 foot submarine is
a mystery to me.  How it makes it so aesthetically pleasing in that
environment is an even bigger mystery.  If there is a flaw to this film
itšs the music.  The composition is adequate and itšs used well, but I felt
that real strings wouldšve added so much more than synthesizers imitating
real strings. Although music can augment a film so profoundly, it doesnšt
take away too much here.  At any rate, itšs a tiny flaw in a giant
masterpiece.
[ Note: This is my first shot at a review.  I apologize if itšs a little
rough. Išd love some comments, suggestions, advice, etc. ]

Title
Review for Good Will Hunting (1997)
     Every once in a while you see a film that is so effective in
delivering the goods that it is easy to forget, and forgive, its glaring
imperfections.  Such is the case with łGood Will Hunting˛, a subtle
character study about a socially inept mathematics genius who struggles to
find his path in life.  Despite some serious character problems, this is
still a very good film.
     You probably know about the plot so Išll make it quick.  Will Hunting
(Damon) is a janitor at M.I.T., hešs really smarter than Einstein but
nobody knows it.  He likes to go out with his friend Chuckie (Affleck) and
their other working-class buddies and drink beer.  Hešs good-looking,
charismatic, and witty but has a terrible time with authority and stiff
college folk.  After getting into a tiff with the law, a distinguished
professor (Skarsgĺrd) discovers Willšs genius and offers him a chance to
clean up his record and avoid jail time, at a price:  He must attend weekly
sessions with a therapist and work on various mathematical problems (that
have stumped the academic elite) with the professor.  After outsmarting and
scaring the hell out of a couple of different psychologists he meets his
match when hooked up with a once-promising therapist named Sean Maguire
(Williams) who has his own problems.  In the meantime Will meets a British
medical school student (Driver) and they begin to fall in love.
     The story starts out well enough and is a pretty original basis for a
film.  Even though wešve seen movies about misunderstood, erratic prodigies
before (łShine˛ ring a bell?), the script here creates a complex narrative
that doesnšt just focus solely on one character.
     Alas though, this is not a perfect film, as much as you feel like it
couldšve been while watching it.  The one real problem I had with it is the
unrealistic nature of the main character.  Is it possible for a lowly
janitor to be this intelligent? Of course.  Is it possible for him to be
estranged from any deep, human relationships?  Usually, yes.  But, is it
possible for him to also be so handsome, funny, quick with the tongue, and
city-street tough?  Not very likely.  Come on, usually these guys are total
nerds who canšt even buy their own shirts, much less talk down a Harvard
student in a hip pub while picking up phone numbers from pretty med.-school
girls.  Will is just a little too perfect, and in order to accept the
character your disbelief suspension needs to be in excellent working
condition.  The heavy-handed, anti-war statement made by Will at a
government job interview late in the film is also boorish, overlong,
pompous, and completely unnecessary.  All this sounds pretty  bad, but the
film somehow makes up for it in other ways.  Damonšs acting overshadows the
fact that the character is slightly unbelievable, his performance is truly
extraordinary.
     Which leads me to the really good part of the review.  The strength of
this movie can be summed up in one single word: acting.  I canšt recall
seeing a film recently that was so well-acted from top to bottom.  From
Minnie Driveršs frustrated lover to Ben Affleckšs laid-back best friend,
and all the small roles in between, the performances are magnificent. 
Robin Williamsš skill is a given as a bereaved psychologist who couldšve
had a legendary career but was knocked off the path somewhere down the
line.  The real gem though is Stellan Skarsgĺrdšs turn as Professor
Lambeau, an award-winning mathematician who feels reduced in comparison to
a younger, smarter Will Hunting.  The scenes between Williams and
Skarsgĺrd, as two old college pals whošve been brought back together by
this enigmatic kid, display some of the best acting Išve ever seen.  When I
say delivering the goods, this is what Išm talking about.  Watching these
two work is what going to see movies is all about.
     Gus Van Santšs (To Die For, Drugstore Cowboy) cold, urban direction is
right on, as well as Danny Elfmanšs sauntering musical score.  I highly
recommend łGood Will Hunting˛.  Despite its faults, it is still an
intriguing and fascinating film and you are not likely to see a better
acted one this year.
