Authors
Grant Heinrich
Number of Reviews
2

Title
Review for Fatale (1992)
Directed Louis Malle.
Stars Jeremy Irons, Juliette Binoche (Teresa in THE UNBEARABLE LIGHTNESS
      OF BEING).
     Irons and Binoche play two aliens stranded on earth in human form 
and only able to communicate through involved eyebrow wiggling and 
insertion without foreplay.  Irons is a wacky English MP.  Bincohe 
reprises her role from THE UNBEARABLE LIGHTNESS OF BEING, only this time
without the benfit of good scripting--certainly, Damage allows no room
for anything resembling characterisation or, indeed, any form of acting 
whatsoever beyond stoicism and the occasional smirk during orgasm.
     Here's the plot:  Irons is a talented actor who picked a bad
script.  Dressed as an well-toned MP, he drags Binoche around France and
Britan, looking for some place more uncomfortable than the last to fuck.
Binoche is his son's girlfriend.  The rest is easily filled in: the
octopus position, the half-nelson with triple pike position, the losing
control of a two-wheel scooter because of an inexplicable manifestation
of  Cthulu position.
     Since it's impolite to giggle in the cinema (even when everyone
else does), wait for the video.  Personally, I enjoyed Damage, but I'm
a big fan of the badly-executed highbrow wanking flick.  Well, not a
fan.  Not really.  But I seem to see a lot of the things.
     Good points: the first ten minutes.  The last half hour works.  
The closing music is stirring.  The actress playing Binoche's mother 
has a grey stripe through her hair; she looks and sounds like a Python 
character--doesn't suit the movie, but she's fun to watch.
     Winnner: the 1993 "Close my Eyes" award for sexual banality.  This
award is named for the '92 film, notable for trite dialogue, inept
direction and anatomical correctness.
--- Grant Heinrich  ( leroy@socs.uts.edu.au )

Title
Review for Bis ans Ende der Welt (1991)
Review: UNTIL THE END OF THE WORLD.  Directed Wim Wenders (WINGS OF
        DESIRE) Lots of actors, including William Hurt, Solveig
        Dommartin, Sam Neill, Max Von Syndow and Ernie Dingo. 
     The Australian release of UNTIL THE END OF THE WORLD is roughly 
three hours long, cut down from an original length that's rumoured to be
between five and seven hours long.  Even so, there's more than one movie
in the edited length of World: there's at least three distinct
sections, and enough stuffing -- in terms of ideas and incomplete,
possibly edited-out character development -- to make a few more movies
again.  Ambitious, in this case, is an understatement.
     UNTIL THE END OF THE WORLD has three basic sections.  The first
hour is an ordinary chase movie through Europe and the US.  The action
then moves to Coober Pedy for the final two "acts."  Hurt's mother is
blind.  His father has invented a camera for the blind.  Hurt was
travelling around the world to film images for his mother.  (The scene
where Hurt films his sister and her daughter is my favourite of the
movie: the daughter tells the camera how she misses her mother, and
wishes the mother were there to meet the granddaughter.  It's simple and
moving, with superbly restrained emotional impact.)
     The film Hurt makes -- and it's effect on the mother -- is the
centre of the second section.  And the final third concerns "the disease
of images."  The father goes one step further with his camera, and 
records the dreams of Hurt and Dommartin, who become addicted.
     UNTIL THE END OF THE WORLD is co-written by Peter Carey (the
narration is reminiscent of Illywacker).  It's filmed in 10 countries --
Wenders has said, in interviews, that "the constant
crew...were...completely wasted and out of their heads."  In some ways,
this shows.  There was too much material for one movie -- it's
disjointed and obviously heavily edited.  But for a director like
Wenders, severe editing is a plus.  And the constant introduction of new
themes and plots (and the way once-important plotlines are just
forgotten) doesn't distract from the dazzling ideas of the script.
     Very much worth seeing.  Inventive, affecting and more interesting
than most of the movies showing now.
(That review was followed up by a friend of mine, who said UNTIL THE END
OF THE WORLD was "good, but dull in places." But he's not good with long
movies.)
--- G M Heinrich  ( leroy@socs.uts.edu.au )
