Authors
Max Messler
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Chuck & Buck (2000)
filmcritic.com presents a review from staff member Max Messier.
You can find the review with full credits at
http://www.filmcritic.com/misc/emporium.nsf/2a460f93626cd4678625624c007f2b46/0746cecf152aec3588256909005a1169?OpenDocument
Forgiveness is a thing most people long for in their lives.  Forgiveness
represents a silent and indescribable object that opens doors of
acceptance and slams shut avenues of obsession.  It is a delicate object
that is difficult to find in people and their actions.  What amazes me
is how the slightest gesture, vision, or tragedy can become the main
element in the catalyst of this emotion.
Chuck & Buck is a story of forgiveness, a tale of individuals locked in
obsession, denial, and ignorance.  The film revolves around two guys,
Chuck and Buck, who were the best of mates growing up.  When Chuck moves
at the age of 11, the trauma ends up stunting Buck emotionally. 
Flash-forward about 17 years and we encounter Buck, who still plays with
Matchbox cars and keeps a glowing blue orb lamp stuffed full of
lollipops.  Buck's mother has just passed away so he writes a letter to
Chuck, whom he hasn't seen since the departure, asking him to come to
her funeral.
As it turns out, Chuck has become Charles, a straight-laced guy living
in LA with a BMW, a girlfriend, a white-collar job -- the type of guy
who put his G.I. Joes away a long time ago.  When Buck sees his new
buddy at the funeral, he becomes newly obsessed, packing all his things
up and moving into a hotel room in LA to try to reconnect with his old
best friend.  Then things get a bit weird.  Really weird.
Buck stalks Chuck at his office, shows up at his house late at night
with a collage of Chuck as a kid, writes a play about their
"relationship," and generally provides enough edge to creep the crap out
of the audience.  The unusual nature of Buck's stalking lends a strange
ambiguity to the motivations of the character.  To what ends will Buck
go to win back Chuck's friendship?
The beauty of the film lies in the script written by Michael White, who
also plays Buck in the film.  White creates a very original character
that retains the attitude and motivations of a child with a silent
sexual prowess that comes across innocently aggressive.  The script also
provides a number of U-turns, which appear out of nowhere to generally
up the spook factor of the film.  White also gives special attention to
the supporting cast by creating characters that are all in looking for
answers to their own personal dilemmas.
The film also marks a revolution with the entire production done in
digital video format.  Director Miguel Arteta was able to invoke some
amazing angles by climbing into tight spaces with the compactness of the
digital video camera.  The lighting is equally excellent.
The only real flaw of the film is that we are never given a clear
glimpse of the characters as children.  Their homes, their parents, and
the things they did together as children are never exposed.  Dreamy
flashbacks give evidence of the boys' friendship but don't define the
reasons for their kinship.
Chuck & Buck is not a film for everyone.  It leaves a strange uneasiness
at the end of the film that sits with you for days.  But it's too real
to ignore.
Director:  Miguel Arteta
Producers: Matthew Greenfield, Jason Kliot, Joana Vicente
Writer: Michael White
Starring: Mike White, Chris Weitz, Paul Weitz, Lupe Ontiveros, Beth
Colt, Maya Rudolph, Mary Wigmore
Rating: R
">http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html"> 
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
