Authors
David Kerr
Number of Reviews
2

Title
Review for Big Lebowski, The (1998)
Starring: Jeff Bridges, John Goodman, Julianne Moore, Steve Buscemi
1998, R, 115 minutes
The Coen Brothers latest offering is sure to please fans of their older
works, especially Raising Arizona.  Directed by Joel Coen, produced by
Ethan Coen, and created by both, this is the team that brought last
year's smash Fargo.
I liked Fargo, but The Big Lebowski is not like Fargo at all, except for
that ol' Coen Brothers style.  Everything that the Coens have done has
been wierd and over the top, and The Big Lebowski is no exception.
The story is about The Dude (Jeff Bridges) who comes home one fateful
day to find two thugs awaiting to collect money from one Jeff Lebowski. 
After roughing up The Dude a bit and urinating on his carpet, the thugs
realize that they have the wrong guy. The Dude's name is Jeff Lebowski,
but there are two Jeff Lebowskis and the one they want is supposed to be
a millionaire living in a mansion.
The Dude is upset over his carpet.  "It was the centerpiece of the
apartment" exclaims his veteran bowling buddy Walter (John Goodman). 
The Dude wants compensation for his rug, but when he asks for it he gets
much more than he bargained for.  He is drawn into a web of deciet,
lies, kidnappings, car chases, feminism, porn movies, and nihilism.
And in the midst of all this chaos, The Dude is relaxed.  He is the
"laziest man in Los Angle-ees" explains narrator Sam Niell.  After an
afternoon of madness, The Dude returns to his bowling tournament, with
partners Walter and Donny (Steve Buscemi).
This movie isn't a laugh fest, although there are a few instances of
extreme craziness that push the viewer over the edge.  One scene comes
to mind, when The Dude is decoding a secret message that turns out to be
a rude drawing.  I don't want to give it away, but it is quite funny,
and for some reason reminded me of a line from The Long Kiss Goodnight.
What is the point of this movie?  Glad you asked.  I am not really
sure.  As far as I can make out, this is just a week in the life of The
Dude.  The Dude gets a rabid marmet thrown on him while taking a bath
and doesn't think much of it.  He goes  bowling, and returns home to the
chaos.  The Dude isn't a nihilist, but the ultimate message is nihilism
- who cares?  Nothing really matters in this movie.  The Dude is a poke
and prod kinda guy who reacts to external stimuli.  Ironically the
nihilist gang members are the most concerned about their welfare in this
movie.
As Homer J. Simpson said, there is no moral of the show, it is "just a
bunch of stuff that happened".  Relax, sit back, and watch.  Unlike
movies where this is the case  because the movie has no substance, this
film is deliberately made to be nothing more than a set of events.
I have to say I enjoyed this movie, but it is definitely not for all
tastes.  Watch Raising Arizona before seeing this.  If you loved it,
you'll at least be in for a treat with the Big Lebowski.  I liked it,
but I can't say I'm dying to go see it again.  I got my money's worth,
which is a good thing these days.  Besides, it's worth it to see Peter
Stormare play a porno star... if only for a few hilarious seconds.

Title
Review for Saving Private Ryan (1998)
After being bombarded by Dreamworks SKG advertisements, I eagerly 
awaited Spielberg's latest movie about World War II: Saving Private 
Ryan.  After the opening scene (which seems like they added it in at the 
last minute), the audience is treated to the invasion at Omaha Beach.  
Subjected is probably a better word, for when the plank is lowered on 
the first boat all the men on board are slaughtered by German machine 
guns, spraying blood on the camera lens.
This first horrifying scene led me to expect more of the same.  Ten 
minutes in I was so utterly engrossed with the movie that I was 
convinced, "this is going to be the best war movie ever".  Unfortunately 
it soon degenerates into your standard Hollywood flick about a band of 
charismatic war buddies.  While the movie becomes basically average 
after the first half hour - getting repetitive and boring, then 
exciting, then looping round again - the superb opening sequence and 
technical excellence pushes the rating from an average two stars to a 
decent three.  While Saving Private Ryan is probably the best war movie 
since Platoon, it has many shortcomings.
The problems I have with this movie are: it is a predictable Hollywood 
movie that takes little risks and comes dangerously close to glorifying 
war.  I shouldn't let my political ideologies get in the way of this 
review, but it seems to me that the intention of Spielberg was, at 
least, to show that war is ugly.  If that was his intention, he failed.  
For example, a few gruesome death scenes are played for laughs.  Three 
scenes in the opening battle come to mind: a man picking up his arm and 
running around with it, a man shot in the head after just being 
medically stabilized, and a man shot in the head after being saved by 
his helmet.  The latter two caused an uncomfortably high amount of 
laughter from the audience.  Throwing in funny scenes in the middle of a 
tragic battle is what I call "glorifying war".  This reminded me of the 
sad "watch people bounce off things as they fall" gags in Titanic.  I'm 
not opposed to having such scenes in movies, I just think they destroy 
the overall message and are a cheap way to make audiences like the 
movie.  Consider the emotional impact that Titanic would have had if the 
person twirling off the rotor blade was the young woman whose falling 
death was the only one not shown.  The same should have been applied to 
Saving Private Ryan.  If you are going to show a funny death scene that 
isn't supposed to be funny, then give the audience an emotional 
attachment.  Otherwise people will laugh.
To make war look even more fun, all the noble characters are happy to 
fight, and if they aren't noble enough to fight they eventually become 
go-lucky war heroes by the end.  The dramatic music cues when our heroes 
do the right thing kind of gives this away.  A lot of this movie would 
have been better without these cues (or possibly no soundtrack at all 
since this is all it is used for).
Finally we see the brave Christian sniper who is having a heck of a time 
praying to his god before each kill.  It would be very interesting to 
know if Spielberg is showing that theism can be abused or if he is 
trying to show that the allies in WWII actually had God on their side.  
There are plenty of shots showing the U.S. troops carrying crosses and 
praying yet presents the Germans as godless heathens.  I think a less 
biased, less forced, and less ignorant approach to this subject is 
needed.
Perhaps these scenes went above my head and were played satirically to 
show the insanity and stupidity of war.  If so, it went over the heads 
of most of the audience as well, and I wasn't even laughing!  Saving 
Private Ryan being an extreme satire certainly is a possibility - it 
happened recently with Paul Verhoeven's Starship Troopers.  Verhoeven 
wasn't actually pushing the fascist message of the film, but trying to 
show how ridiculous it was (see the directors commentary on DVD).  
Ironically, a lot of people came out agreeing with the "message" of the 
film - I hope the same doesn't happen with Saving Private Ryan!
Another tiresome device used by Spielberg is making sure the audience 
goes through a long drawn out process of making sure we know someone 
essential to the plot is going to die, while anyone given little screen 
time has a quick and unexpected death.  
These gripes aside, let me dwell on what I liked about the movie.  
Usually reviewers talk about what they like first and what they didn't 
like second.  Not me.  The technical excellence of this movie is 
incredible; from staging incredible pyrotechnic battle scenes to using a 
multitude of film stock, war on film hasn't look more realistic.  The 
camera gets a bit MTV-ish at times but it is almost always used as a 
good confusion effect.  Overall the cinematography by Janusz Kaminski is 
perfect.
The weapons and tanks all look incredibly realistic, and I mean 
realistic.  I wonder if they used actual equipment from the period.  I'm 
also wondering if there were any computer generated effects - if there 
were I couldn't tell.  Some of the bullets whizzing through the air 
leave a yellow streak though - this seemed a bit strange and was 
probably a computer effect.  Since these streaks all match the various 
film stocks you have to commend the effects team for a wonderful job.  
The sound is also loud, thunderous, and uses multi-channel effects well.  
Furthermore the guns all have distinct sounds, and this also impressed 
me.
A couple classic lines: "If one of my men dies, doesn't that mean I've 
saved two more?"  "If God is on our side, then who could be on the 
other?"
Where Spielberg does take some risks and shows his directorial talent is 
showing some insignificant characters in pain and suffering.  Most war 
movies just show casualties lie down quietly and peacefully as if they 
had spontaneously fallen asleep during the battle.  I have to thank him 
for making this decision as this gives the movie a needed dose of human 
realism.  Another bonus is that some of the characters are not cardboard 
stereotypes.  Tom Sizemore, Edwards Burns, and Tom Hanks are good in 
their roles and both  make unpredictable decisions (a lot of POW killing 
in this movie).  Yet there are even more cardboard characters: the 
humanistic wimp who becomes a tough soldier, the lovable young hotshot 
sniper, and of course the rest are tough and rambunctious grunts who 
don't seem to have any thoughts about war at all.
This movies message basically boils down to: pro-patriotism, 
pro-American, and leans slightly towards pro-war.  Whether you have a 
problem with those things is your own concern.  If you'd rather not see 
them, I suggest some real anti-war movies: Platoon, Paths of Glory, All 
Quiet on the Western Front, or even Spielberg's own Schindler's List.  
If you are a war movie buff like me then by all means rush out to see 
it.  The battle scenes, at least, are technically excellent and the 
chance to see the opening fifteen minutes on a big screen shouldn't be 
passed up.  Heck, it even has a cameo by Captain Dale Dye!

