Authors
Paul McElligott
Number of Reviews
11

Title
Review for Blazing Saddles (1974)
"Blazing Saddles" is probably not Mel Brook's best film (that's a
toss-up between "The Producers" and "Young Frankenstein"), but it is
easily his most consistently funny work. It would never be made today
and that statement is as much praise for this movie as it is an
indictment of the politically correct times in which we live.
Nowadays, when we have to refer to the "N-word" as, well, the N-word, I
find myself actually nostalgic for a time when a movie was confident
enough in its own sense of humor to throw around the N-word with such
gleeful abandon.  Brooks has enough faith in his audience to expect them
to be in on the joke, and thus understand that he is an
equal-opportunity offender.  
This is a film based squarely on the old Abbie Hoffman quote that
"sacred cows" make the tastiest hamburger, serving up a juicy slab of
USDA Grade A irreverence.  It assaults your sensibilities, yes, but it
does it with a wink and a smile.
Watch this film and try not to take it, or yourself, too seriously.

Title
Review for Wyatt Earp (1994)
Before the eruption of dueling volcano movies and dual impact of the
killer asteroid movies, there was the showdown between this pair of
cinematic takes on the life of Wyatt Earp and the now legendary gunfight
at the OK Corral.
Aside from being released within a year of each other, these two film
have little in common other than attempting to relate similar events. 
"Tombstone," released first, approaches the story as standard action
fare, while "Wyatt Earp" strives to be a "serious" biopic in the
tradition of "Patton."  Held up against their respective aspirations,
"Tombstone" is the more successful film, but it's a near thing.
The obvious place to begin is by comparing the actors portraying Wyatt
Earp.  Kurt Russell in "Tombstone" is the standard Kurt Russell
character with an 18-century mustache.  It's not a bad performance, but
it hardly distinguishes itself among Russell's recent performances.
Kevin Costner as Wyatt Earp is much harder to evaluate.  He plays the
older Earp as an emotionally repressed man, so the range of his
performance is limited.  As the younger Earp, when the future lawman was
simply guarding a payroll wagon, before life had crushed all the
optimism out of him, Costner shows some sign of the goofy exuberance he
showed in "Silverado", his last collaboration with director Lawrence
Kasdan.  Overall, Costner's portrayal is superior but his Earp is often
so coldly unlikable that it's hard to care much about him.
One similarity between the two films is fact that the actor playing John
"Doc" Holliday steals all the scenes he is in. 
Val Kilmer's role in "Tombstone" is showier and more comedic.  He plays
Holliday as an effete Rhett Butler with a droll wit.  In "Wyatt Earp"
Dennis Quaid simply disappears into his role, pulling a reverse DeNiro
by losing 43 pounds to play the tubercular Holliday.  His character has
his own form of wit, but it's colder and harder than Kilmer's.  Also,
Quaid does a far better job of portraying the effects of Holliday's
tuberculosis.  Kilmer never seems to have anything worse than a bad flu,
except when its dramatically necessary for him to look worse.  The
downside is that Quaid's Holliday doesn't appear until the film is half
over and gets a lot less screen time than Kilmer does.
As history, "Wyatt Earp" holds a sizable lead in accuracy over
"Tombstone" although its fidelity to the facts is questionable in a lot
of areas.  Interestingly, they both take the same liberty with the
shooting of Morgan and Virgil Earp, condensing events two weeks apart
into a single night.  
Of course, key to both films is their depiction of the events in
Tombstone leading up to the famous shootout.  This is the entire focus
of "Tombstone" but occupies only the last hour of the three hour "Wyatt
Earp".  "Tombstone" is more "interesting" and "exciting" but very
superficial.  The "bad guys" are simply bad because there has to be bad
guys.  There is also a klutzy analogy to modern inner city gangs that
robs the "Tombstone" villians of their only shreds of credibility. 
"Wyatt Earp" does a much better job of portraying and clarifying the
issues that drove Earps and Holliday to shoot it out with the Clantons
and the McClaurys.  The personalities involved are less colorful but the
are more believable.  How true they are to history is another question,
but clearly "Wyatt Earp" gets closer to the truth than "Tombstone" ever
does.
The shootout itself is similar in both films, but "Tombstone" goes over
the top, turning it into a scene that owes more to "Lethal Weapon" than
"My Darling Clementine".  It doesn't help that during sequence where the
Earps and Holliday walk side-by-side to the OK Corral, they pass by a
totally unexplained house fire.  Was this set by the Clantons?  Or was
it just to give the director a dramatic backdrop against which to shoot
the characters?
It may sound like a prefer "Wyatt Earp" to "Tombstone" despite the fact
that I said that "Tombstone" was more successful.  The deal is, in areas
where the two films overlap, "Wyatt Earp" is the superior film; better
written, better acted and more authentic.  The problem is that this film
also covers areas of Earp's life that Tombstone does not touch.  Much of
this, especially early in Earp's life, is just not interesting.  Costner
seems to have become the king of three hour movies that should be
shorter.  Although editing would probably not have rescued "Waterworld"
or "The Postman" it would have lessened the pain.
It would have helped "Wyatt Earp" a great deal, however,.  If they had
left out most of the stuff before Earp meets the Mastersons, this film
would have been much more successful.  There is little before that point
that is not adequately explained later on.  
"Tombstone" is more successful only because it aims lower than "Wyatt
Earp."  The Costner film plays for bigger stakes, and thus fails more
spectacularly than the Kurt Russell version could ever hope for.

Title
Review for Contact (1997)
Contact is a nobly intentioned but ultimately unsatisfying adaptation of
Carl Sagan's only novel.  It details the circumstances surrounding the
first clear sign of intelligent life in outer space and their effects on
the life of a young and idealistic radio astronomer named Ellie Arroway
(Jodie Foster).
We first meet Ellie at a giant radio telescope in Puerto Rico, where she
is part of the SETI (Search for Extraterrestrial Intelligence) project.
Her research is quickly killed, however, by her highly political David
Drumlin (Tom Skerrit), who disdains "pure research" in favor of science
with "commercial applications.
She goes in search of private funding and is turned down at every step
until she pitches her project to a corporation run by the mysterious
S.R. Hadden (John Hurt).  Then, with that money just about to finally
dry up, Ellie is sitting out in the desert near the Very Large Array in
New Mexico when she hears over her headphones a very powerful pulsing
radio signal.  In the movie's most exciting and believable sequence,
Ellie and her coworkers determine that the signal has to be coming from
the star Vega.
At first the signal appears to be just sequences of prime numbers, then
it turns out to be a TV signal of the Berlin Olympics bounced back to
Earth from 50 years before.  Further decoding, with Hadden's help,
reveals another layer to message, containing detailed plans for a
massive and complex machine.
It appears that the machine is a transport that will allow one person to
travel to the aliens' home world.  Of course, the big question becomes
"Who gets to ride it?" (right after "Who's gonna pay for this thing?").
To boil it down, Ellie gets denied the seat in the machine because she
bluntly acknowledges her atheism, while Drumlin gets to go because he
rather insincerely professes his deep religious faith.
Drumlin is killed and the machine destroyed when religious fanatics bomb
the launch platform (apparently to keep "godless science" from talking
to god, or something like that).
Then Hadden reappears with startling news.  He has secretly constructed
a second machine off the coast of Japan and has reserved the ride for
Ellie, in whom he has taken a rather paternal interest.
Ellie boards the machine and is transported through some kind of
wormhole to a dream-like place that looks a lot like Waikiki Beach
before they built the hotels, where she meets the aliens who take the
form of her late father (David Morse).
When she returns home, no one believes her.  She was not even gone for
one second, they say, even though she remembers being gone for 18 hours.
Her story is officially discredited, although believed by a large
segment of the public (who don't even have to know that her computer
records of the trip contain nothing but static . . . eighteen hours
worth of static).
There is a lot to like about Contact so I will highlight those points
first.  Ellie Arroway is a well-rounded character portrayed by one of
the best actresses currently working.  Neither the character nor the
performance has the same depth as Clarice Starling in Silence of the
Lambs, but that's a tough standard to meet.
Ellie is interesting in that she is woman defined by a strange array of
father figures.  Her real father is an idealized movie Dad who does
nothing in the film but love his daughter unconditionally.  Drumlin
comes across as a distant stepfather to whom Ellie is like an irritating
teenager who wants to use his toys to get into trouble.  Hadden
obviously has affection for Ellie, but in the end he seems to see her as
his creation, nothing more than his favorite piece on the chess board.
Even Palmer Joss (Matthew McConaughey), Ellie's love interest, takes a
paternalistic interest in Ellie, seeing her as a misguided person who
needs protection from her own impulses.
The film is technically impressive, especially in the scenes where the
message is first received and during the destruction of the first
machine.  The part of the film dealing with the message has the best
presentation of real science in a film since The Andromeda Strain.
The film falls apart when dealing with its central theme, the dichotomy
between science and religion.  This is a very real debate but Contact
boils it down to a simplistic level that never really touches on the
actual issues involved.
The film presents science pretty well (until the end) so the real
problem stems from it presentation of religious faith.  Religious people
are presented as shallow caricatures.  Rob Lowe plays a Ralph Reed clone
named Richard Rank (very subtle, guys), the voice of the religious
right.  Another religious figure is the fanatic who blows up the first
machine (Jake Busey).
The only really fleshed-out religious person, Palmer Joss, is supposed
to be a minister of some sort, but his actual faith is left pretty
vague.  I can't even say for certain that he was supposed to be a
Christian.  All we know is that he dropped out of the seminary and
obviously has no qualms about pre-marital sex.  
The film drops the science ball at the very end, when Ellie appears to
assert that there are some things even scientists must take on faith. 
In a day and age when the theory of evolution is denounced by the
religion right as an atheist "religious" doctrine, this is exactly the
wrong message to send.  In a movie dealing with issues of science and
faith, the last thing you want your scientist character to do is abandon
the principle of scientific skepticism.
What Ellie should have said was, "You shouldn't believe me.  Not without
evidence, and I don't have the evidence.  I know what happened but you
shouldn't take my word alone."  That is the voice of science speaking.
The character of David Drumlin is another problem with this film.  His
attitudes toward pure research project seem out of place for a person in
his position.  Also, his profession of "faith" before the selection
committee is so nakedly and transparently insincere that only a pack of
idiots should have fallen for it.
The last big problem is with the use of real personalities in various
roles.  The media figures, such as Bernard Shaw and Jay Leno aren't so
bad, in as much as their participation was voluntary.  The use of Bill
Clinton, however, should give anyone pause.  First of all, lifting the
image of a sitting head of state and inserting him into a fictional
story line, thus using his words outside of the context in which they
were spoken, is just plain creepy.  Also, using the real president
places this film between 1993 and 2001, forever dating it.  People
watching this film in the future will say, "Hey, this never took place
during Clinton's term."  This bit of unreality will jar people out of
their suspension of disbelief.  Also, the level of technology portrayed
in the film is too advanced to take place before the first decade of the
next century.  Better to have had a fictitious president played by an
actor or no president at all.
The film does raise an interesting question, although it never develops
it in a satisfying way.  
If we were picking an emissary to send to an alien culture, would an
atheist be automatically disqualified just because ninety percent of the
population of the world professes a belief in God, or at least some form
of supernatural creator?
Personally, I would hope not, since religion is basically an opinion, a
form of ideology.  I would not want any form of ideological test for
such an import task.

Title
Review for Andromeda Strain, The (1971)
Starring: Arthur Hill (Dr. Jeremy Stone), David Wayne (Dr. Charles
Dutton), James Olson (Dr. Mark Hall), Kate Reid (Dr. Ruth Leavitt).  
Produced and Directed by Robert Wise.
The Andromeda Strain is the greatest science fiction film ever made.  I
know that is very sweeping statement, so I'll qualify it by adding that
The Andromeda Strain is one of the few films made that genuinely deserve
the label of "science fiction," stories in which speculative science is
at the core of the plot.
2001: A Space Odyssey is probably a better film, but it really only
qualifies as science fiction if you consider metaphysics to be a
science.  Most all other films we normally classify as science fiction,
or SF, are really just fantasy, action or horror stories set in a
futuristic setting.
The Andromeda Strain starts out with two soldiers in a high-tech (for
1970) van looking for a crashed satellite in a tiny New Mexico town. 
Something bad happens to them.  Pictures from a reconnaissance plane
show a shocking sight.   Apparently everyone in the town is dead.  The
authorities call a "Wildfire Alert," summoning four scientists, all but
one of them somewhat reluctant, to a super-secret underground germ
warfare laboratory in Nevada.  Two of scientists, Stone and Hall, fly
directly to the town in space suits and find a town where almost every
single resident literally dropped in their tracks, their blood turned to
powder in their veins.  Some went insane before they died and two of
them, a baby and an old wino, are miraculously still alive.  They take
the survivors and the satellite back to the lab, where Stone pressures
the White House to call up a "Directive 712," an executive order to
cauterize the area around the town with a nuclear bomb.
What they find on the satellite when they get back to the lab is
Andromeda, an organism that defies all the normal rules of Earth-like
life and mutates as it grows.  Their only hope to cure it is to find out
what a perfectly healthy baby boy has in common with an old derelict. 
What they find out is that organism feeds directly on energy and that
detonating the A-bomb over the town would only spread it across the
entire planet.  They barely call off the bombing in time.
But then the organism mutates into something that threatens to eat
through the labs defenses and break out.  This triggers the lab's
last-ditch defense mechanism, an atomic bomb.
To those raised on the brainless action fare that pollutes movie
theaters these days, The Andromeda Strain will probably seem
interminably slow.  Much of the film is a lot of people standing around
looking at video screens and computer readouts.  But what the characters
see on those screens ratchets up the tension with every turn of the
screw.  The performances are universally fine, with the actors keeping
things low-key and restrained, just like scientists.
To me, the real appeal of this film is the fact that it shows scientists
acting like scientists and makes it seem exciting.  We follow the logic
of their deduction step by methodical step, puzzling like they do every
time Andromeda behaves in a way we don't expect.
This film is only available on wide screen on DVD and that is the way to
see it.  It was originally rated G when first released but it now
carries the PG rating, mostly for very mild nudity and one scene in
which a body's wrist is slashed, spilling its powdered blood.

Title
Review for 2001: A Space Odyssey (1968)
Starring: Keir Dullea, Gary Lockwood, William Sylvester, Douglas Rain
Written by Arthur C. Clarke and Stanley Kubrick
Produced and Directed by Stanley Kubrick
2001 is probably the most review-proof film in the history of cinema. 
Critics who try to do an in-depth analysis always come off sounding like
freshman philosophy students.  In a lot of ways, 2001 is the ultimate
cinematic Rorschach test.  Any review winds up saying more about the
reviewer than about the film itself.
Instead of trying to tell you what I think it all means, I will satisfy
myself with saying that I think 2001 is a singularly important film. 
Aside from Citizen Kane, it may be the most significant film in the
first 100 years of cinema.  More than any other film, before or since,
it shows that film can be used for something beyond mere storytelling. 
Almost all other "great films" still hold to a more traditional
narrative structure.
Not so here.  It would be pointless to summarize the plot of 2001,
because the plot is almost beside the point.  This is cinema as mood
piece, the use of imagery to stir the mind in ways that go beyond
reason.  2001 is a film to be experienced and then dwelt upon at length,
rather than just watched.  If no one comes to the same conclusions, so
much the better.  I seem to remember that director Kubrick compared the
structure of this film to that of symphony.  I think this is accurate. 
2001 is as open to individual interpretation as any good piece of
classical music.
I have said elsewhere that I would not classify this film as science
fiction, unless one considers metaphysics to be a science.  Still,
Kubrick's insistence upon rigid technical accuracy means that the
science-fiction elements are some of the most sophisticated ever
committed to film.
In this vein, the middle and later sections of the film which follow
Heywood Floyd to the lunar crater Tycho and then follow Dave Bowman to
Jupiter and beyond present us, the viewers of 1999, with a strange
contradiction.  Even though the film's view of man's relationship to
technology is rather bleak, the level of technology portrayed for the
years 1999-2001 appears wildly optimistic.  It is fascinating to see
just how big we were dreaming back in the 1960's.
2001's predictions about the future are a wild collection of hits and
misses.  It's true that there are no giant wheel-like space stations in
orbit, but the first elements of a more modest station are already in
place.  Its interior, however, will not resemble the concourse at
Heathrow.  And although the Pan-Am space plane was overly optimistic,
both about luxurious 747-style passenger travel in space and also about
the existence of the airline itself, the design of the ship does
accurately predict the basic shape of the space shuttle we currently
fly.
Like I said, the film's view of man's relationship to his machines is
almost relentlessly pessimistic.   How could it be otherwise when the
only character with a semblance of a personality is a sentient
supercomputer, and a homicidal one at that?  The scene in which the HAL
9000 kills the still hibernating astronauts is especially chilling when
the camera focuses on the computer ubiquitous red eye, like a
traditional movie would dwell on the face of a murderer surveying his
handiwork.  With a human killer, we could read the expression on the
face, maniacal glee or tortured guilt.  With HAL, the lack of any
possibility of expression means that we have a killer whose motives are
both unknown and unknowable.  I challenge even the makers of The Blair
Witch Project to concoct a scarier scenario than that.
And the following scene, in which the pitiless killer begs for its own
existence as David Bowman coldly and mechanically disassembles its
higher mental functions, adds an equally chilling coda to that idea. 
Our attempt to create technology in our own image has succeeded in
duplicating even the darker corners of our nature.
The human characters are overshadowed by both HAL and the alien
monolith, but unlike other technology-driven effects films, this is not
accidental or a deficiency.  In 2001, the human characters are almost
elements of the scenery, their interaction part of the background
noise.  Heywood Floyd (Sylvester) is a non-stop stream of unctuous
pleasantries.  His bland company-man exterior makes his reminder that
security oaths will be required from anyone who knows about the monolith
all the more ominous.  He seems like a nice-enough guy, but his words
hint at rather authoritarian attitudes.
Astronauts Bowman (Dullea) and Poole (Lockwood), on the other hand, seem
to have totally submerged their personalities into their jobs, until
they almost act like machines.  Their responses seem almost programmed,
automatic, while their computer goes about having a nervous breakdown. 
I found it ironically amusing when, in response to a reporter's
question, Poole says that HAL acts like he has emotions, and says so in
the most unemotional voice of which a human is capable.
2001 is not a movie for the people who log into the Video section of
Amazon.com and blather that Armageddon is "the greatest movie ever
made!"  This film makes demands that its audience try to understand what
it is trying to say without it being explained, but doesn't care if we
fail to do so.  The pace is almost glacial at times, but the film
rewards and doesn't bore those willing to make the effort.

Title
Review for Star Wars: Episode I - The Phantom Menace (1999)
Star Wars: Episode 1 - The Phantom Menace
Having seen the original Star Wars films more times than I can count
(more times than any adult cares to admit), I so wanted to love this
movie.  I was mentally prepared to be swept back into a world I haven't
seen anew since I was 17.  With the imagination behind the first trilogy
re-invigorated by a long rest, and equipped with technology not even
imagined in 1977, I expected an unequalled triumph of the imagination.
Okay, there were a few warning signs along the way.  Two years ago, when
the first trilogy was re-released with new effects, the key scene where
Han Solo (Harrison Ford) guns down the bounty hunter Greedo was
re-edited so Greedo fired first.   Not only did the new version look
ridiculous, it also emasculated a key character, softening his rough
edges.  This told me that Lucas was not making creative decisions purely
on artistic merit, but that a politically correct element had crept into
his thinking.
The trailers, however, looked good, filling me with hope that Episode I
would take the Star Wars saga to new heights.
Such is not the case, however.  The Phantom Menace is such a mixed bag
of small pleasures and major disappointments that it's hard to decide
whether or not I actually liked the movie.  (I'll probably have to see
it four or five times to be sure).
The biggest problem with the film is the relative flatness of the
characters.  The first film had clearly defined personalities that
contrasted well.  They were archetypes, of course (the farm boy, the
princess in distress, the soldier of fortune and the old wizard), but
they were well-drawn archetypes inhabited by talented actors.   In The
Phantom Menace, everyone seems to be of the manor born, always speaking
in high, formal language.  None of the personalities stand out well from
the others.  In the first film, even when the characters were speaking
more formal tones, there was still a spark of humanity and humor ("I
thought I recognized your foul stench when I was brought on board").
Something else missing was a clearly defined threat to care about, such
as in the first film, when the Rebels had to destroy the Death Star to
keep themselves and their planet from being blown to tiny bits.  There
is no such easily understood threat here.  Part of the problem is that,
although we are told that the people of Naboo are suffering greatly at
the hands of the Trade Federation, we don't see any example of that on
screen.  I'm not asking for the film to wallow in unpleasantness, but
rather just for anything that would have personalized the situation and
given it some urgency.
In a sense, the title of this film seems rather apt, since the true
villain of this peace never really materializes.  The on-screen threat,
the Trade Federation viceroy and his battle 'droids seem to be a poor
substitute for Darth Vader, Grand Moff Tarkin and Imperial Storm
Troopers.  The really interesting threat, in the persons of the Sith
Lords Darth Sidious and Darth Maul, get far too little screen time.
Darth Maul is a great villain, as far as he goes, but is far too
underutilized here.
I'm not going to fault the quality of the acting too much, since the
actors were given so little to work with.  Ewan McGregor (Obi-Wan
Kenobi) seems especially wasted in a rule that should have had far more
spark and humor.  Liam Neeson () gets a little more meat to chew on, but
even he seems a hemmed in this role.  And as much as I like Samuel L.
Jackson (Mace Windu), I have to wonder how much of a long distance bill
he ran up while basically phoning in his brief appearance.
On the plus side, Natalie Portman (Queen Amidala) brings sweetness and
surprising strength to her role.  Jake Lloyd (Anakin Skywalker), despite
early rumors that his performance was a problem spot for the film, is
also charming and affecting as the ordinary boy who grows up to be Darth
Vader.  Ian McDiarmid is also effective as Senator Palpatine, the future
Emperor, but it is the two young stars that almost save this film's
bacon.
I have to admit that I did not mind the character of Jar Jar Binks,
Qui-Gon Jinn's reluctant comic sidekick.  So much negative hype about
how annoying this character was going to be had spread like wildfire
though the Star Wars fan community that it was impossible for Jar Jar to
live down to it.  My only reservation about this character is that he
was essentially the only source of humor in this film, and it was almost
all slapstick.  There was none of the witty dialogue that typified the
characters of Princess Leia and Han Solo ("It was a boring conversation
anyway") in the first trilogy.  That is one element this film sorely
needed.
I won't give away too much, but the ending of this film seems to depend
far too much on luck and accident, both in the ground battle and up in
space.  As far as the space battle goes, it may be Anakin's abilities
with the Force manifesting themselves, but that is not made clear enough
if it is true.
>From a technical standpoint, of course, the film is faultless.  Director
and writer George Lucas creates totally fantastic and believable worlds
on which we can feast our eyes.  Never once did I find myself looking at
a creature or environment in this film and thinking, "That's a special
effect."
It's a shame that the story doesn't quite live up to the setting.  Of
course, Titanic had the same problem, and it didn't do too badly.
Still, Lucas needs to get a better handle on dealing with characters and
the actors who play them as he goes to work on the next film.  I can't
help but think that a director who hadn't been in the chair in more than
20 years could have tried a smaller, more intimate film before
attempting the most technically ambitious film of all time.
On the plus side, this film more than whets my appetite to see Episode
II, coming in 2002.  The Phantom Menace sets up a number of future
sub-plots that are potentially far more interesting than anything in the
film.
I give the film a 7.5 out of 10.  That's 5 out of 5 for technical merit
and 2.5 out of 5 for artistic impression

Title
Review for Executive Decision (1996)
"Executive Decision" is probably the best film Kurt Russell has made
since the original "Escape From New York."  Of course, only "Tequila
Sunrise" and "The Mean Season" give it any serious competition.  That
said, this is largely a standard "'Die Hard' on a plane" action film
that works best if you don't think too hard.  Fortunately, most of its
mistakes are technical errors that can be mostly dismissed as "artistic
license."
The story concerns an airliner hi-jacked between Athens and Washington,
D.C.  The motivation is presumably to free an Arab terrorist leader
("Babylon 5's" Andreas Katsulas), but intelligence analyst and student
pilot Kurt Russell deduces that the terrorists have some Russian nerve
gas stolen by Chechen mobsters.  Rather than the let the plane land and
wipe out Washington, the Americans launch a daring mid-air transfer led
by stony-faced Steven Seagal, with Russell, a nerdy ARPA engineer
(Oliver Platt) and a rainbow coalition of commandos (John Leguizamo,
B.D. Wong and Joe Morton) along for the ride.  The transfer goes
horribly wrong, mercifully killing off Seagal, breaking Morton's neck
and leaving civilians Russell and Platt stranded on the airliner with
the commandos.
Russell and the surviving commandos start scoping out the enemy and
planning to retake the plane, aided by a plucky flight attendant (Halle
Berry).  Things are complicated by a pompous U.S. senator (J.T. Walsh),
who takes Hart Bochner's role from the original "Die Hard": in other
words, he arrogantly tries to exploit the situation, negotiates with the
terrorists and gets his head blown off as a reward.
One could take issue with the portrayal of the Arab terrorists as nearly
mindless fanatics.  A little more subtlety in their motivation would go
a long way.  It's just not realistic to have the lead hijacker be the
second-in-command of a major terrorist organization who actually
believes the incendiary anti-American rhetoric he uses to fire up the
troops.  Just once, I'd like to see terrorist leaders, Arab or not,
portrayed as the skillful manipulators of propaganda and practitioners
of realpolitik that they probably are.
The ending of the film is telegraphed all the way back in the second
scene where we see Russell taking a flying lesson, so it comes as no
surprise that we end up with the plane crippled and the pilots dead. 
Despite the inevitability of the conclusion, the story moves briskly and
never seriously insults our intelligence.
Still, there were a couple of moments that I'm sure had real military
personnel and aviation engineers laughing hysterically.  At the
beginning of the film, we see Steven Seagal dispatch three armed guards
at the Chechen mafia safe house using a knife, while the rest of his
team looks on with their silenced automatic weapons.  Of course, it
would have been easier, safer and just as quiet to pick off the guards
with the guns, but then Seagal wouldn't have gotten to play with his
knives.
Later, Oliver Platt's character tells us that the mid-air transfer
technique was originally designed for "low-orbit, supersonic" transfers
to the space shuttle.  But Oliver, to be in low-orbit is to be in space
and sound does not travel in a vacuum, thus supersonic is a meaningless
term in this context.  And the last time I checked, the F117 stealth
fighter is not a supersonic aircraft anyway.
Finally, toward the end of the movie, a stray bullet from a terrorist's
gun blows out a window, ripping a huge hole in the side of the aircraft,
through which many passengers and at least one dead terrorist are sucked
out of the plane.   Despite what Hollywood has always shown us, people
would probably not get sucked out of a hole in the side of a plane,
since the differential between the internal and external pressures is
not that great and the pressures would equalize fairly quickly. 
Secondly, one shattered window would never cause a gaping hole like the
one that they show here.
Of course, such artistic license is the norm in Hollywood action movies
and it doesn't spoil my enjoyment of this film in the least.  I just
wish someday, someone would have enough faith in movie audiences to get
such details right.

Title
Review for Aliens (1986)
Starring Sigourney Weaver, Michael Biehn, Bill Paxton, Paul Reiser
Written, Produced and Directed by James Cameron.
Aliens represents a true rarity among movies, a sequel that not only
equals or even surpasses the original, but also one that stands alone as
work unto itself.  You could see this movie without knowing the first
ever existed.  Knowing the original allows you to enjoy the sequel on
other layers of course.
Weaver plays Ripley, the sole survivor of a mining ship whose crew was
wiped out by a previous unknown creature.  After killing the creature,
she climbed into a lifeboat and put herself into suspended animation. 
She stayed that way, drifting through space, for 57 years until she was
found.  Her story is discredited, however, and she is forced into menial
jobs.  However, a colony has been established on the planet where
Ripley's ship found the original alien and now contact has been lost
with that colony.  Ripley is invited to accompany a platoon of Marines
to the planet to investigate.  At first, Ripley resists, but the need to
purge herself of the nightmares that have been plaguing her sleep impels
her to confront her fears.
The gung-ho Marines arrive to find the colony deserted, with signs of
desperate fighting all around.  They also find carcasses of alien
"face-huggers," which plant the seed of the adult alien into human
hosts, and one lone survivor, a little girl named Newt.  An attempt to
locate and rescue the other colonists, however, leads most of the
Marines into an alien ambush and most of the platoon is wiped out.  The
few remaining survivors have to desperately fight off hundreds of aliens
while searching for a way off the planet.
Aliens is less of horror story, like the original, than a
straight-forward action story, and on that level it succeeds as well, if
not better than Alien did as a horror movie.  It represents the peak of
James Cameron's career so far, creatively speaking.  Those who only know
Cameron through Titanic might be surprised to note that yes, he really
can write, and he can also bring in a film for only $17 million, on time
and under budget.
For a film released in 1986, it was certainly not the norm to have a
female lead anchoring a science-fiction action film.  It's not even
common enough today.  That's what makes Sigourney Weaver's performance
so striking.  She can bring off a female action role without ever
calling undo attention to the fact that she is a woman.  Lesser
filmmakers would have felt it necessary to pepper the film with
self-conscious feminist rhetoric and lesser actress might have played it
self-consciously butch.
That wouldn't have worked in this film.  Aliens is, among all the macho
posturing of the marines, the high-tech weapons and furious gunplay,
ultimately a film about motherhood.  For those of you who have only seen
the theatrical release, I point you to the Special Edition, now
available on VHS and DVD.  It contains several scenes deleted from the
original release to shorten the running time.  The most critical of
these is early in the film, before the inquest, when Ripley finds out
that her daughter died of old age two years earlier.  This loss and
sense of failure drives the maternal interest that Ripley takes in the
newly orphaned Newt, and this sense of responsibility leads, I think, to
Ripley going from a shell-shocked basket-case at the beginning of the
film to the rock on which all the other characters wind up leaning.
The motherhood arc extends to the aliens too, when Ripley winds up face
to face with the alien queen, another mother who is now super-pissed at
Ripley for torching her nest.  This film reminds us that, although women
might be referred to as "the weaker sex," in much of nature, the female
is the more dangerous and ferocious gender because she is charged with
the protection of the young.
If you've never watched any of the Alien films, I recommend this one. 
It's far less gory than the first and far superior to the third and
fourth.

Title
Review for Haunting, The (1999)
Rule #1 in telling a good ghost story: the less you show of the ghost,
the better.  Robert Wise remembered that in 1963, Jan de Bont ignores it
in 1999.
To be honest, for the first half of this new adaptation of Shirley
Jackson's classic novel, the story follows the book and the original
movie with reasonable fidelity, and thus for the first hour, The
Haunting is reasonably effective and spooky.  The ghostly manifestations
are done with sound and suggestion, not ham-handed visuals.  After that,
however, the special effects take over and the film loses all narrative
cohesion.
There were a few early problems with the movie, too.  The first was the
house itself.  In the book and the first film, Hill House was a stately
mansion to be sure, but never resembled this cross between Xanadu and
the Winchester House.  Secondly, in the book and first movie version,
the character of Theodora (Catherine Zeta-Jones) was subtly suggested to
have a sexual interest in Eleanor.  In this version, Theo announces
outright that she has a girlfriend and a boyfriend and any sense of
subtle sexual tension between the two women is lost for good.
As far as the story goes, the writing depends on coincidences too
bizarre to be believed, and the resolution is too neat, too pat to make
an effective ghost story.  The foreshadowing in this script not only
lacks subtlety, but some events are so obviously telegraphed that Samuel
Morse should get a writing credit.
The acting is fine, although Liam Neeson chews the scenery a little
toward the end.  He's probably just making up for the lack of
opportunity he had to do any acting in Star Wars.
Jan de Bont serves up another reminder that he's never one to let story
get in the way of special effects.  This is probably his most competent
film since the original Speed, but that's hardly an accomplishment.
All in all, this version of The Haunting is a waste of the talents of
those involved.  See the 1963 original instead.  Better yet, read
Shirley Jackson's brilliant novel.  
This is film gets 4 out of 10 and most of those points were earned in
the first hour of the movie.

Title
Review for 2010 (1984)
Starring: Roy Scheider, John Lithgow, Helen Mirren.  
Based on the novel by Arthur C. Clarke
Written, Produced and Directed by Peter Hyams
2010 is the sequel to the film that needed no sequel, the cinematic
equivalent to painting legs for the Mona Lisa.  It seeks to explain
things best left to the individual viewer's imagination.  For these
reasons, I hate it.
But is it a good movie?  Judging by the standards set by 2001, the
answer is no.  By the standards set by what tends to call itself science
fiction these days, it's ok, but not great.
The setup is pretty simple.  Nine years later, two missions to
investigate what happened in 2001 are being planned, one American, one
Soviet.  The Russians will get there first, but only the Americans have
the know-how to get the Discovery, the ship from the first movie,
working again.  When it turns out that the Discovery will crash into
Jupiter's moon Io before the Americans get there, it is decided to send
the American crew along on the Russian mission.
This is one of the places I think the film goes wrong.  Hyams adds an
element not in the book when he sets the story against a backdrop of
escalating Cold War tensions in Central America.  I'm sure this seemed
quite topical in 1984, but less than four years later, the rise of
Gorbachev and Glasnost quickly made this film seem dated.  Today, with
the Soviet empire in ashes, it seems almost quaint.  To be fair, Hyams
had no way to predict the incredible changes that would come into the
world over the next few years.  Still, his insistence upon the Cold War
setting seems at odds with the first film, which seemed to imply very
cordial relationship between the U.S. and Russia.  It is easy to imagine
2001 taking place in a world where the Cold War has ended.
Another problem is with the casting of Roy Scheider as Heywood Floyd.  I
realize that William Sylvester was probably too old to play the part,
and they probably wanted a better known actor for the role, but Scheider
seems like exactly the wrong choice to play this character.  Floyd is a
bland bureaucrat who speaks in unctuous pleasantries, while Scheider
plays a rather demonstrative and eccentric academic.  There is nothing
wrong with his performance, but it is jarring when held up against the
original, like bringing in Eddie Murphy to play Luke Skywalker in a Star
Wars movie.  If they had just not called the character Heywood Floyd, I
would not have minded so much.
They also screwed up by letting Floyd off the hook for HAL going
bonkers.  It is revealed that conflicting orders caused the computer to
interpret them by deciding he didn't need people to run the mission.  In
2010, Scheider-as-Floyd pleads ignorance, but in 2001,
Sylvester-as-Floyd is clearly shown toward the end of movie saying
things that indicate he knew exactly what was going on.  Apparently, in
1984 Hollywood, you can't have your main character be a bad person in
any way.  However, if the two films are to be consistent,
Scheider-as-Floyd is clearly lying.
My other problem with this scene is a too pat explanation for HAL's
psychosis.  It makes perfect sense and is thus emotionally unsatisfying
in light of the first film.
Overall the acting by the rest of the ensemble is fine, but John Lithgow
overacts shamelessly at some points, screaming at the top of his lungs
when a little more subtlety would have been so much better.
The first movie was famous, in part, for its overly optimistic
predictions about space travel in 2001.  The sequel's problem is that it
appears that technology has slid backwards to a decade behind what it
was in 2001.  Everything in 2010, from the ships to the spacesuits, look
primitive compared to those in the first film.  You can't write it off
to being on a Russian spacecraft, because the American spacesuits don't
look any more advanced than the Russian ones do.  Certainly, the suits
and technology look more "realistic" by 1984 standards, but this movie
doesn't take place in 1984, it takes place in 2010, nine years after the
boldly futuristic designs of the first film.
As a technology predictor, 2010 fails in the opposite direction as its
predecessor.  We already know that huge crewed ships will not be headed
to Jupiter in either 2001 or 2010, so we have to look to the small
things.  A lot of the technology in 2010 looks primitive even by today's
standards.  The computer technology looks especially klugey. 
Scheider-as-Floyd is shown using a big klunky notebook computer at one
point that must have looked so futuristic by 1985 standards.  In the
"Pan Am space plane" failed-economic-predictor department, 2010 shows us
a copy of the now-defunct magazine OMNI.
Again, 2010 is not a horrible movie, but given the legacy it has to live
up to, not being horrible is simply not enough.   The Lakers today may
not be a bad basketball team, but compared to the Showtime era of the
80's, they suck.  The problem is that 2010 is very much a regular movie
in the traditional Hollywood mode, done as a sequel to a masterpiece
that thumbed its nose at every convention of that tradition.  To their
credit, Hyams and Company did resist the temptation to totally surrender
to Hollywood convention.  Scheider and Russian commander Helen Mirren do
not sleep together, and there is no crazed saboteur threatening both
ships.  It defies the fashion of the time by predicting a reasonably
optimistic future.  Sure there are still nuclear bombs and a Cold War
going on, but at least it's not Blade Runner or Escape from New York.
On the whole, however, when set against the original film, 2010 is a
competent failure.

Title
Review for Air Force One (1997)
"Air Force One" probably would have seemed like a retread even if it
hadn't followed "Executive Decision" by a year, but the existence of
other film sure doesn't help. 
The plot deals with the hijacking if the eponymous aircraft by a band of
Russian "ultra-nationalists" led by Gary Oldman, who want to free their
leader, General Radek ("Das Boot's" Jürgen Prochnow).  The terrorists
think that the president (Harrison Ford) has escaped, but he's really
hiding in the bowels of the plane, getting ready to start kicking some
Ruskie butt.
That this story has plot holes big enough to fly a 747 through them is
probably not a surprise to people familiar with this sort of "'Die Hard'
on a ____________" movie.  Unfortunately, this film falls down exactly
where more successful movies of this sort shine, with clearly understood
motivations for the bad guys.  Gary Oldman's character is easy enough to
relate to, but the film's writers clearly have no clue when it comes to
post-Soviet Russian politics.  For an "ultra-nationalist", he sure rants
and raves like a dedicated communist.  Anyone who knows anything about
Russia today knows that ultra-nationalists are anything but communists.
The key motivation for making this story believable, that of the
traitorous Secret Service agent (Xander Berkley), is never explained. 
What would make this man betray the president he swore to protect with
his life?  Money?  Is he a closet commie?  Why?
Another gaping whole is the story comes when Ford orders one of the
fighters trailing the plane to fires missile to set off Air Force One's
defenses, thus helping Ford to overpower one of the terrorists.  I don't
know, but if I had hi-jacked a plane and then someone fired a missile at
it, I'd be kind of pissed, but Gary Oldman never even mentions it to the
vice-president (Glenn Close).
The ending of film, featuring a mid-air transfer from a crippled Air
Force One to another plane, is exciting but inadequately justified. 
Hey, they are flying over water!  Even if the plane is supposed
"unlandable," surely it must be safer to ditch at sea then do a trapeze
act at 10,000 feet.  I mean, Air Force One does have floatation devices,
doesn't it?
Glenn Close is first rate as the vice-president, but otherwise the
performances are professional but unspectacular.  Ford plays his stock
"Vulnerable Everyman" character.  Even though this is not a Tom Clancy
film, one can't help but notice the similarities between the President
in this film and Clancy's Jack Ryan. Some other top-flight actors (Dean
Stockwell and William H. Macy) are sadly underutilized.
All in all, "Air Force One" is a professionally made big-budget
actioner, but the script could have done with a few extra trips through
typewriter.
