Authors
Jason Sands
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Godzilla (1998)
The Big G gets a 90s make over in this thrilling roller coaster of FX.
In this version, Godzilla is the result of French nulcear testing in the
50s.  He is supposedly a mutated Iguana, and is well over two hundred
feet tall.
The main plot revolves around Nick (Matthew Broderick), a
Biologist/Nuclear Physicist who is researching the results of Radiation
on animals.  He is called in to investigate when Godzilla attakcs a
Japanese Fishing boat.  
Meanwhile, Nick's ex girlfriend is struggling in a dismal job as toadie
to a smarmy anchorman.  It seems she dumped him when he asked her to
marry her in the films lame attempt at a love story.  But hey, who cares
about the little people?  THis move ain't called Broderick;  We are here
to see the Big Guy turn up the heat!
There are many struggles by the script writers to keep Godzilla
"realistic."   He is not the invincible juggernaut of Japanese Kaiju
films;  He can be hurt, and used speed, agility, and cunning to defeat
the army instead of brute strength.
Godzilla's special FX are nothing short of amazing;  His sheer size is
well displayed by some artful direction, and his much more reptillian
appearance makes  him all the more menacing.   Instead of an atomic fire
blast, he can create hurricane force winds with his roar.
BTW, he is a HE.  Yes, the egg laying thing is a big part of the plot,
but he produces the eggs asexually.
Godzilla dwells little on the human side of the drama, which is good
since it basically sucks.  The producers probably knew this, so there
are many, many jabs a Film Critics Siskel and Ebert.  Doesn't excuse the
thin plot, though.
Kudos do go to the Professional, (forgot his name.) who plays a French
Secret Agent.   He is the only well developed character in the movie,
and his screen time is among the shortest.   
All in all, I have to say that Godzilla is a great, entertaining movie,
but not for the human actors;  For all of the city stomping anctics of
the Big G.  The movie screams for sequal;  How about a rematch with King
Kong?  Hey, it could happen...
The  Steel City Wrestling Federation: Where the big boys play with
attitude!
http://www.angelfire.com/mi/scwrestling
