Authors
Karina Montgomery
Number of Reviews
8

Title
Review for Serendipity (2001)
What a delicious conceit that all the stars and fates and powers that be
have a hand in our destinies, so that we can stumble across the person with
whom we are meant to be through fortune alone.  It's definitely escapist to
be selfish, and what better way to be selfish than in the fictionalized
pursuit of true love?  This is definitely one of those movies where the
ending is in no doubt; the joy is in the journey. And thankfully, the
preview actually leaves us with some surprises! 
The characters in this movie wisely suggest on more than one occasion that
leaving everything to fate isn't living at all, and they are correct.  It's
entertaining as well to watch people who generally are intelligent and
well-read and the type to scoff at horoscopy new agey kinds of intuitive
pseudo-science to also be utterly captivated by the magic of their
connection.  It is, after all, magic that appears in a non-magical world
that is the most wondrous.  Seriously, how many times can magic happen in a
fairy-world before it becomes mundane?  It's the same kind of acceptable
magic that made Sleepless in Seattle such a winsome film.  Amusingly, all
their rational, scientific machinations to force fate into finding each
other again are nothing compared to the witless, accidental
almost-path-crossings throughout this film.  It's a delight to watch two
charming people, charmed by each other, twisting in the fickle wind of
destiny.
It also doesn't hurt that Kate Beckinsale is a dreamy perfect girl, and
it's no secret that every woman at some point has objectified John Cusack
as the perfect man.  How could they not be perfect for each other?  Instead
of holding up the jam box outside Kate's window, however, John has to
really get down to some stalker nitty gritty...meanwhile, the ladies are
all charmed that he would go to so much effort.  That's what's romantic,
that passion despite all reason.
Plotwise, their interest/love/connection has to be immediate and
distracting, and perhaps it's a little unfair to so easily discard their
existing mates.  Kate's mate is pretty annoying, but Cusack's is not.  My
companion wished she had been more villainized, but I disagree.  Sometimes
someone can be perfectly wonderful but still not The One perfect one.  If
she's a villain, then he's an idiot for being duped by her.  If she's a
sweetie, then only his predestined soulmate can trump her.
In the meantime, it's also beautifully shot with lovely music and pretty
little running visuals.  We sit in the dark, watching the screen for clues
(like watching The Sixth Sense for the 2nd time) and wriggling in delicious
agony every time they have a near miss...very nice teases.  The supporting
cast includes the under-appreciated Jeremy Piven and Eugene Levy,
supporting and/or not condoning this mad quest, as well as Molly Shannon in
a surprisingly Joan Cusack-esque best friend role.  (That's a compliment).
I would only recommend it as a date movie for people who are totally
convinced that they belong together, their meeting was pre-ordained, all
that good stuff.  Otherwise you are just planting the seeds of doubt and
worry where Hollywood certainly did not intend for them to go.  But it's
worth the money.
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
These reviews (c) 2001 Karina Montgomery.  Please feel free to forward
but just credit the reviewer in the text.  Thanks.
cinerina@flash.net
Check out previous reviews at:
http://www.cinerina.com
http://ofcs.rottentomatoes.com - the Online Film Critics Society
http://www.hsbr.net/reviews/karina/ - Hollywood Stock Exchange Brokerage
Resource
http://www.mediamotions.com
http://www.capitol-city.com

Title
Review for Osmosis Jones (2001)
It appears I neglected to send out this review!  My apologies!  Viewers of
my website have seen it, but I apologize for my slip.  I wrote this 8/7/01!
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
Osmosis Jones
Wait a minute - a Farrelly Brothers movie that is rated PG?  Starring Bill
Murray?  Is such a thing possible?  Possible, yes, and, believe it or not,
not so bad for the kiddies and adults.  My companion (with very low
expectations) and myself (not so low) were surrounded by kids in the
screening we saw, and trepidatious parents as well - they were willing to
go only because it was free.  It was no routine antibody comedy!  We
laughed a lot and strained to catch all the jokes.  In fact, afterwards,
the more we talked about it, the more we really liked it.
Chris Rock, as the titular white blood cell, was as annoying as he always
is, which was the only damper on the film for me.  If you love Chris Rock,
by all means, rush out and see this film without reading another word.  If
you don't, you should still enjoy it a lot, as we did.  Bill Murray is a
genius at being a lovable slob, and few other people could have been Frank
- so oblivious to his self-induced plight, reveling in his disgustingness
but never winking or nodding at the audience about it, and yet somehow
remaining sympathetic.  Fabulous.
Anatomical jokes (well-researched and not just humerus for humorous' sake)
abound, as well as a general message that you should eat right and help
your body take care of itself.  Bill Murray's Frank is a master of killing
himself through food and general bad behavior, and it is depicted as gross
and awful, and deadly.  He picks up a little simian retro-virus in his job
at the zoo and the internal, animated portion of the movie becomes a great
cop/buddy adventure comedy starring Chris Rock and, later, a pill voiced
with droll heroics by David Hyde Pierce (Niles).
I only gave this film a matinee price because it stumbles a bit in the
beginning of the third act, possibly due to too much attention briefly
being paid to the live-action framing story.  Bill Murray is Frank, whose
body is host to the visual gag-fest that is the animated section of the
film, and he has a daughter, a loser brother, abysmal personal habits, and
some problems with his daughter's teacher.  It's kind of complex for a
framing mechanism, and it is only made interesting by the real story, what
is going on inside his system.  Inside Frank is a nonstop and very creative
barrage of visual and verbal gags, some of which the sound quality
obscured, which just made me want to see it again.  The detail-oriented
writing that went into the endo-plotline more than make up for any mild
deficiencies in the exo-plot.
Jones' story is a pretty straightforward, almost formulaic
cop-who-can't-catch-a-break-but-is-the-only-one-who-knows-about-what's-going-dow
n story, but somehow, in this plasmic milieu, it's fresh again.  It's very
creative, yet very 5th grade science film (thematically) and that is really
what makes it work.  That, and William Shatner as the mayor of Frank.
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
These reviews (c) 2001 Karina Montgomery.  Please feel free to forward
but just credit the reviewer in the text.  Thanks.
cinerina@flash.net
Check out previous reviews at:
http://www.cinerina.com
http://ofcs.rottentomatoes.com - the Online Film Critics Society
http://www.hsbr.net/reviews/karina/ - Hollywood Stock Exchange Brokerage
Resource
http://www.mediamotions.com
http://www.capitol-city.com

Title
Review for Jay and Silent Bob Strike Back (2001)
JAY AND SILENT BOB STRIKE BACK (2001) / ** 1/2
Directed by Kevin Smith, from his screenplay. Starring Jason Mewes, Smith,
Ben Affleck. Running time: 104 minutes. Rated R for offensive language by
the MFCB. Reviewed on September 6th, 2001.
Synopsis: Potheads Jay (Mewes) and Silent Bob (Smith) learn from their
friend Holden (Affleck) that their likenesses are being used in a new
feature film, based on a comic book created by Holden and his ex-partner,
Banky (Jason Lee). Determined to put a stop to the movie, Jay and Silent
Bob set out for Hollywood. En route, they befriend a monkey, encounter a
quartet of suspicious women -- including the lovely Justice (Shannon
Elizabeth) -- and run afoul of a hapless wildlife offer (Will Ferrell).
Review: "Jay And Silent Bob Strike Back" feels like a late-night wrap
party; it's a loud, fun, silly release. "Jay And Silent Bob" has none of
the keen ethical acuity of "Dogma" or "Chasing Amy", nor "Clerks"'s sly
social awareness; it's just a traditional road comedy, an excuse to put a 
bunch of Smith characters (and actors) back onto the screen one last time
and take a few more potshots at his favourite targets. The result, not
unexpectedly, is somewhat uneven, and exhibits a "Saturday Night
Live"-like ignorance of when a joke has outlived its usefulness. To a
degree, it's also a rather inaccessible movie: if you're unfamiliar with
earlier Smith flicks, the appearance of some actors in multiple roles may
be confusing. Similarly, if you've never heard of, say, the debate over
Greedo shooting first, much of the cinema-oriented humour may not be to  
your taste. That said, there are moments of brilliance, especially for  
Smith aficionados: the "Scooby Doo" and "Planet Of The Apes" pastiches  
are priceless, as is the scene in which the title characters provide wish
fulfillment for any long-suffering Usenetter. And "Jay And Silent Bob  
Strike Back" succeeds as a last hurrah for Smith's seminal creations: it
both celebrates the characters, and leaves us satisfied that their story
has now been told.
Copyright  2001 Shannon Patrick Sullivan.
Archived at The Popcorn Gallery,
  http://www.physics.mun.ca/~sps/movies.html
  |     Shannon Patrick Sullivan    |         shannon@mun.ca          |       
  +---------------------------------+---------------------------------+
/  Doctor Who: A Brief History of Time (Travel)   go.to/drwho-history  \
\__ We are all in the gutter but some of us are looking at the stars __/

Title
Review for Musketeer, The (2001)
While it may seem petty, in light of this week's events, to decry this
movie as an abomination, well, that is what it felt like sitting in the
theatre.  The Musketeer starts out in an average enough fashion, with
slightly wooden dialogue, Tim Roth over acting, super tight shots of abrupt
movements.  Then, an appalling 1970's student film takes over for the
opening credits.  Apparently paying Xin Xin Xiong (the fight choreographer,
whose name was the only one billed in the previews) left no cash for the
titles.  My companions giggled uncomfortably during the weird and horrible
early 80's TV movie titles.  Still, chin up, we will survive this - and
besides, the teaser portion of the movie looked just fine.  Key word:
Looked.  Please note the past tense.
Then the movie reverted back to normal.  The sucking began slowly,
gradually, imperceptibly.  An out of focus shot here, an overly dark action
sequence there, inexplicable behavior and silly dialogue scattered like
breadcrumbs in the dark woods.  It was still the first real scene in the
film, it could just have been a ham-handed bid at mystery.
The first fight scene is elaborate, almost cartoonish in its
fifty-moves-where-one-will-do, with fingerhold balance absurdity.
Impressive hiding of the wires, however - it was so dark in this scene they
could have been suspended from nautical ropes.  Was it dark?  You bet -
almost totally Asian stunt team (according to the credits) probably did not
resemble their white French Gallic patrician characters very much, so the
director opts for a muddy too-close soup of stupidity.
The director, Peter Hyams, is also the cinematographer (in a low attempt to
be Robert Rodriguez, I suppose) and his name set off clanging Notre
Dame-size bells in my head - but from what?  End of Days, that wasn't so
bad (but now that I think about it, it was dark), Timecop - and The Relic.
Long the butt of my movie crowd's derision, The Relic was only used as an
object of positive comparison after Phantoms came out.  Similarly, The
Musketeer is only watchable when compared to the truly unwatchable, like
Battlefield Earth.  We did have a lot of laughs watching this film, and it
is extremely MST3K-friendly, but man is it rank.
Enter the dame, modern American Virgin/Beauty/Pie's Mena Suvari, whose
period acting is comparable to Winona Ryder's.  "Sexual tension" is played
as flat wit after being translated into various languages.  Then it gets
worse.  Continuity is non-existent - bad guys disappear when they are
dispatched like a Playstation game, and turn up with the same logic-free
silliness.  By the end we were holding our pounding heads in agony (like
Relic companion SJ's forehead bruise after pounding his fist there
repeatedly during that film), rolling our eyes, gasping in horror, and
inserting our own superior dialogue.  Instead of calling in, say, William
Goldman or Carrie Fisher, apparently all the script rewrites were done by
Koko (the gorilla) - didn't Cardinal Richlieu at one point say "drink drink
apple me kill D'Artagnan?"
Bad dialogue, dark dark scenes, Stephen Rea & Tim Roth yawning through
their scenes, Catherine Deneuve looking like she shot up heroin just to
tolerate the job, and D'Artagnan (The Wedding Planner's Justin Chambers)
almost irritatingly serious throughout.
Good points:  production design, art department, locations, makeup,
wardrobe, all fantastic.  The ladder scene (even if it is ridiculous, it's
still extremely cool.)
Bad points:  Everything else.  The entire movie is a flimsy and needlessly
complex construct to justify the admittedly cool ladder scene.  FYI:  The
Ladder Scene is one hour, 45 minutes into the film.  Do yourself a favor:
buy a ticket to Rat Race, watch these 5 minutes of the Musketeer, and then
go see Rat Race.
Hong Kong actioners generally don't need such dense and elaborate plots to
show off cool fight choreography.  The Must-Not-Hear is low on fights, big
on badly explained 17th century French politics, and long on suck.  The
HTML code on the home page for The Musketeer would be a better screenplay.
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
These reviews (c) 2001 Karina Montgomery.  Please feel free to forward
but just credit the reviewer in the text.  Thanks.
cinerina@flash.net
Check out previous reviews at:
http://www.cinerina.com
http://ofcs.rottentomatoes.com - the Online Film Critics Society
http://www.hsbr.net/reviews/karina/ - Hollywood Stock Exchange Brokerage
Resource
http://www.mediamotions.com
http://www.capitol-city.com

Title
Review for Greenfingers (2000)
This is an affable, charming, warm comedy-drama with interesting
characters, fine actors, and some good gardening tips.  However, Britain
has a new genre of movie these days (I noticed the same thing with The Full
Monty, fun as that one was) which is the charming, obstacle-free ascension
fable.  In this genre, The Full Monty has things going for it which
Greenfingers did not, which is bawdy humor, deeper drama, and snappy
musical numbers.  But, sadly, from a storytelling perspective,Greenfingers
is a smooth, painless ride into unlikely bliss.
Clive Owen plays Colin Briggs, the titular greenfingers, who is a criminal
of uncertain degree put into a progressive prison, where he haplessly falls
into gardening.  Everything happens from this point on with Swiss precision
and then the movie is over.  Certainly, there are ups and downs.  David
Kelly (from Waking Ned Devine, whose presence onscreen actually caused a
murmur to ripple through my small weeknight audience) is a sweet old man
and a fascinating character, whom every recognizes as such, thus negating
his specialness with regards to audience empathy.
Colin is closed off and surly, and then he is greenfingered and closed off,
and then, with no change of expression, is fully alive and thriving.  I was
charmed at spots, I laughed at spots, but mostly I saw points where the
story needed to take a turn to keep me interested - the young lovers needed
to be thwarted in some way, or the system needed to shut the program down,
or something - anything.  None of that happened, and everything went
swimmingly.  Very disappointing.
While, of course, we go to movies to see people achieve what we can only
dream of, or overcome insurmountable odds, or find love despite destiny's
sense of humor, or whatever, this is not always enough.  The hero in a
story is the person with the most to lose, or with the most to gain.  Since
Colin is so abrasive and unpleasant at the beginning, in order to
sympathize with him, I needed to root for him, have some reason to care
about him.  He has nothing to lose, because he cares for nothing, and
nothing to gain, because he is happy where he is.  Except inasmuch as other
characters decided to care for him (so did I, by extension, because I cared
for them) he was no one I wanted to spend two hours with in a dark room, no
matter how charming the subject matter.  I didn't care, and I wanted to,
and that is movie's flaw.
However, there are some laughs, and David Kelly is of course lovely, as is
Helen Mirren, in a British sort of Martha Stewart persona, and it's worth
seeing, just not worth paying too much.  Lovely flowers, excellent and
obscure dialects to study, and breezy flower show gowns, but it's all too
easy.  Most times the joy is in the journey, but here the joy must be
merely the outcome.
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
These reviews (c) 2001 Karina Montgomery.  Please feel free to forward
but just credit the reviewer in the text.  Thanks.
cinerina@flash.net
Check out previous reviews at:
http://www.cinerina.com
http://ofcs.rottentomatoes.com - the Online Film Critics Society
http://www.hsbr.net/reviews/karina/ - Hollywood Stock Exchange Brokerage
Resource
http://www.mediamotions.com
http://www.capitol-city.com

Title
Review for Musketeer, The (2001)
Alexandre Dumas meets Hong Kong action with newcomer Justin Chambers
reprising the oft-played character of dashing swordsman D'Artagnon in
director Peter Hyam's adventure "The Musketeer."
For some reason that I may figure out later, I don't know why the time,
money and effort were put into the making of "The Musketeer." It may be
that someone had the clever idea of combining the Dumas characters and
story with the current enamor with the action work of Hong Kong imports
like this film's Xin-Xin Xiong ("Once Upon a Time in China") and Yuen
Woo-Ping from "Crouching Tiger, Hidden Dragon." The result is a mix of
genres that don't mesh well.
Elements of the Ritz Brothers-style comedy (for those few who remember that
comedic troupe from the 1939 "The Three Musketeers"), the Man with No Name
from "A Fistful of Dollars" (D'Artagnan demands that the bad guys apologize
to his horse in a direct ref to the Clint Eastwood spaghetti western) and
Hong Kong action choreography are all utilized in the original script by
Gene Quintano. The result is an action flick that bears little resemblance
to its source material while it makes contemporary that material in an
effort to grab the "Matrix" crowd. Alexandre Dumas may well be rolling in
his grave if he knows what was done to his classic oeuvre and characters.
The real problem with the "The Musketeer" lies in the casting of the two
lead, romantically intertwined characters, D'Artagnan and Francesca (Mena
Suvari). Chambers has the boyishly handsome good looks for the character, a
la Chris O'Donnell, but lacks any onscreen charisma. Suvari has the
doe-eyed, pretty looks as the chambermaid who has the ear of the queen, but
she, too, does not have the chemistry to command the screen. If "The
Musketeer" makes them any money, they should invest in acting lessons.
Stronger performers may have helped to raise the bar on this one.
The supporting cast is, on the surface, impressive. Catherine Denueve plays
the Queen of France and lends her character an air of royalty, dignity and
humor, especially when she plays off of D'Artagnan's mentor, Planchet
(Jean-Pierre Castaldi, who reminds of Andre the Giant in "The Princess
Bride). Stephen Rea looks good in the part of the conniving usurper
Cardinal Richelieu, but is given very little to help flesh out his
character. Tim Roth is the kind of bad guy you love to hate as the
Cardinal's chief henchman, Febre. He is so bad he makes Simon Legree look
like a boy scout. The rest of the players, particularly the three
musketeers Aramis (Nick Moran, "Lock, Stock and Two Smoking Barrels"),
Porthos (Steve Spiers) and Athos (Jan Gregor Kremp), are background fodder
whose role is to come to D'Artagnan's aid when needed.
Peter Hyam's does double duty as director and cinematography and may be too
stretched to do both well. A stronger hand at the helm could have helped
the mediocre performances of the leads and better utilized his veteran
thesps. Photography is straightforward action fare that goes through all
the appropriate action flick motions - D'Artagnan takes on a tavern full of
thugs and bests them single-handed; he fights a gang of Febre's henchmen
aboard a speeding coach to protect the queen (with the obligatory branches
hanging over the road); he goes one on one with his lifelong enemy, Febre,
who murdered D'Artagnan's folks years before. It is all routine stuff.
The renowned wire work developed by the Hong Kong action masters is used to
artificial effect as the players leap, defying gravity, up walls and from
horse to horse. It works in a sci-fi film like "The Matrix" or in a
classical fantasy like "Crouching Tiger, Hidden Dragon" but just calls
attention to itself in "The Musketeer." At one point I could swear I saw
the stunt wire being used. It did not make me a believer and I am very
disappointed. With a run time of 106 minutes it should have been more like
80 and I give it a D.
For more Reeling reviews visit www.reelingreviews.com

Title
Review for Hearts in Atlantis (2001)
To crudely semi-plagiarize from Entertainment Weekly, who in their right
mind would expect anything but good things from William Goldman's
adaptation of a Stephen King novel directed by Scott Hicks (Shine) and
starring Anthony Hopkins?  Of course, Hollywood has been able to muck up a
seemingly unmuckable roster in the past (Sphere comes immediately to mind)
but please let me tell you now, this is no Sphere.  This is a treasure.
People potentially put off by "adaption of a Stephen King novel" obviously
haven't been reading him lately.  Let me give you some perspective:  did
you like Shawshank Redemption, Stand By Me, The Green Mile, maybe even Apt
Pupil?  This is the King on display here, softened even more by the deft
hand of William Goldman.  Goldman speaks Kingese as well as Frank Darabont
does, and my frequent readers will recognize that as high praise indeed.
He shows without telling in an effortless, non-lingual way, and it's
delightful.  The late Piotr Sobocinski is the cinematographer, and this is
indeed a glorious swansong; everything is beautiful, everyone is carefully
placed in the frame, every visual detail is crisp and perfect, like the
best parts of a favorite memory.
Before the show began, I told my companion that I knew I had read this
book, it was on my shelf, I could picture the cover, but I had zip of an
idea what it was about.  The maddeningly vague ad campaign was no help
either.  As soon as Hopkins' hands curled around his paper shopping bags, I
remembered the whole thing, and I was just so glad to be there.  I
understand why the ads and even the publicity copy is so vague - how do you
describe it?  If you haven't read the book, you would only be attracted by
the pedigree.  When my boyfriend asked what the movie was about when I came
home, streaked in tears, I would only have been able to explain it by
ruining it.  So I said, it's just great.  As I am telling you now:  go
forth, and reward the studio for making this movie.
Many of King's best works (It, Stand By Me, for example) depend on his
brilliant, gleaming adoration of childhood friendships, notably around age
11-14, when the mind is the most open and innocence and curiosity and
everything are just budding but have not ruined the mind.  This film is no
exception.  It's wonderful.  I cried, more than once, as did my very
cynical (as a rule) male companion.  This is one of those films where,
actually, very few happy things happen, yet the feeling walking home is one
of uplifted wonder and melancholy joy.
Anthony Hopkins' eyes can see forever.  There are many unanswered questions
with regards to his Ted Brautigan, but we believe him and believe in him
because of his eyes.  Mychael Danna's music (he also did The Sweet
Hereafter and the Ice Storm) is hauntingly delicate, like the film itself.
Our copy actually broke 80 minutes into the film - we weren't budging,
despite missing 10 minutes and being told we'd have to wait 30 minutes.
The whole room was transfixed - what would happen next?  Lovely.  Anton
Yelchin is young Booby Garfield (David Morse is him grown up - take close
look at all his props, they say so much about his character) and he is
lovely, very open and natural and sweet and real.  Mika Boorem (I
recognized her, belatedly, as the child Ally McBeal, but she has a good
resume) is also dreamlike in her perfection as the best gal pal.
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
These reviews (c) 2001 Karina Montgomery.  Please feel free to forward
but just credit the reviewer in the text.  Thanks.
cinerina@flash.net
Check out previous reviews at:
http://www.cinerina.com
http://ofcs.rottentomatoes.com - the Online Film Critics Society
http://www.hsbr.net/reviews/karina/ - Hollywood Stock Exchange Brokerage
Resource
http://www.mediamotions.com
http://www.capitol-city.com

Title
Review for Rat Race (2001)
"What!  Full Price Feature?!"  Believe me, I am as shocked as you are.  I
fully expected to come out of that theatre with a couple of amusing
moments, smiling maybe, nut not much more.  I can't give away what was
funny about the movie without ruining it, so I will have to rely on
detailing our reaction to the film.  Not only did I laugh my freakin' butt
off (as did my three very diverse companions) pretty much the whole time
(after a mite slow beginning), but the four of us were still cracking up,
loudly, walking out of the theatre and into the car and most of the drive
home.  We recollected all our favorite moments, which were legion, and
laughed afresh.  It was the simple, unaffected laughter of delight in
simple, easy pleasure.  Guffawing, if you will.  Now that's funny!
Remember in the date montage in Naked Gun when Leslie Nielsen and Priscilla
Presley come out of Platoon clutching their guts and laughing?  That was
us, except instead of Platoon, it was Rat Race!  So, with my pricing schema
of dollar value for entertainment received, this is indeed a Full Price
Feature.  I want to see it again!
Now if course I have built it up too much, but I have peeked at ratings on
other sites and they seem to agree.  What looks like a disjointed,
multi-storyline wackofest is actually a beautifully shot, action-packed
comedy with a little something for everyone.  Some of the jokes telegraph
themselves a mile away, and a lot of people seem to crash vehicles through
fences, but for some reason, it all works!  My favorite shot, which I do
not want to give away, literally had me hopping up in down in my seat, even
though it was apparent what would happen and how it would be, it was the
execution that was so hilarious.  It was like a cartoon come to life, in a
good way.  If you need your humor to be dry and verbose, well, you weren't
honestly expecting that after looking at those creepy big-head-big-hand
posters, were you?  I hope you like those images because they also are the
main visual crux of the official movie site and the opening credits.
The characters are a diverse group of actors and comedians who have very
little character interaction outside of their teams in the race, yet the
sense of working together to a common comedic goal is still felt.  A good
story involves the dynamics between people, but this story can rely on the
over-reaching theme of greed to unite the people who are otherwise apart on
screen.  But the miniature teams of one or 2 or 4 all have their own magic
as well.  It's the details, however, that really make it work.  I wish I
could give away things but I fear the trailer has already done some of that
for me.  I never would have seen it if not for the previews, so I guess it
was a necessary evil.  I now wish to see the original film upon which this
one was based, It's A Mad, Mad, Mad, Mad World, to see if it compares.
Bizarre situation exacerbated by wicked machination with reincorporation
and huge reaction equals comedy.  There's slapstick, situational humor,
subtle physicality, tumbling disaster, Darwin-award behavior, good natured
humor, mistaken identity, peril, insanity, over-the-top, observational
humor, corn-pone chuckles, surreal visual gags, and even an homage to a
classic Lucy episode - whatever you like, they got it!  It's a Zucker film.
So go get it!
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
These reviews (c) 2001 Karina Montgomery.  Please feel free to forward
but just credit the reviewer in the text.  Thanks.
cinerina@flash.net
Check out previous reviews at:
http://www.cinerina.com
http://ofcs.rottentomatoes.com - the Online Film Critics Society
http://www.hsbr.net/reviews/karina/ - Hollywood Stock Exchange Brokerage
Resource
http://www.mediamotions.com
http://www.capitol-city.com
