Authors
Rich Meitin
Number of Reviews
2

Title
Review for Kingpin (1996)
Cast: Woody Harrelson, Randy Quaid, Vanessa Angel, Bill Murray
Director: Bobby & Peter Farrelly
Producer: Brad Krevoy, Steve Stabler, and Bradley Thomas
Screenplay: Barry Fanaro and Mort Nathan
Cinematography: Mark Irwin
Music: Freedy Johnston
Capsule review: Bathroom humor and sight gags, neither original nor well
done. Visually shoddy. A waste of talented actors.
This is a movie that has it all: Prosthetic gags, vomiting gags, bull
semen gags, kick-in-the-crotch gags, boob (as in female breast) gags --
lots and lots of them. There wasn't a trick too cheap or too embarassing
for Fanaro and Nathan to trot out. 
After listening to an astonishingly lavish and fawning review by both
Siskel and Ebert ("I can't wait to take my friends to see it, "easily the
funniest movie of the year," "laughed out loud all the way through," etc.)
I overcame my natural resistance to seeing a movie about bowling,
especially one with such idiotic posters and trailers. What a mistake. I
spent the first 20 minutes waiting for something funny to happen, and the
remainder of the two hours feeling thankful I had not asked anyone to join
me.
Harrelson plays a young, innocent, talented bowler who is corrupted
morally and destroyed physically (overnight, no less) through the actions
of Murray's cynical character. Years later, Harrelson tries to take
advantage of Quaid's character in a similar way, but Quaid's Amish-dweeb
is too goodhearted to buy into Harrellson's schemes ... until he is forced
into making money to save his family's farm.
The climax involves a re-match on the lanes with villain Murray. Harrelson
is inexplicably able to bowl again, in championship form, despite a
seventeen year layoff and the hook/rubber hand at the end of his bowling
arm. Angel is chiefly available for her looks, and for one of the nicest
bodies money can buy. Harrellson and Angel undergo a sort of moral and
romantic redemption at the end that is equally inexplicable. The story
elements are just a flimsy framework for a long list of sight gags, at
least twenty of which involved either Harrelson's rubber hand or Angel's
silicone breasts.
Broad, physical comedy has decades of genuinely funny precedent to draw
upon -- everything from the Marx brothers to Leslie Nielson. I don't
dislike silly movies. Just bad ones. It was poorly lit and shot. The
soundtrack was pinched and tinny. Even the opening credits of this film
were cheap and un-funny. 
One-half star awarded for several talented actors, who were up the
cinematic creek without a paddle. One thing about the Siskel/Ebert review
was true: This was a movie that would "do anything for a laugh."
Unfortunately, it just didn't do anything funny.

Title
Review for Courage Under Fire (1996)
Capsule review: Moving and absorbing. Excellent acting, direction,
scriptwriting. A shoo-in for multiple Oscars.
It's nice to know that the hollywood studio system can still come up with
a fine film, every now and again. I doubt if we'll see a better "big"
movie all year.
It would be a shame to discuss too much about the storyline here, because
so much of the drama depends on the carefully orchestrated flashbacks that
allow the characters, their conflicts, and their secrets to unfold. So
I'll tread very lightly.
Denzel Washington, charismatic as always, plays Nathanial Serling, an Army
colonel who is tormented by a deadly serious mistake he made during the
Gulf conflict. After the battle, he finds himself at the Pentagon,
assigned to investigate whether a posthumous Medal of Honor should be
awarded to Captain Karen Walden, a medevac chopper pilot, played with
gritty humanity by Meg Ryan in the many flashback scenes. Captain Walden
is the first woman to be considered for a combat medal, so the White House
(in light of the photo-op that will be created by hanging the medal around
the neck of the dead pilot's pretty young daughter in the Rose Garden) is
putting on extra pressure for a quick, positive decision. 
At the same time, Colonel Serling continues to be pressured by the Army
brass to lie about the mistake he made during the war.  Serling feels,
without knowing completely why, that he must seek his redemption through
truth  -- he must unmask the facts of both incidents, despite the
pressures from above. But the truth about Captain Walden is hard to find,
and the truth about himself is hard to face. As time goes on, he is aided
in his quest by a clandestine relationship with a Washington Post
reporter, played with admirable restraint by Scott Glenn. Serling
eventually wins the conflict with his commanding officer: Full
investigation and disclosure are made, culminating in a scene that could
have been a Great Big Truly Awful Hollywood Climax in the hands of a less
skilled director. Instead, that moment was handled with equally admirable
restraint. 
Among the many fine aspects of this film: The battle scenes are so
personal, so intimate, if you will, that I felt more deeply than ever how
War is Hell -- not because of massive battles and high-tech weaponry, but
because of the impossible responsibilities and poignant relationships in
the trenches. _Courage _ shows in close-up how battle is a soldier's
crucible. True "courage" is not an abstract ideal. Nor is it bravado.
Rather, it is a kind of integrity which underlies difficult, sometimes
sudden, often ambiguous real-life decisions.  Do you abandon a badly
wounded, inmmovable soldier when hasty retreat is probably the safest
recourse for the rest of your unit? Do you risk revealing your position to
the enemy if that might save the lives of others? 
_Courage_ also explores the theme of a Woman in War, not a helpmate or
lover-in-waiting, ala classic war films, but a tough, exhausted, bleeding,
gun-toting combatant and squad leader. It examines how equal awards and
equal rank are not the same as equal respect and equal treatment.
Consider, for example, how an enlisted street-wise, hyper-male tough guy
might react to a female commanding officer in battle. 
It is wonderful to experience the artful intertwining of the two
storylines. There is a symbiosis between Ryan's and Washington's
characters. He helps her by bringing to light the full dimensions of her
courage, and, because of his mission to reveal her story, she in effect
helps him reclaim his own courage. 
