Authors
Chris Webb
Number of Reviews
19

Title
Review for Face/Off (1997)
        I often argue that the terms movie and film come under different
definitions.  A movie is an enjoyable theater experience that creates
memorable characters.  A film is made for artistic purposes with qualities
in the behind-the-scenes areas taking the forefront.  Not since Fargo has there
been such a good movie/film.  In fact this is the best one since Fargo.
        Unfortunately, it is not often that a movie qualifying as an action
picture will even be given a second look for Oscar contention.  Face/Off
deserves such attention.  John Woo is a technical wizard on this picture with
an almost surreal opening in which a child gets shot.  Then, toward the middle
of the film, we witness a shootout through a child's eyes as he listens to
"Over the Rainbow" on a headset.  It is truly a spectacular moment that you
will remember.
        The drama and charcter development are established in this film 
pushing it beyond the limits of Eraser or Con Air.  Nicolas Cage plays Castor
Troy, a homicidal maniac, who killed Sean Asher's (John Travolta) child while
the latter two were riding a merry-go-round.  We then move to six years later
as Troy plots to demolish Los Angeles in a cold-blooded bombing.  In order
to diffuse the bomb, Asher is coaxed into trading faces with Troy, who is in 
a coma.  This top secret mission, however, heads down the wrong path.  Troy
wakes up and forces Asher's face to be transplanted onto himself.
        From there, plot shifts abound as suddenly Cage is playing the 
kind-hearted guy and Travolta the dispicable one.  Cage illuminates the
screen as he watches the evil Asher (Troy) gain credit for saving the city.
The real Asher is helpless and now he must save his well-being by getting 
Troy.
        Joan Allen (Nixon, The Crucible) magnificently portrays the third of
a series of tortured wives.  The depths that John Woo has extended the action
genre into amazes.  A shootout in a church toward the end works the viewer 
into a frenzy, but the film still is not over.
        It runs an enjoyable and quick two hours and ten minutes.  And is
truly worthy of highest honors.  Cage deserves an actor nod since he had
to create the bad guy and then earn back our sympathies as the good guy.
Cage's work let Travolta off easy, though he was spectacular as well.  The
direction was top-notch, and its easily the best picture since Fargo.
        Maybe the academy will take notice of this intelligent and
ground-breaking film.  It isn't often that I do this, but the film was
extremely impressive.  

Title
Review for English Patient, The (1996)
Cast: Ralph Fiennes (Count Laszlo Almasy), Kristin Scott Thomas 
(Katherine Clifton), Juliette Binoche (Hana), Naveen Andrews (Kip), 
Willem Dafoe (Caravaggio).
Directed and written by Anthony Minghella
Based on the novel by Michael Ondaatje
        There is a ten minute intermission in "The English Patient" that 
if you are not careful, you might sleep through.  I saw this movie in the 
theaters in January, and about midway through, I had to take a break from 
Anthony Minghella's successful tribute to Oscar snobbery.  "The English 
Patient" is a mediocre movie at best, with a broken plot, uninspired 
acting, and an adaptation that would make Shakespeare cringe.
        I did not enjoy "The English Patient," and I find it hard to 
believe that most critics were so swept away by this transparent 
over-the-top movie.  This film follows the story of Count Laszlo Almasy 
(Fiennes) after some sort of debilitating accident which rendered him 
skinless and near death.  It is an as-told-to account to nurse Hana 
(Binoche) who is so enthralled by him that she whisks him away to an 
abandoned mansion, deserting her army effortlessly.
        This was supposed to be a love story, but between whom?  In Hana, 
we see a compassion for Almasy, but there exists no spark there.  We hear 
of Almasy's lusty affair with Katherine Clifton (Scott Thomas), but there is 
not much love portrayed on the screen.  But then there is the romance 
between Hana and Indian bomb-defuser Kip (Andrews).  However, after 
sorting out the which-is-which and who-is-who, we are left with a 
trifling unromantic tale of deceit and treachory that should not be 
endearing as many think it is.  There is no prominent love story here. 
        Ralph Fiennes has thrived on portraying dispassionate men in 
"Quiz Show" and "Schindler's List," but in "The English Patient" he takes 
his lack of passion to a height where it seems as though he could care 
less about the script.  He speaks more like a book-on-tape, and being in 
bed shrowded in makeup does not a good actor make.  By the time you see 
his most poignant scene, where he screams in anguish before being a 
traitor to his country, his performance has already desended into 
monotony.  The character is arrogant, and Minghella tries to show us 
this, but embarrassingly mimics Shakespearean rhetoric failingly 
instead.  
        Scott Thomas is more of a mantlepiece who goes with the flow and 
does little to show that she can act.  Her range rises a bit above the 
flatline throughout.  As she lays dying, she sounds the same as when she 
is at what is supposed to be her most passionate.  Binoche won best 
supporting actress for her part, and she was the most transparent of 
all.  Play a game while watching, and call it, "Can you tell she's about 
to cry?"  It was not a great part for this talented actress, but she 
reaped rewards nonetheless.  If we are going to find a great performance, 
we look to Naveen Andrews, who portrays the quiet anxiety which someone 
with his job might have.  He is understated and powerful at the same 
time, saving "The English Patient" from complete failure.
        Willem Dafoe's character does not belong, and it is unclear as to 
why he is there, except that he's mad that some of his fingers are 
missing.  At this point, who really cares anyway?  
        I wanted to like "The English Patient," but I know many who did.  
Personally, I think that this movie was a waste of time and that if one 
truly looks for grand scale romantic drama, "Casablanca" is the way to 
go.  

Title
Review for Lady Beware (1987)
Cast: Diane Lane (Katya Yarno), Michael Woods (Jack Price), Cotter Smith 
(Mac Odell).
Directed by Karen Arthur
Written by Charles Zev Cohen and Susan Miller
        This is a TV movie which became a feature film, and worked its 
way into a string of movies on a video tape that my family owns.  So, 
after watching FATAL ATTRACTION and MOONSTRUCK, I decided to explore this 
so-called thriller.
        Its MANNEQUIN: The Dark Side, as Diane Lane runs from a 
psychopath who has intercepted her mail.  This is how he knows all about 
her life.  Her name is Katya Yarno and she creates window dressings with 
mannequins for artistic purposes.  She has quite the mouth, but that 
impresses the mayor who commissions her work.  A newspaper sends Mac 
Odell (Smith) to cover her work, and they fall in love almost 
instantaneously.
        This is when Jack Price (Woods) begins his stalking.  We listen 
to his eerie phone calls and then become even more frightened once we see 
him in her apartment.  His presence is not as scary however, as his 
dancing in a towel after he has bathed in her tub.  He then lies naked on 
her bed, but director Karen Arthur decides to cut that scene short.  Jack 
is as witty and catchy as a rock.  He talks about how he'll climb a 
beanstalk to get to her and about how nimble and quick he is.  I'm sure 
he used other nursery rhymes to scare her as well.
        Karen Arthur is a veteran of TV movies and she shows it here.  It 
fits within a low-grade movie frame that you might watch on a Friday 
night.  Except film allows her to explore nudity and profanity.  The 
writers, Charles Zev Cohen and Susan Miller, must have really received 
backlash from this movie, because they have never written anything for 
any screen since.  Ladd, at least, has escaped this debacle with JUDGE 
DREDD and THE FULL MONTY.  Hopefully, she has been able to forget this
movie more than I will be able to.
        LADY BEWARE turns the tables once Katya decides to go after Jack, 
putting her life more in peril.  This movie is predictable, boring, and 
not scary at all.  It plods and we snooze.  One side note, this was 
filmed in Pittsburgh, and it gave two of Mr. Rogers' actors, Don Brockett 
and Audrey Roth, some big screen time.  That's perhaps the one nice thing 
about LADY BEWARE.   

Title
Review for Beloved (1998)
Everything Oprah touches turns to gold, what is surprising is that shehas
sustained her touch for thirteen years.  Emmy-winning and Oscar-nominated
for her first and only other major film role ("The Color Purple"), she is
a best selling author and now sings her television show's theme song.  She
would probably win the Presidency if she wanted.  Still, I entered
"Beloved" with reservations.  When it comes to adaptations, Toni
Morrison's novel is not film-friendly and had tremendous risk of failure.
Sometimes, as is the case with "Beloved," the risk can turn into a
powerful experience.  
        I have read "Beloved" twice and still cannot grasp all of its
intricacies.  I watched with my parents, who have never before read the
book.  This allowed me to judge if reading the book is needed for the
film.  Aside from being able to follow the plot, previous knowledge will
not enhance or detract from the experience.  
        Beloved follows the story of ex-slave Sethe (Oprah Winfrey) eight
years after the end of the Civil War.  An old friend from the plantation
she worked, Paul D (Danny Glover) arrives on her doorstep after wandering
for eighteen years after his own escape.  There he finds Sethe and her
daughter Denver (Kimberly Elise) living in a house haunted by the demons
of Sethe's past.  Her house is possessed by the spirit of the baby
daughter she killed right after her escape to spare her from being claimed
by the master.  This daughter, Beloved (Thandie Newton), returns home in
the body of a teenager further haunting and suffocating the life out of
everyone in the house.
        The story is told partly through flashbacks from Sethe's point of
view.  Director Jonathan Demme weaves image after image of the
psychologically horrific reality that slavery must have been:  the
slaveholder's sons sucking Sethe's nursing milk from her body as Sethe
would have seen it, the spinning delirium of running away from evil not
knowing who is following, the bloody terror of whipping, the gagging and
hanging of slaves.  Demme's use of extreme close-up locks the viewer into
this trauma in almost the same way Stephen Spielberg brought the audience
into the battlefield in "Saving Private Ryan."  It is a grotesque and
nerve-wracking ride, but well worth the struggle. 
        While the direction is inspired, the performances keep the focus
on the characters and story.   The characters of Sethe, Denver, and
Beloved are so deep and layered, "Beloved" should be a woman's acting
dream.   Beah Richards as Baby Suggs, Sethe's soulful mother-in-law that
we see through flashback, is commanding in her small, but pivotal
performance.  Demme is known as an actor's director, and he pulls out
career-defining performances from all the leads.
        I found potentially five acting Oscar nominations that could arise
out of "Beloved."  Yet since 1977, the year I was born, there have been
thirteen Academy Award nominated black actors.  Only one woman, Whoopi
Goldberg ("Ghost" - 1990), has won in that time.   Keep in mind, too, that
only five of the past one hundred acting nominees have been black.
Unfortunately, I do not see this year equaling that total no matter how
good they are.  Then again, maybe Hollywood will put away its bias this
year.
        Oprah Winfrey is almost a shoo-in for the Best Actress
trophy, putting in one of the top performances of the decade.  Kimberly
Elise is riveting as Denver as is Beah Richards.  Danny Glover shines as
Paul D and should score his long overdue first nomination.  But the show
really belongs to Thandie Newton who outdid Morrison in creating a
tangible Beloved.  
        Newton first appears walking out of a lake covered in bugs,
huskily breathing like an alien inside a human body.  She walks as if
uncomfortable in her skin, talks in growly monotone, and eats with
reckless abandon.  Beloved is an unbridled and undeveloped soul trapped in
a human body, and is a creation different from anything in the movies.
Newton exhibits a range of often volatile emotions and unrepressed
sexuality in a sincere, intense, and extremely brave performance.  This
should put her on the acting map for a long time.
        "Beloved" deserves to be seen, but I fear that much of the public
will dismiss it because of its length and complexity.  It is as complex as
the novel, and should leave more questions than answers.  Painful and
frightening, my father mentioned that it unintentionally made for a great
horror movie.  But that is what good films do.  They transcend the
boundaries set by conventional wisdom.
        Toni Morrison endorses "Beloved," always a good sign for a film.
It is a vision that Oprah held for ten years that has finally come to
fruition.  As a result of this labor, we might have a close Oscar race for
the first time in years.  This is one of the best films you will see in
1998, joining "Saving Private Ryan" and "The Spanish Prisoner."  Submerge
yourself in this entrancing film and savor it.  Films this deeply driven
by character do not come around often.  

Title
Review for Good Will Hunting (1997)
CAST: Matt Damon, Robin Williams, Stellan Skarsgard, Ben Affleck, Minnie 
      Driver, Casey Affleck, Cole Hauser  
      Directed by Gus Van Sant
        "Good Will Hunting" is one film that had caused me to reevaluate 
where my life is going and how I am doing it.  Perhaps because I have 
friends and conversations like these back home, and I have dealt with a 
similar struggle between picking my future and holding onto what is 
comfortable.  For whatever reason, I could relate to this film.  While 
many will sympathize with the characters and enjoy the story, young guys 
who have not had the world handed to them will benefit from seeing "Good 
Will Hunting."
        Twenty-year-old genius, Will Hunting (Matt Damon), lives in South 
Boston working construction and as a janitor at MIT.  He solves the 
problems left on a hallway chalkboard by professor Gerald Lambeau (Stellan 
Skarsgaard), an internationally acclaimed mathematician.  Will does this 
anonymously, not wanting any part of the world of academia.  He would 
rather spend time with his friend, bar-hopping and driving aimlessly, 
running up an unbelievable rap sheet.  Lambeau takes time to seek Will 
out, only to discover him in jail for hitting a police officer.  Will can 
be free if he agrees to work with Lambeau in higher math and to undergo 
therapy.  The film hits full speed once Sean Maguire (Robin Williams) 
agrees to take on Will as a patient.
        Themes that run through "Good Will Hunting" are layered. The 
nature of genius, class conflict, and the complexities of love and trust 
are all explored, not focusing solely on Will.  Maguire and Lambeau old 
roommates took different paths after MIT.  Maguire will not attend 
reunions, looked on as a sellout for leaving the upper echelon of the 
academy to teach in a Boston community college, finding his true love in 
the process.  Lambeau, all awards and success, with little personal 
fulfillment, resents that Maguire was "smarter than me then, and smarter 
than me now."  They argue about whether Will should follow his heart or 
his brain, while Will himself becomes lost in their bickering.
        The screenplay was written by Damon and best friend Ben Affleck, 
who plays best friend Chuckie.  They have deservedly won a Golden Globe 
for best screenplay and have jumped to the A-list of actors, after seeing 
smaller roles in the past.  Affleck was found in this year's "Chasing 
Amy," for better or worse, and Damon has charged out with simultaneous 
roles in this and "The Rainmaker."  He opened eyes in 1996's "Courage 
Under Fire" as a Gulf War vet turned heroin addict.
        Robin Williams, gifted comedian, but better onscreen in dramas, 
has pulled himself out of purgatory after the disastrous "Fathers' Day" 
and "Flubber."  With a character most akin to his teacher in "Dead 
Poet's Society," he serves as the mentor for Will in a cynical world.   
        Skarsgaard, a Swede recently landing English-speaking roles with 
this and 1996's "Breaking the Waves" is excellent as the professor who 
all-too-keenly recognizes his limitations.  Minnie Driver performs well 
as a sheltered, wealthy college girl who turns into an emotional wreck as 
her relationship with Will becomes deeper.
        Before attending "Good Will Hunting" the first time (three times 
total), my father pointed out that this was the film that reduced most 
guys to tears.  A late scene between Damon and Williams will tug at you 
emotionally, and is reminiscent of an exchange between Judd Hirsch and 
Timothy Hutton in "Ordinary People."  Both received Oscar nominations, 
with hutton winning as a supporting actor.  "Good Will Hunting" is 
expected to garner its own slew of nominations, while the principals 
should get one.  This could be Williams' year, as this character is the 
deepest one he has portrayed to date.
        "Good Will Hunting" deeply affected me, for while I could not 
identify with all the struggles, I have had my share of run-ins with 
people.  Freshman year I was told by a student here to ignore my friends 
from home if I wanted to make it.  When Will is reminded by a 
pseudo-intellectual Harvard student that he will be serving his kids 
burgers, he responds, "That may be so, but at least I won't be 
unoriginal."  Neither is this movie.  It does not get caught up within 
itself the way most against-the-odds films do, and that is why this film 
will be one of the most fulfilling experiences you could have.

Title
Review for Game, The (1997)
        In "The Net," Sandra Bullock raced against a band of computer 
hackers who sought to erase her identity.  In predictable fashion, she 
was able to outsmart the fiends, saving herself from extinction, in the 
final scene of the movie.  Writers John Braccato and Michael Ferris have 
teamed up again, this time creating a less formulaic and more 
unpredictable thriller in "The Game," with winning results.
        Michael Douglas is San Francisco investment banker Nicholas Van 
Orton.  A composite of his previous cutthroat and tempermental 
businessmen from "Falling Down" and "Wall Street."  Throw in the bad luck 
he experienced in "Fatal Attraction" and "Disclosure," and we have his 
latest character.  Nicholas is a miserly, modern-day Miss Havisham, who 
chooses to rot away in his wealth with nothing but reheated food and 
monotonous financial reports.
        How could this six hundred million dollar man become such a cold 
fish?  While not seeking to find the drive behind his personality, "The 
Game" constructs a past through home video-style flashbacks.  In them, we 
see a young, happy boy with all the luxuries of the rich life his father 
brought to the family.  Unfortunately, the happiness subsides after he 
witnesses his father leaping to his death from the roof of their mansion 
at age forty-eight.  Today happens to be Nicholas' forty-eighth birthday, 
but in his life its just like any other day.
        Dark rooms, cold floors, and bland gray suits abound as Nicholas 
tends to his daily business of being filthy rich and alone.  Director 
David Fincher (Seven) skillfully crafts the image that Nicholas is a 
small cog in the grand scheme, passively living while his fortune builds 
effortlessly.  Wide screen views of him within his mansion or office 
focus on the amenities of a lavish life rather than on Nicholas as a 
charater.  We care about the ineffectuality of these scenes and not about 
the sad, unfortunate man within them.
        The spark plug in the Van Orton family comes in ne'er-do-well 
Conrad, played by a hyperactive Sean Penn.  Conrad has part of the Van Orton 
estate, but does not allow it to rule his life.  Seeing Nicholas' misery, 
he decides he needs to have some fun.  For his birthday, Conrad gives 
Nicholas the opportunity to play a reality based role playing game, 
sponsored by the ominous Consumer Recreation Services.  In order to play, 
Nicholas endures extensive physical and mental tests, while also 
completing endless personality questionnaires.  As the representative 
tells him, this game will provide him with what his life lacks.
        In Nicholas' case, he is bound to have some excitement thrown 
into his life.  It begins while he watches the financial news and the 
newscaster interrupts to tell him the rules of the game.  Essentially, 
whatever happens, happens.  It will not ruin the plot to say that while 
doing business, he cannot open his briefcase, a waitress spills wine all 
over him, he almost drowns in a car accident, and he endures rifle fire.  
While all this is inexplicable to him, the waitress (Deborah Unger) 
reveals that she was bribed to dump drinks on him as part of a prank.
        "The Game" descends into the twisted and macabre as Nicholas 
begins to realize that he cannot bail out of his gift.  The game overlaps 
and overtakes his life when his house is vandalized and his company's 
funds are tapped and drained.  Even his friends seem connected to his 
downfall, and the waitress, who turns up again, has more than just drinks 
to spill on him.
        Technically, Fincher has captured the essence of the thriller 
through a great use of his camera.  The initial expansive views of 
Nicholas in his home, seemingly possessing control of his life, begin to 
close in on him.  As the pressure on Nicholas rises, we find him trapped 
in elevators, running down alleys and dank hallways, and locked in cars.  
Sweat and strain replace the calm and command that Nicholas once 
possessed.  The paranoia runs deep and even Conrad does not appear 
trustworthy.
        After all this, we have quite a way to the end, and I choose not 
to spoil it.  I find it hard to imagine that the ending will be guessed, 
since "The Game" twists where "The Net" plodded straight ahead.  Given 
the way Nicholas treated people in the beginning, its fun to see this 
representative of Douglas' despicable characters be paid back.  With the 
tables turned, the great world that Nicholas has inhabited and ruled does 
not feel quite so comfortable anymore.  
        The acting on the parts of Douglas and Penn, using their 
stodgy and wild-boy images respectably, is amazing and makes this plot 
seem more credible.  The supporting cast are faceless enemies within a 
destructive machinery reminiscent of Stephen Spielberg's "The Duel."  
While the supporters could have held greater speaking parts, but the 
writers and Fincher smartly choose to focus on Nicholas fighting an 
uncontrollable monster.
        "The Game" is an exciting, nerve-wracking thriller, and I highly 
recommend it.  It runs over two hours, but feels as fast as a runaway 
car hurtling toward the San Francisco Bay.

Title
Review for In & Out (1997)
Cast: Kevin Kline (Howard Brackett), Joan Cusack (Emily Montgomery), Matt 
      Dillon (Cameron Drake), Tom Selleck (Peter Malloy), Debbie Reynolds 
      (Howard's Mom), Wilford Brimley (Howard's Dad), Bob Newhart (Tom 
      Halliwell). 
Directed by: Frank Oz
Written by: Paul Rudnick
        It is no small feat to say this, but this is one of the funniest 
movies that I have ever seen.  I have never laughed so much in a theater 
before.  But beware, there exists a cynical approach to the movie that if 
taken, could force you to miss the point.
        Allow me to first dispel the cynical viewpoint that this movie
essentially stereotypes gay people.  As you watch this film, you have to 
suspend political correctness, as the writing displays through his 
exploitation of misconceptions about gay 
people that many have.  This is not a movie about being gay, but about 
how gay people have been perceived, making the portrayals and reactions of 
people in this movie are more real than any watered down effort 
would bring.
        If you choose to take a less cynical approach to the movie, you 
will find that "In and Out" is full of good intentions and rich in laughs.  
Welcome to Greenleaf, Indiana, where everyone knows you and your 
business, probably better than you do.  Howard Brackett, English teacher 
and lifelong resident, is preparing for his wedding to Emily Montgomery 
(Joan Cusack) after a three year engagement.  It never dawned on him that 
this delayed wedding, combined with his tastes for poetry and drama, his 
clean look, and his affinity for everything Streisand would even cause 
others to question his sexual preference.  It is not until former student, 
Cameron Drake (Matt Dillon), wins an Academy Award for portraying a gay 
soldier in "To Serve and Protect," and outs Howard as his gay inspiration in 
his acceptance speech, that Howard's reality comes crashing down around him.
        Greenleaf comes to a standstill as many were watching the 
telecast, and all know Howard.  Almost immediately, Howard's 
parents (Wilfred Brimley and Debbie Reynolds) arrive searching for 
answers.  In a classic scene Howard denies this, and the small town 
conspiracy theories spring up as to why Cameron would sabotage Howard's 
life.  Spouting non-sequitors, which any townie will appreciate and 
identify with, Howard's parents drag Cameron's name through the mud in 
their support of their son.
        The problem is, Howard is torn between two identities, one of 
which is a lie.  To help him sort out his life comes gay tabloid reporter 
Pater Malloy (Tom Selleck).  For a ratings jump, Malloy decides to spend 
the week cataloguing Howard's every move.  Hounded, Howard begins to see 
the error of his lies to all that he loves and realizes that he will only 
be a better person for the truth to come out.  It is both painstaking and 
humorous to watch as the loacals do all the predictable actions when 
Howard is around.  Students he coaches cover up in the locker room, 
fellow teachers spout their suspicions, and the principal threatens his 
job.  In an effort to live up to his lie, Howard seeks out ways to seem 
more masculine.  He uses self-help tapes and even goes to a priest, who 
offers some unique advice about premarital sex.  
        The biggest snag he faces will be Emily's reaction.  She has been 
losing weight to improve her self image so that she could make Howard 
love her more, creating a double lie around her life.  Howard 
does make right, but at the most inopportune time in front of everyone he 
knows.  This sends Emily reeling and creates some of the best comedic 
scenes of Joan Cusack's career.  She rants, she reels, and she gives the 
most memorable quote in defaming Barbara Streisand.  
        The Oscar-nominated Cusack ("Working Girl") is flamboyently 
funny as the disshevelled bride, while Kline's vulnerable and scared 
teacher is many times funnier than his Oscar winning performance in "A Fish 
Called Wanda," not an easy task to accomplish.  There does not seem to be a 
part that Kevin Kline takes to which he cannot bring some sort of 
credibility.  He excels in the great movies ("Wanda," "Dave") and adds 
respectability to lesser films like "Consenting Adults" or "Fierce 
Creatures."  The acting standouts do not stop here, though.
        The supporters take the characters to which they are accustomed 
and make them soar in "In and Out."  As the school principal, Bob Newhart 
stutters his way through in Porky Pig fashion whenever the tension 
rises.  Wilfred Brimley is the venerable old everyman and Debbie Reynolds 
recaptures her "Mother"ly instincts as the overbearing mom.  In smaller 
roles, Dan Hedaya ("Clueless") plays an army officer in the film within the 
film, drawling his way into the memory, and Ernie Sabella ("Perfect 
Strangers") captures the small town attitude toward the media as Howard's 
barber.  The only departue from character comes from Magnum P.I. himself.  
Selleck has done wonders in revamping an acting career that had suffered 
under the likes of "Mr. Baseball," and has forsaken nothing to prove his acting 
chops.  The scenes with him and Kline are the best and will leave you 
talking afterward.
        Toward the end of the movie, Greenleaf High is graduating, and 
nearly-exiled Howard shows up.  Cameron comes home to save the day and 
interrupts the ceremony a la Al Pacino in "Scent of a Woman" inciting a 
display which echoes the ending of "Dead Poet's Society" in a more humorous 
tone.
        "In and Out" is loosely based on Tom Hanks' Oscar acceptance 
after winning for "Philadelphia," when he thanked his openly gay drama 
teacher.  Writer Paul Rudnick, who wrote another politically incorrect gay 
comedy "Jeffrey" and director Frank Oz (Muppet movies) have landed a gold 
mine with this film.  It is not only funny, but they might have finally 
mainstreamed gay characters by exploiting the very assumptions surrounding 
them that independant films have been combatting for years.  By ignoring 
the sacred cow, this movie could open doors for future movies.  This 
would make "In and Out" not only one of the best comedies I have ever seen,
but one of the most meaningful.     

Title
Review for Extreme Measures (1996)
        Hugh Grant (Dr. Guy Luthan), Gene Hackman (Dr. Lawrence Myrick)
        Sarah Jessica Parker (Jodie Trammel).  Directed by Michael Apted
        "I took the liberty of ordering you some baklava," says a shaky Hugh 
Grant to Sarah Jessica Parker as they meet in a diner.  If that isn't bad 
enough, Grant will go on to say baklava one more time in that *scene*.  I 
can imagine that Grant would be pleased to know that his affinity for all 
things Greek is encompassed in this movie, since Extreme Measures is what 
the Greeks created best: a tragedy.
        With the A-list leading men trioed with Parker, the 
movie seems to get off on a respectable footing.  However, as Grant does 
his bumbling Brit, the movie trips over itself.  In an inner-city 
emergency room, Grant's British accent and calm demeanor don't lend any 
credibility to what we see on screen.  Still, its probably the 
writing more than his acting, as Grant yells at convulsing 
semi-conscious patients to calm down.  
        Suddenly, one unfortunate night, homeless men wander into 
the ER, naked and sick.  They convulse, vomit, and bleed, with no medical 
explanation, and suddenly stabilize, but ultimately die.  Who could be 
behind such diabolical deeds?  Movies new bad cronie, Gene Hackman, of 
course.  Hackman is working on flushing his career down the toilet, since 
he seemingly has picked his latest roles with a dart board. You see, Hackman 
is a rogue doctor who uses the homeless to do vertibrae transplants in order
to allow those who have been paralyzed to regain use of their bodies.  
        With such high aspirations, we might see a debate between human 
experimentation and be given compelling arguments for both.  However, 
Michael Apted (documentarian for the 7-14-21-28-35-Up series and 
director of Nell) treads into thriller territory.  This movie is not a 
bit scary, its a joke.   
        Now, what has happened to Hackman's career?  He was sympathetic 
and tormented in The Conversation and Mississippi Burning, and has fallen 
into the world of evil with Crimson Tide (great performance), The Chamber 
(tired performance), Absolute Power (lifeless performance), and now 
this.  He needs to read the scripts before choosing parts.  Nonetheless, 
he adds some credibility to this faltering picture.  But, he's becoming 
boring and repetetive with his holier-than-thou bad guys.
        Parker is the real doozy in this film.  Her career started 
brightly as Annie, and since then she has gone on to other roles such as 
Matthew Broderick's wife.  Yes, folks, she's terrible.  Is it her or her 
lines?  In Extreme Measures its tough to see.  She plays a 
two-dimensional supporting part with her two-dimensional acting, and 
sometimes it feels like we're transported into the black hole of the 
fourth dimension.  She's on a personal crusade in Hackman's underground 
hosptial.  She wants the experimentation on humans to maybe save her 
brother, who was paralyzed in an accident.  Let's add to the sympathy: 
she was driving the car.  Let's wander into afterschool special land: She 
was drunk.  You see, kids, there's a message in this film being spelled 
out for you.  She almost kills Grant by letting him into the hands of 
Hackman, and then comes to his aid.  For Grant it would have been
be a mercy killing.  In fact, someone should have pulled the plug on this film.
        This movie is so bad, so contrived, that it was fun to make jokes 
while watching.  However, if you want to rent a good film, bypass 
this.  Don't believe the hype on the case, you will be disappointed.  
Extreme Measures took the liberty of placing itself right on 
our platters, and we're left there to stare, wondering what exactly it is.

Title
Review for Spice World (1997)
Cast: The Spice Girls, Alan Cummings, George Wendt, Richard E. Grant, 
      Claire Rushbrook, Roger Moore.
Directed by Bob Spiers
        I am a Spice Girls fan, and am one of the few over eighteen who 
will admit that they indeed do have talent.  Part of the Spice Girl 
backlash is that many feel they are simply pretty faces and became 
extremely popular extremely fast.  I have no problem with that, yet they 
can sing, and their songs are enjoyable.  They are entertainers, not a 
band, so in my mind, they do not have to play instruments to be 
legitimate.  
        Can they act though and do they deserve a movie?  This could only 
be proven by watching "Spice World," which I did, and enjoyed 
considerably.  Of course its silly and is not a filmmaking clinic, but it 
does what some of what are considered great films have failed to do: 
entertain.
        To answer my first question, some Spice Girls are better actors 
than others, and the winner of most-talented Spice Girl goes to Melanie 
Chisholm (Sporty Spice).  Her distinctive voice is highlighted in the 
song "Too Much," and is peppered throughout the rest.  Yet, she can 
really act, as well, to the point where it felt as if she was being more 
than just a Spice Girl.  Among the others, Melanie Brown (Scary Spice) 
and Geri Halliwell (Ginger Spice) act well, and Emma Bunton (Baby Spice) 
and Victoria Addams (Posh Spice) were given lesser roles in the scheme of 
things.  You can really feel their bond and comfort with each other.
        The plot basically takes us through the follies of the girls as 
they go from rehearsals to press conferences to one final big live show.  
Members of the press try to ruin them, and their managers are put to the 
test trying to keep things together.  The tabloid run by Kevin McMaxford 
(Barry Humphries) is the weak link in this, as they try to show his evil 
through visual effects of thundering galestorms and streams of spittle as 
he talks.  The managers, played adeptly by Richard E. Grant (Portrait of a 
Lady) to ridiculous extremes and Claire Rushbrook (Secrets and Lies) create
some on-screen chemistry that Grant thwarts each time he talks to her.  Roger 
Moore plays an omnipotent producer known as The Chief who carries on sight 
gags and  mixes his cliches a la "Naked Gun."
        Other appearances are made by George Wendt (Cheers) as a film 
producer and Alan Cummings (Circle of Friends, Emma) as a documentarian 
who both attempt to make films of the Spice Girls and their travails.  
What is churned out is a film about the making of a film about a film in 
which the Spice Girls are the main attraction.  The Spice Girls sing 
their tunes to the delight of fans, stringing in what are essentially 
four or five music videos.  
        The Spice Girls show they are not all work when they help out a 
pregnant friend (Naoko Mori) who missed the Spice boat, but who supported 
them when they just got started.  Cameos by Elton John, Elvis Costello, 
and Bob Geldolf are thrown in, but the movie is at its strongest when the 
girls themselves are on screen.
        I was expecting it to be dumb, but there was even some adult 
humor in there that kept me going, and it never disappointed me.  If 
you're a fan, you'll enjoy the movie.  If you're not, then don't go, 
because we don't need to hear yet another person mocking them because 
that is the popular thing to do.

Title
Review for Ghosts of Mississippi (1996)
Cast: Alec Baldwin (Bobby De Laughter), Whoopi Goldberg (Myrlie Evers), 
James Woods (Byron De La Beckwith).
Directed by Rob Reiner
        "Ghosts of Mississippi" begins with a montage akin to very few 
other films.  It is a movie with a purpose: we want Oscars.  So, how to 
start a weak movie with high aspirations than to send up chilling images 
of the civil rights struggle in the United States with a gospel 
soundtrack.  Very chilling, indeed.
        Once you get to the meat of the movie though, it is hard not to 
notice the misguided storyline.  I credit Rob Reiner, who said that he 
would never attempt to approach the story through the eyes of a black 
person, since he cannot portray those emotions as a white man.  So, what 
we wind up with is a mildly entertaining, somewhat powerful, newsmagazine 
account of the trial lawyer who brings Medgar Evers' killer to justice 
after more than thirty years.
        Alec Baldwin portrays Bobby DeLaughter (fresh off his deep 
Southerner in "Heaven's Prisoners") who, as a white man, undertook the 
unpopular task of imprisoning Byron De la Beckwith (James Woods) after he 
went free from numerous mistrials.  We search for his reasoning to do 
this, since he is financially stable as a result of his father-in-law, a 
racist judge.  Is it for poilitical aspirations or because it is the 
decent and right thing to do?
        These are questions that Myrlie Evers (Whoopi Goldberg) seeks to 
have answered, as well.  She doesn't trust Bobby as much as she trusts 
any white man, since those are the people who have let Beckwith run free 
for so long.  Unfortunately, here is where Reiner loses the reins.
        If he cannot make a movie about the black experience, he could at 
least make Myrlie a more central figure.  Scenes between Goldberg and 
Baldwin are surprisingly intense, as we watch the progression from wariness 
to trust.  Instead, the movie chooses to focus on Bobby's home life and 
the fact that his wife is as much of a racist as her father.  She leaves 
him for a while, and Bobby makes a mistake while taking care of the kids 
alone.  Instead of telling him that racism is out-an-out wrongdoing, he 
skirts the issue.  This shows a fear to make a statement.
        Maybe, now, its true, as Beckwith states, that "[y]ou'll never 
get a jury in the state of Mississippi to convict a white man for 
killing" a black man.  Its because no white man, not even our heroes, can 
face up to the idea that racism is bad.  So, Woods prevails in the end, 
even though his character is convicted.  He remains the one memorable 
character in the movie, yet doesn't he always make his scenes great?  His 
nomination was well earned.
        I would have liked "Ghosts of Mississippi" to have been the 
Myrlie Evers story.  It would have been more compelling and hit home much 
harder.

Title
Review for Rounders (1998)
Cast: Matt Damon, Edward Norton, John Malkovich, Martin Landau, Gretchen
Mol.  directed by John Dahl.
Before Matt Damon became "Ooh, Matt Damon!" he was a young actor
just looking for work.  It wasn't until "Courage Under Fire" that he
really gained notice for his acting ability.  His performance in a small, 
though pivotal role, caught the eye of Steven Spielberg, who gave him the
title role in this summer's "Saving Private Ryan."  At the same time,
"Good Will Hunting" turned Damon into a superstar, sex symbol, and double
Oscar nominee.
Going to "Rounders," I wanted to see if we would get Matt Damon the actor,
or Matt Damon the super-glossy star.  And what we find is a little bit of
both.  Matt Damon the star is on screen as Matt Damon the actor tries to
portray Mike McDermott, a high stakes poker player and law student.  This
is slightly distracting when watching the film, but a good mix for
attracting audiences.
McDermott is conveniently at a crossroads in every aspect of his life from
the start of the film.  He loses thirty grand in one hand against Teddy
KGB (John Malkovich), an underground poker club owner with connections to
the Russian mafia.  This throws McDermott into a tailspin and he decides
to become legitimate, which suits live-in law school girlfriend Jo
(relative unknown Gretchen Mol).
Around the same time, McDermott's best friend from childhood, Worm (Edward
Norton), is coming out of jail.  Worm hustles and cheats his way through
poker, the antithesis to Mike's considerable skill.  This singleminded
movie focuses on Worm's bringing Mike back into underground poker and the
deterioration of his non-gambling life.
First-time feature writers David Levien and Brian Koppelman have come up
with a witty script.  But the inside world of poker and the one-track
storyline make for a pretty slow two hours.  Mike's relationship with Jo
is an underdeveloped afterthought.  Jo's protests about Mike's gambling
come off as whiny and do not ring with the impending heartbreak that one
might expect from a couple breaking up.  Once Jo leaves the apartment, she
almost vanishes from the film.  Its not the point of Rounders anyway to go
deeply into this relationship - rather Mike's struggle between his two
senses of self takes center stage.
Martin Landau, playing not-so-coincidentally a professor who also
struggled between becoming a rabbi or following his true calling to teach
law, arrives just in time to assist Mike in his choice.  Wondering what
path he chooses?  Well, I'll just tell you this is not a John Grisham
movie.
By this point, Worm has dragged him so far down back into the poker world
that Mike has to take on Worm's debts.  They need to raise fifteen
thousand bucks in five days.  Worm, of course, sabotages the plan with his
hustling resulting in a showdown between Mike and Teddy KGB in a
winner-take-all game.  
Rounders has the feel of 1940s and 50s crime films with Matt Damon
voicing-over a narration throughout.  Director John Dahl (Unforgettable)
never lets us forget the stark dreariness of the underground with cold
blues and blacks dominating his palate.  All in all, it's a pretty well
acted movie, as well.
Many movies that are full of Academy Award nominees and winners (like
1996's Marvin's Room) tend not to live up to the hype.   With Malkovich,
Norton, Landau, and Damon, Rounders has quite the pedigree.  Malkovich (In
the Line of Fire) commands respect on screen as his very presence should
strike fear in those dealing with him.  His role is small, but his
convincing Russian accent keeps him interesting.  Norton (Primal Fear) is
his twitchy self, while Landau (Ed Wood) deserves more time than his three
to four conversations.
The treasure of Rounders is found in John Turturro, who can play quirky in
Coen brothers' films or straight in such fare as Quiz Show.  Turturro
plays Kinish, Mike's mentor if Mike will ever listen.  Kinish has the
skill to play with the best, but does not look for the glory of victory.
He earns his living legitimately driving a truck.  His winnings pay
alimony and child support.  
It is difficult to decide whether Mike is a gambling addict who needs help
or a skilled player hungry for his dream to play in the World Series of
Poker on ESPN.  He wins without cheating, can tell everyone's hand after
just entering a room (playing blind, as they say), and uses his biggest
challenges for bluffing practice.  In the process, though, he loses his
girlfriend, quits law school, gets beaten up severely, and plays
compulsively.  His addiction fuels the pursuit of the dream.  Mike plays
for the glory, the excessive amounts of money are necessary for him to be
able to play.  It's a tightrope Mike walks throughout Rounders, and quite
shakily at that.
Matt Damon walks the same tightrope in his first major role since "Good
Will Hunting."  It will be interesting to see if his
considerable acting abilities will ever again be able to outshine the star
status the world has placed on him. 

Title
Review for Big Hit, The (1998)
Cast: Mark Wahlberg, Lou Diamond Phillips, Christina Applegate, Avery 
Brooks, China Chow, Antonio Sabato Jr., Elliot Gould, Lainie Kazan, 
Bokeen Woodbine, Sab Shimono.  Directed by Che Kirk Wong.  Written by 
Ben Ramsey. 
        In 1996, a film called "2 Days in the Valley" made a misguided 
attempt at becoming the next "Pulp Fiction" by intertwining several lives 
amid a ring of smalltime crime, examining the inner humanity of the 
lowlives involed.  Essentially, "Pulp Fiction" borrowed this formula 
from Robert Altman's classic "Short Cuts," but did so successfully.  
Another copycat has emerged in "The Big Hit," a film so derivative of 
genres and directing styles, that the real enjoyment is indentifying 
where you have seen this happen before.
        Four idiosyncratic hit men, Melvin Smiley (Mark Wahlberg), Cisco (Lou 
Diamond Phillips), Crunch (Bokeen Woodbine), and Vinnie (Antonio Sabato 
Jr.), work for ringleader Paris (Avery Brooks).  Unauthorized, they kidnap 
the college-aged daughter (China Chow) of a failed media mogul (Sab 
Shimono) looking for quick ransom.  A problem arises 
when the girl, Keiko, turns out to be Paris' goddaughter, angering him.  
What ensues is a series of double- and triple-crossing that plays out 
like a bad cartoon.
        Sensitive, morally-challenged Melvin is engaged to airhead Pam 
Schulman (Christina Applegate), whose Jewish parents (Lainie Kazan, Elliot 
Gould) disapprove of the pairing since Melvin is Catholic.  Meanwhile, 
wild-and-crazy Cisco is caught between his loyalty to his fellow 
kidnappers and his loyalty to Paris, who asks him to find the 
culprits.  Phillips broods and rants, chewing up scenery, as a villain 
who defies death about as well as Glenn Close in "Fatal Attraction" or 
any enemy in the "Scream" series.  Woodbine ("The Rock") becomes a sight 
gag as in each scene he has a different and increasingly bigger 
hand-strengthening apparatus after denying he enjoys self-pleasure in 
an opening scene.  This is all supposed to be funny stuff.
        Rookie writer Ben Ramsey and accalimed director Che Kirk Wong, 
making his big time American debut, seem to have gained their cinematic 
eye by watching all the movies they could get their hands on.  In one 
scene, hitmen have come to take out Melvin as he and Pam's family sit 
down for dinner.  As they sit there, guns are pulled under the table, 
while a drunken Elliot Gould spews insults and his insides across the 
table.  The Gould part of this scene is reminiscent of Oliver Stone in 
"Natural Born Killers" or "U-Turn."  As the tablecloth is pulled off the 
table, the guns go off in a less-than-spectacular scene that producer 
John woo could have turned into a masterpiece.  The gunfight moves to the 
kitchen invoking memories of "Grosse Pointe Blank."  
        Want a search and car chase?  Borrow from "Law and Order" or "NYPD 
Blue."  Want to tape up the kidnapped?  Watch "Excess Baggage."  Hey, 
what about a slow motion scene of guys walking?  Steal from "Reservoir 
Dogs" which adapted elements from "A Clockwork Orange."  Want to turn 
stuffing a chicken into a romantic encounter?  That pottery scene from 
"Ghost" works.  This film touches Scorsese and video from the O.J. 
Simpson car chase.  It borrows from everything, because it wants to be 
the next "Naked Gun," which is setting its sights far too high.
        "The Big Hit" gives us the spectrum of movie stardom.  Mark Wahlberg 
is a nearly established star thanks to "Boogie Nights," but is green 
enough to make films like this without ruining his potential career.  Lou 
Diamond Phillips and Christina Applegate are in the positions of being 
typecast as a hothead and airhead respectively, and should aim higher.  
TV-ready Gould should stick to his sitcom spots on "Friends" and "Getting 
Personal," while Kazan should book her ticket for a ride on the new "Love 
Boat."  There is always potential for them to return to their heydays 
(both are past Oscar nominees) with some smarter choices.  As Burt 
Reynolds, Robert Forster, and Pam Grier proved last year, it is never too 
late to make a comeback.  The lucky escapees?  Chow and Sabato Jr.  Their 
stars are rising and gain valuable exposure in this high profile film.  
After all, Wahlberg had his "Fear" and underwear model career before 
making an A-list name for himself.
        If "The Big Hit" is a spoof on every movie ever made, then it is 
successful in its inclusiveness.  The sum of these parts, though, makes a 
choppy, annoying movie.  The only truly funny thing about this film is 
its ironic title.

Title
Review for Cop Land (1997)
        Here is a film that is wrapped in a 95 minute package that should 
be about three hours long, and still would be enjoyable.  Director/writer 
James Mangold probes into the lives of 5 different personalities that only 
touched the surfaces of their lives.  He could have and should 
have gone deeper.  Despite this lapse, though, Cop Land is a great film 
with great acting across the board.
        Sylvester Stallone is an intelligent guy.  After all, he wrote 
the Academy Award winning Rocky (1976), and was nominated for the 
screenplay.  It was also the last time we saw him truly act.  Maybe urban 
dramas are a place he could inhabit and reap benefits from for movies to 
come.  After failing to impress in comedy (Stop, Or My Mom Will 
Shoot, Oscar) and in his specialty, action (the last few Rockys and 
Rambos, Judge Dredd), Stallone has delivered an understated performance 
that rightfully has Oscar buzz flying around him.  
        As the lonesome loser, Freddy Heflin, Stallone has to portray a 
half-deaf, overweight (he added 40 pounds and watched muscle 
deteriorate), and joke of a cop, who never became a Cop.  He is the 
sheriff of Garrison, New Jersey, a haven for New York's most 
corrupt police officers.  He keeps a peaceful town, but no one takes him 
seriously.  He watches the cityscape pass him by, a place his hearing 
kept him from working.  However, he wasn't always this buffoonish.
        He lost his hearing while saving the woman (Annabella Sciorra) he has 
come to love, and protect, after she plunged off a bridge in her car 
years before.  This kept him from becoming the decorated city officer he 
yearns to be, but in Cop Land he is presented the chance to achieve hero 
status.
        Ray Liotta could have won me over years ago, had I seen 
GoodFellas before witnessing his performances in Unlawful Entry, the 
ironically titled Unforgettable and the atrocious Turbulence.  I can 
finally say, he has won me over.
        In fact, he puts in the most impressive performance in this well-
stocked film.  As an ambiguously moral cop, Liotta dives into his 
own personal dilemma of doing what's right and doing what's fashionable.  
He has some questionable dealings as a result of using his police 
privileges which extend to a drug habit and insurance fraud.  But, on the 
good side, he serves as Freddy's mentor.  
        Perhaps to show HIS seriousness, Liotta has beefed up as well.  
In one chase scene, its enjoyable to watch Stallone and he become 
out-of-breath as a result of their weight gain.  With his usual 
intensity, Liotta puts in a performance for all-time, that should be 
recognized come Oscar time.  He's the one to watch.
        Harvey Keitel is the bad cop.  Robert De Niro is the good 
internal affairs cop.  Michael Rapaport is the fallen-hero cop.  Noah 
Emmerich and Janeane Garofalo are the small-town Heflin-wannabes.  All 
are terrific.
        Keitel is unforgiving as ever as .  He is the one who created 
Garrison for his profit and to run his shady dealings.  His nephew, 
Michael Babitch, played by Rapaport, made a mistake.  He had saved six 
black children's lives, recently, but became trigger-happy after being 
side-swiped by two black teens, and kills them.  His uncle, Keitel's 
Ray Donlan hides him as others plant a gun in the deads' car.  A 
bogus funeral is held after Babitch and Donlan fake a suicide. 
        Everyone around knows this is false, including Mo Tilden (De Niro).  
Yes, even De Niro has put on the pounds to capture the essence of an 
overeating desk cop, who must chase down some of his own.  This meets 
with the bad cops' disfavor, but also compromises Freddy's position 
between his friends who got him the sheriff's job and doing the right 
thing.  The deal is, Freddy has spotted Babitch, and Tilden 
has gone after Heflin to get him to become the cop he's wanted to be:  An 
heroic one.
        Garofalo and Emmerich play the bumpkin deputies smartly, and 
don't want to become involved in breaking up a mob-run dictatorship in 
Garrison.  Its Freddy's turn to become the law.  The question is, will 
he?  
        Stallone and De Niro together make sparkling confrontations over 
right versus loyalty.  And we are finally shown that Stallone knows how 
to act and can stand his own.  De Niro has returned to acting since 
seeing a ridiculous bit in Marvin's Room and his patented psycho in The Fan.
        Keitel and Liotta hold well, with Liotta putting in his best 
performance yet.  The only lagging part comes from director James 
Mangold.  
        This was a great script which could have gone on forever, and 
been just as riveting.  We hardly got to know some of these fascinating 
guys, but his direction was impeccable.  Watch for the deafened shoot-out 
which takes place.  It is the second great shooting sequence of the 
summer taking the lead of Face/Off's Over the Rainbow.  Still, when the 
only flaw is that it was too short, it says something for the movie.
        Come Oscar time, I ask that the Academy look favorably on 
Stallone, recognize Liotta, and give Cop Land a much-deserved 
nomination.  Its not one of the immortals, but its one to see again and 
again.  

Title
Review for Titanic (1997)
Cast: Leonardo DiCaprio, Kate Winslet, Billy Zane, Frances Fisher, Bill 
Paxton, Gloria Stuart, Kathy Bates, Bernard Hill, Jonathan Hyde, Victor 
Garber, Suzy Amis, Ewan Stewart, Eric Braeden.
Written and Directed by James Cameron
Music by James Horner
Cinematography by Russell Carpenter
Costume Design by Deborah Lynn Scott
Art Direction and Set Decoration: Peter Lamont and Michael Ford
        With an epic love story touched by disaster, a three hour running 
time, and great early press, I feared that "Titanic" was going to become 
this year's "The English Patient."  After all, that horribly 
disappointing picture was touted for Oscars long before it hit wide 
release.  Happily, after three viewings, and I hope one more next week, 
"Titanic" has proven my skepticism completely wrong.  Alongside "Good 
Will Hunting," this is the best film of 1997 and deserves many of the 
accolades and awards it has been given.
        Some people are losing themselves to the spectacle of effects and 
editing.  Certainly these were some of the best effects Hollywood has 
witnessed, but the true splendor comes in the storyline.  A vagabond 
sketch artist, Jack Dawson (Leonardo DiCaprio), and young rich poseur, 
Rose DeWitt Bukater (Kate Winslet), become embroiled in a forbidden love 
affair on board the R.M.S. Titanic.  Rose is engaged to Pittsburgh 
businessman Cal Hockley (Billy Zane) as arranged by her mother Ruth  
(Frances Fisher).
        This story is told through the eyes of a 101-year-old Rose 
(Gloria Stuart) after she has seen a news report of divers led by fortune 
hunter Brock Lovett (Bill Paxton) searching for a priceless diamond necklace 
aptly called "The Heart of the Ocean" that she  still owned since the 
ship's sinking. The old Rose takes us back to 1912 for the maiden voyage of 
the Titanic, when she, a miserable teenager, was heading home for a wedding 
that would keep her family out of debt, while sucking away her life.  Here 
she met Jack after a botched suicide and quickly falls for him.  In this 
relationship, there are no pretentions, just casual flirtation followed 
by deep emotions: the type of love we would all like to have.  This meets 
the scorn of Cal and Ruth. 
        Foreshadowing (though we know what will happen) of the disaster 
about to occur is hinted at throughout the first half of the picture.  
The mystique of the ship is that it is deemed unsinkable by all involved 
in its creation.  In spite of Rose's concerns about the limited 
amount of lifeboats, builder Thomas Andrews (Victor Garber) assures her 
they will not be needed.  Guided by fate, pressure, and human error, 
Captain E.J. Smith (Bernard Hill) turns the engines to full speed.  With no
moonlight and no speakable wavecrests around the iceberg, the Titanic 
became history's most famous blunder.  For over an hour we watch as the ship 
sinks, and Jack and Rose's love grows deeper and stronger as their time 
runs slowly out.
        Everything in this film deserves mention and praise, so here 
goes.  The Oscar nominated Kate Winslet tempers naivete with strength, 
while DiCaprio plays Jack with youthful exuberance.  Their romance is 
believable and heartwrenching.  Gloria Stuart is wonderful as the old 
Rose, conveying eighty years of repressed emotions.  Her role might have 
been too slight for an Oscar nomination (though her age, 87, will endear 
her to the Academy) and it could be a recognition of her longevity.  
Kathy Bates does not show up on screen long enough, though she nails the 
nouveau riche and brave Molly Brown on the head with gusto.  
Billy Zane, all caked up with eyeliner, is the biggest jerk on the 
screen.  We are not supposed to like him and he never gives us any 
reason to.  Frances Fisher, as Rose's icy mother could have received her own 
Oscar nomination.  
        James Cameron is lucky he was given such free reign on this film, 
because he has made one of the best films of all time.  His direction 
and eye for detail makes this film worth viewing many times, and has 
given the world a gift with "Titanic."  The hardest workers, though, 
have to be the stunt men and women, as well as the extras, who might never 
see more than their names in small print in the credits.
        Cheers to James Horner for his haunting score and to Wilbur Jennings 
(lyrics) and Celine Dion for "My Heart Will Go On."  Her voice has become 
synonymous with soundtracks and this year she should take home the big prize.  
If you see one movie more than once this year, make it "Titanic."  You will
not be disappointed.  I have not gotten up in the nine hours and forty-five 
minutes I have watched of "Titanic."  Watch it for the effects, watch it 
for the love story.  If "Titanic" does not move you, I don't know what will.

Title
Review for Blood and Wine (1997)
        Rage.  Integrity.  Intensity.  Passion.  Disillusionment.  Pain.  
Charm.  Jack Nicholson can incorporate all these contradictions into 
whatever role he plays.  Such is the case in Blood and Wine, his latest 
collaboration with director Bob Rafelson (Five Easy Pieces, King of 
Marvin Gardens).  Over the past few years, we have seen him in the 
two-dimensional role, no matter how compelling, in A Few Good Men, as a 
cartoon in Batman, and as a compassionate and angered man in The Crossing 
Guard.  But nothing can exercise Nicholson's talents as good as when 
he displays absolute paranoia and irrational psychosis as we've seen in 
Five Easy Pieces and Carnal Knowledge, which was a subtle, but calculated 
performance of mental deterioration.
        To watch Nicholson in a frenzy, the gritted teeth, the extended 
facial expressions is to face the devil.  Much as is seen in Blood and 
Wine.  We are presented with Alex Gates (Nicholson), who is 
married to Suzanne (Judy Davis), and step-father to Jason (Stephen 
Dorff).  The verbal abuse begins immediately in the family's first scene, 
and relationships have already been fractured when we enter their lives.  
Jason can do no right in wine merchant Alex's eyes.  He doesn't dress 
right, he doesn't have many friends, and he sticks up for his mother.  
They simply don't like each other, never had, and we must take that at 
face value.
        On top of his wine business, Alex is into some small time jewelry 
heisting.  In his second life, he is close associate to Victor (Michael 
Caine), who is an expert safe-cracker on probation.  Meanwhile, Alex is 
having an affair with Gabrielle (Jennifer Lopez), the nanny for a rich 
Miami family.  Alex has been using her to get at a necklace which could 
bring him in more than a million dollars.
        In a slow-developing format, we begin to see motivations of each 
character.  Jason wants to leave home, and hopes his abused mother leaves 
too.  A loner, Jason's dream is to ride the seas on a fixed-up boat.  He 
wants peace in his life.  Gabrielle loves Alex.  Unfortunately, Alex is 
selfish and relentless in his pursuit for riches.  Despite his business, 
he feels unsuccessful and needs money to live the lavish lifestyle he 
feels he missed out on.
        When Suzanne discovers he has two tickets to New York, she 
refuses to let Alex leave the house.  The Nicholson rage emerges for the 
first time.  In a fight which leaves you sympathizing for both 
characters, both parties are beaten pretty badly.  Suzanne leaves home 
and takes Jason with her.  In the process, they wind up with the jewels.  
        Alex and Victor need the jewels, as this game has suddenly gone 
terribly wrong.  At this time, Jason has also fallen for Gabrielle, who 
leads them both down different paths.  Nicholson has landed in the love 
triangles he has had in his earlier movies.  This leads to more rage as 
he descends deeper into his self-created psychosis.  At one point, he 
does the unforgiveable asking his hurt wife to tell him where the jewels 
out.  That sentence does not give the scene justice, but I don't want to 
ruin the film.
        Caine is superb as a man who has nown only crime his whole life 
and will stop at nothing and hurt anyone who stands in his way.  But 
Rafelson is not content in that.  Doublecrossing abounds on the parts of 
Steven, Victor, Alex, and Gabrielle, and we are led deeper and deeper 
into this tragic tapestry.  All characters at one point in time are the 
bad guy and all become victims.  
        This is one of the best films I've seen this year, hands down.  
It brought back the Nicholson of the past, which is the best Nicholson.  
He wasn't becoming complaicent, I don't think.  These types of roles just 
weren't around.  But, he's returned to form, and Dorff is quite the 
discovery, in this transition from the indie circuit to more mainstream 
fare.  
        Rafelson seems to have Nicholson's number when it comes to 
tapping into his irrational side, and its nice to see them teaming up 
again.  There is no diner scene here likei n Five Easy Pieces, but 
Nicholson can sneer and Rafelson can pull this mesmerizing picture 
together without the need to prove anything to the audience.  They need 
not our approval anymore, they've mastered that.  Now, its time to just 
watch this film, and enjoy Blood and Wine for the thrilling, though 
depressing, drama it is.  This picture is about contradictions, even the 
title suggests one.

Title
Review for Edge, The (1997)
cast: Anthony Hopkins (Charles Morse), Alec Baldwin (Robert Green), Elle 
Macpherson (Mickey Morse), Harold Parrineau Jr. (Stephen).
written by David Mamet
directed by Lee Tomahori
"If you go out in the woods today, you're in for a big surprise..."
Billionaire Charles Morse (Anthony Hopkins) has descended upon the 
Alaskan wilderness for his supermodel wife's (Elle Macpherson - 
surprised?) layout shoot with studly photographer Robert Green (Alec 
Baldwin - more surprised?) and his staff.  Tension mounts as Macpherson, 
who is decades younger than her sugar daddy husband, seems to get along 
quite well with her photographer buddy.
"It's lovely in the woods today, but its safer to stay inside..."
We learn that we are in store for some wilderness action in 
the first five minutes.  Talk about harbingers of doom!  Morse's 
secretary gave him a deep woods survival book for his birthday.  In the 
meantime, all we hear about is the great Kodiak bear, or what the guide 
calls the "man eater."
"For every bear that ever there was, will gather there for certain, 
because..."
In order to lure Morse away from camp, Robert feigns dissatisfaction 
with his model and seeks an Indian to pose for him.  To do so, they need 
to take a small propeller plane with Stephen (Harold Parrineau), the 
assistant, eighty miles north, for what "will take just two hours."  Sure 
it will.  In the plane, Robert expresses jealousy of Morse's life.  At 
this point, Morse asks, "So, how are you going to kill me?"  
Simultaniously, the plane takes a plunge and they are lost.  All but the 
pilot survive and the action-adventure begins.  Yay!
"Today's the day the teddy-bears have their picnic!"
With our three survivors as the main course, apparently.  I am 
telling you, this bear is a menace that just will not go away.  To 
transform this into a buddy flic, a point that Robert alludes to later 
on, Stephen has to be killed.  He was the whiner anyway, so he was 
expendable.  (Read that: he's not the star.)  So, what ensues is a slow 
moving, seldomly exciting, but mostly plodding movie with quite a 
predictable twist.  In what seems to be an endless trek through the woods 
is saved by the discovery of an abandoned shack, chock full of supplies.  
Included in this miracle kit is a canoe and a map.  How fortunate!
Anthony Hopkins is a great actor, who brings integrity to each of 
his roles.  In this weak picture, he plays an imperialistic aficionado of 
exotic cultures, exuding stodginess.  It is not until the tension rises 
that he gains a sense of humor.  He is all that we could ask for in a 
billionaire with a trophy wife, oodles of possessions, and a vault of 
trivial knowledge.  I must say, though, that it was nice to see the old 
guy in the movie not needing his pills or a respirator when the going got 
tough.
Baldwin played a naive wimp for most of the movie, a nice change 
that is destroyed as we progress.  He is not as nice as he would like us 
to believe, pushing his character to the shadows of previous tough guy 
roles.  Except now, he is tough and bad!  The early part allows an actor 
to glimmer through, and not just a piece of meat strutting on screen.  
Now he needs a meaty role for his next movie, so we do not tire of him 
completely.
Third billing should have gone to Bart the Bear, who held as the 
growling scene stealer.  However, he seems to be a one dimensional 
actor.  Not to worry, third billing went to Elle Macpherson, who showed 
some stupendous range.  She is playing a supermodel named Mickey Morse!  
What kind of acting move is that?  Are we to take her seriously?  She had 
very little time on screen and very little on during her screen time.  
While she did not act much, we did get a veiled peek at her talents: all 
two of them.
It was not a horrible movie, but is one that will be easy to mock.  
Once you find out the twist about the plane "accident" (did I ruin it?) 
you will see why the movie is tough to find remotely interesting.  It is 
apparently more than just a survivor's tale, it is a story about deceit 
and honor.  We have seen this most recently in "Cop Land" and "L.A. 
Confidential."  Right versus might.  Those films had better deliveries 
and payoffs, though.  "The Edge" just gets more boring as we proceed step 
by painful step.
With shoddy dialogue, we expect more from writer David Mamet.  He 
has written "The Untouchables" and was Oscar-nominated for "The 
Verdict."  Perhaps the biggest weakness can be found in director Lee 
Tomahori, who guided the snooze-fest "Mulholland Falls."  This guy has an 
ear for the extremely boring.
If you want an action movie, you will find the attackes to be few 
and far between.  If you want action with intelligence, as this movie 
claims it is, search long and hard to find a theater still showing 
"Face/Off."

Title
Review for Contact (1997)
        Robert Zemeckis could easily separate himself from Forrest Gump.  
After all, that movie is three years in the past.  By now, he should 
realize that not every movie he touches needs to have the same elements.  
Unfortunately, he doesn't.  
        The technical wonder that was Gump invades some scenes of 
Contact, and they are unwelcome.  Unwelcome to the eye and apparently to 
the man in those scenes, Bill Clinton.  What we have here is similar to 
Gumps meeting with President Kennedy, where characters are superimposed 
onscreen during a presidential speech that makes the archived footage 
seem to be a part of the movie.  Here we find two mistakes: one in 
motive, one in the technical uses of the President.  By now, we are 
aware that Zemeckis can do this sort of thing, and it has swerved into an 
annoying pattern.  Also, we can tell that the President did not make his 
speech indoors as sunlight glistens off his gray hair.
        My other complaint with Zemeckis' handling of this film is the 
gooey sentimentality to which we are subjected early on.  We discover how 
the main character, Ellie Arroway (Foster), has become the way she is 
through a series of flashbacks.  Groans were apparent during these scenes 
and should have been handled differently.   Nonetheless, Contact survives 
the heavy hand of Robert Zemeckis, and succeeds.
        The story has been in the making for seventeen years, the 
brainchild of super-astronomer Carl Sagan, who died last year of cancer.  
Pushed by a fascination with the prospects of alien life, Sagan turned 
Contact into a novel as production hit snags endlessly.  Translated to 
film, the effort is seamless.
        Ellie is a scientist who feels that there is someone out there 
trying to communicate.  Like the efforts to make the movie, Ellie 
hits bumps in her search for intelligent life as funding keeps 
disappearing from her projects.  Behind the sabotages is David Drumlin 
(Skerritt), a good old boy who has paid his dues and seeks the fame for 
himself.  However, just as the sheet is pulled from beneath her, Ellie 
finds a way to keep listening for signals, and one evening one appears 
from the star cluster of Vega, and it packs a punch.
        In a series of wrenching scenes, we watch as Drumlin successfully 
pulls the project away from Ellie.  The project consists of building an 
aptly named "machine" to launch someone to Vega to meeet the aliens.     
Soon enough the government takes over, led by skeptical Michael Kitz (Woods).  
Woods is once again brilliant as the sarcastic wit who has no reason to believe
that anything here is sensible.  These, however, are the mere bones of the 
film.
        Palmer Joss (McConaughey) is a Christian leader who plants the 
issue of God into the minds of the viewers and actors.  The science 
versus religion debate emerges and erupts.  As the machine is being 
built, religious and science fanatics line up along NASAs property to 
protest or support the mission.  Meanwhile, Drumlin and Arroway vie for 
the job to meet the Vegans.  Drumlin plays dirty to attain the position, 
while Arroway speaks from her heart during sessions.
        However, after a tragedy strikes, Ellie is allowed to run the 
mission.  She is guided by the Carl Sagan-as-billionaire, S.R. Hadden 
(Hurt), who helps her reach her goal, the stars.  Amazing are the 
wormhole effects of her entering different atmospheres and galaxies, as 
well as the Vegan land itself.  While on Vega, her meeting must remain a 
surprise.  Zemeckis does have a tocuh of flare with these scenes, and 
could have used more of them.
        Angela Bassett deserved more scenes, and comes up as the wasted 
talent.  Casting Rob Lowe as the conservative and Jake Busey as a lunatic 
were smart decisions.
        I believe that Face/Off is the best film we've been given this summer, 
but Contact is Academy-friendly.  It is almost assured that Foster will 
gain a nomination, and Skerritt, in his icy and calculating performance, 
deserves consideration.  Zemeckis almost blows it, but with the 
fascination behind Contact, even he could reap the benefits of an overall 
good movie.

Title
Review for U Turn (1997)
Starring: Sean Penn, Jennifer Lopez, Nick Nolte, Billy Bob Thornton, Claire 
Danes, Jon Voight, and Joaquin Phoenix.
Directed by Oliver Stone.  Written by John Ridley
        Imagine yourself being placed in a world where you have lost all 
control, cannot trust anyone, and where all roads lead to nowhere.  You 
find yourself facing self-centered and self-serving people who seem to 
only know two things: how to survive everyday life and how to make your 
life miserable.  You are stripped of trust and faith in humanity.  Now, 
go see "U-Turn."
        The idea of stagnant lifestyles in the southwest have crept onto 
the screen in recent years with Richard Linklater's teen slacker films 
"Dazed and Confused" and "Suburbia."  Once again, the south becomes the 
butt of a cruel joke in Oliver Stone's "U-Turn," which seems to ask the 
question: what would the slacker adults be like?
        Sean Penn stumbles into Superior, Arizona, after his car 
overheats, running into the most extreme characters one could imagine.  
His days brings him into contact with a greasy mechanic (Billy Bob 
Thornton), a street dwelling, blind Vietnam veteran (Jon Voight), a 
nymphomaniac teen and her tough guy boyfriend (Claire Danes and Joaquin 
Phoenix), and a wronged seductress and her small town mogul boyfriend 
(Jennifer Lopez and Nick Nolte).  This superstar ensemble cast plays each 
bit with subtlety and great effort, as Stone crafts a painful tale of 
being stuck in a state of inertia.
        In what turns into an oddball coming out gala, one might find 
"U-Turn" reminiscent of Coen Brothers movies like "Raising Arizona" or 
"Fargo."  But, idiosyncracies that are celebrated in their films take a 
back seat to irony and perhaps a deeper meaning that only Stone himself 
would know.  The times that the locals shine come with the running gag, 
"You really oughta be more careful."          
        Penn plays Bobby Cooper, a small-time gambler in big-time trouble on
his way to Vegas to pay off a debt.  In this detour, we discover that his 
gambling losses not only entail money but also two fingers.  We are not 
supposed to sympathize with this guy.  So, in Superior, he is fleeced by 
the mechanic, loses his payoff and his weapon, is dragged into a bidding 
war to have Lopez or Nolte killed, and is harrassed by the teens.  His 
words to Thornton as he leaves the garage, "The difference between you 
and me is that I'm only driving through," have come back to haunt him.
        Stone has left behind the high-minded social and political theory 
we found in "JFK," "Natural Born Killers," and "Nixon," and has turned 
his sights to creating a claustrophobic story of losers using tricky 
camera work.  This is more of a chance for him to display his cinematic 
eye.  He does so with still shots or focusing away from the action during 
a scene that allow us to see what we might not normally notice.  The 
ugliness or sexiness of the characters are expanded through this 
technique, for we see the world through Penn's eyes during these 
moments.  
        Another difference between this and a Coen Brothers film is the 
way Stone removes sympathy from the equation.  While Nicolas Cage 
(stealing a baby in "Arizona") and William H. Macy (having his wife 
kidnapped in "Fargo") committed horrible acts, we nonetheless held some 
sympathy for their characters.  In "U-Turn," we are not meant to like any 
of them.  They are meant to disgust us. 
        Sophisticated? No.  Claire Danes asks Penn, "Why doesn't Patsy 
Cline make no more records?" not knowing she's dead.  Trustworthy? No.  
Thornton's prices raise, and Lopez and Nolte are bedhopping headhunters.  
Comforting? No.  Penn is always on edge, either being attacked by Nolte 
or Phoenix, or being involved in a grocery store heist.  We would not 
want to alone in a room with any of these people.  In proving this point, 
however, does writer John Ridley, who adapted this from his story "Stray 
Dogs" wander too far?
        The idea that we would run into this many people and have so many 
breaks go against one person is highly unbelievable.  Furthermore, the 
addition of an incest plot and suicide plot muddle the already filled 
script even more.  It is Stone's technical mastery and the incredible 
acting which push this movie over the top.
        Believe it or not, I enjoyed "U-Turn" a lot.  I was one of the 
few I saw it with who did, and I know this movie is divisive.  It is 
bloody and gory for one thing, which alienates some viewers.  It is 
highly difficult to follow and will play mind games that will leave you 
numb at the end.  Soon, everything bad (killing, even the incest) seems 
to have a funny side to it, and you will not be able to figure out just 
how bad a person you are if you do laugh.
        So, try not to think too much.  Resist the temptation to add any 
significant allegory for modern day greed, and you just might have fun.  
"U-Turn" is not as intelligent as "Trainspotting," but will manipulate 
your brain just as handily.  If you see it for the fun of movie watching, 
you will have a good time.

Title
Review for Mad City (1997)
Cast: John Travolta (Sam Baily), Dustin Hoffman (Max Brackett), Mia 
Kirshner (Laurie), Alan Alda (Kevin Hollander).  Directed by 
Costa-Gavras.  Written by Tom Matthews and Eric Williams.
        You have seen it every night on the television: pushy reporters, 
microphones flying, cameras rolling at times of tragedy, the spotlight on 
the victim, innane questions from the anchor desk.  Its the mind-boggling 
flurry of the media blitz at its best, searching for the best, most 
sensational story, controlling the way the public sees the news.  Behind 
the scenes are the back-stabbing egomaniacs searching for the upper hand 
on the other guys.
        "Dog Day Afternoon" showed the effects of hostage-taker on the 
media.  "The Chase" showed the media's ratings-conscious attitude toward 
tense situations.  "Absence of Malice" displayed the way the media can 
harm its subjects.  Costa-Gavras' "Mad City" mixes all three of these, 
creating one of the more thought-provoking films of the year.  While 
countless films have examined the cutthroat world of journalism, they 
seem to forget about how they deal with the people inside the story.
        Max Brackett (Dustin Hoffman) was once a leading network reporter 
whose grandstanding of Kevin Hollander (Alan Alda) during an airline 
crash has left him demoted to local news in Madeline, California.  
Covering fluff pieces and toting intern Laurie (Mia Kirshner) around 
leave him with little hope for reentering the big time.
        Sam Baily (John Travolta) was a security guard at the local museum, 
a victim of budget cuts.  Unable to tell his wife or to provide for his 
children, he returns to the museum with gun in hand so that he will be 
heard and hopefully regain his job.  Brackett had just done a story on 
the museum, placing him in the middle of what turns into a hostage 
situation.  A school field trip is trapped inside, raising the potential 
attraction of the story.  These two downward spiraling men become the 
nations attention.
        Baily accidentally shoots a black guard who kept his job, moving 
Brackett into the position of damage control.  In effect, he becomes the 
producer, director, and writer of the "greatest show in town" that will 
raise his credibility level in the media.  Brackett wins public opinion 
for Baily, running in and out of the museum controlling police action 
and how the public perceives who should be the villain.  Sam Baily 
becomes a hero who just wants his job back.  As the story becomes 
headlines, Hollander moves in.  In his private war with Brackett, 
Hollander upstages the event through some editing that turns Baily and 
Brackett into mere pawns in the hands of the fickle public.  
        Freshman writers Tom Matthews and Eric Williams hit upon a topic 
that will keep audiences seated, manipulating our emotions the way our 
onscreen counterparts are swayed by each shred of information.  Some 
lapses involving smaller stories do exist, but overall they have crafted 
an intriguing overview of the media-public relationship.  
        Brackett knows the game, teaching the hapless Baily the rules along 
the way.  Sometimes it is difficult to tell who has taken hostages 
here.  While Baily holds fifteen people, Brackett holds the world at his 
mercy.  He orchestrates the ordeal, forgetting that he cannot pull the 
plug; only Baily can finish it.  As much as Brackett thinks so, he 
essentially becomes powerless in his own production, going from 
following the story to part of it.  His decline in stature as the 
situation spins out of his control is most enjoyable to watch.
        Hoffman and Travolta put in solid performances, as control-monger 
and poor soul.  After appearing briefly in the aptly named 
"Sleepers," Hoffman seems to be back to his commanding form.  Travolta, 
meanwhile, continues his hot streakon the heels of this year's 
"Face/Off" and his well-received performance in the otherwise 
lackluster "She's So Lovely."
        "Mad City" closes with a view from above: booms, microphones, 
cameras, police, and a mob of reporters.  The consequences of 
Brackett's and Baily's actions pale in the face of the edgier story, 
business continues as usual.  This film leaves the viewer with the 
question: who are the victims in the media blitz?  This movie argues 
that everyone is.  From the reporters' integrity to the audience's 
trust, nothing is untouched or unsoiled by the finish.  While the 
characters of "Mad City" learn nothing, the viewers of this solid and 
enjoyable film can go home and ponder the message.  
