Authors
Timothy Scott
Number of Reviews
4

Title
Review for Game, The (1997)
        When considering David Fincher's latest film, "The Game", four 
words come to mind. "Don't believe the hype." This Michael Douglas 
vehicle, from the director of "Seven", isn't nearly as clever or 
innovatively suspenseful as it would have us believe.
        The film draws us in with an intriguing concept (aided no doubt 
by the riveting trailer) where a jaded millionaire (Douglas) is presented 
with the opportunity to enter into a living fantasy. This isn't simply 
virtual reality. This is real life with a deadly twist.
        On his 48th birthday, Nicholas Van Orton (Douglas) is invited to 
dinner by his underachieving younger brother, Conrad (Sean Penn). Conrad 
has a special birthday present for his brother. He hands Nicholas a gift 
certificate and tells him to contact a company called Consumer Recreation 
Services. "They make your life fun," Conrad tells him. Nicholas humors 
his brother, telling him he'll call, but it's clear he has no time for any 
foolish, "fantasy role-playing," as he calls it.
        Then, for reasons that are never really made clear, Nicholas 
decides to go to CRS and see what they're all about. He ends up spending 
a whole day going through their screening process, which to me made no 
sense considering the tight schedule he keeps claiming to have. 
Nevertheless, when it seems Nicholas has been rejected as a CRS client, 
the weird things start happening. Of course, when we've only covered 
about 30 minutes of screen time, what else should we expect.
        Douglas has built his modern career around playing powerful, 
violent and unlikable men being manipulated by unseen hands. One of those 
films, "Basic Instinct", came from the creative minds of writer, Joe 
Eszterhas and director, Paul Verhoeven.
        The premise of "The Game," is not unlike the concept of another
Verhoeven film, "Total Recall." In that case, the premise was implanting 
someone else's memories as a way to enhance one's own life through a 
dream vacation. Yet, in both films, the real goal is to create a 
vicarious bond with the audience. We live the adventure along with the 
protagonist, reacting to each twist and turn. In theory, the key to the 
suspense is not being to tell what is real and what isn't. All we can do is
hang on until the end of the ride, when the truth is finally revealed.
        Now, for those of you who forgot, let me say this again. "Don't
believe the hype." "The Game" is not a thrilling roller coaster ride. As 
a suspense-thriller, it doesn't do much but spin in circles. By the third 
reel, I was fighting back sleep and checking my watch as I endured the 
predictable plot.  Is it any wonder Douglas won't be able to resist the 
charms of a mysterious, potentially life-threatening blonde (ever heard 
of Glenn Close? No? Well, how about Sharon Stone? Thought so). 
        If anything in this film surprises you at all, I would guess you 
haven't seen that many films. There is no suspense here. Trust me, I 
looked hard to find some. I had to settle for contrived gimmicks and 
ridiculously implausible situations. Fincher aim's for Hitchcock but 
lands somewhere just north of Joe Eszterhas.
        There are those that might say "The Game" is not intended to be 
viewed literally. I would submit that is exactly the way I tried to view 
the film. The film simply does not have the teeth to bite into any real 
psychological issues. 
        There is a moment early in the film where Van Orton,
realizing his game has begun, smiles as he walks through the airport 
trying to figure out who's in on the whole thing. He is charged by his 
paranoia. He is looking at the world through new eyes. It is the last 
thought-provoking moment in the film. From there on, the director only 
wants to stay a step ahead of us. Any significant archetype that is set 
up in the beginning of the film is simply turned into a plot device. At 
the outset, we're told each "game" is tailored to the individual. 
Ultimately, this "game" is supposed to work like a crucible, trying this 
obscenely wealthy and emotionally detached aristocrat by fire, proving 
his soul.
        Yet, as Douglas endures his personal gauntlet, we're given very 
few pieces of the puzzle to illuminate us on who this man really is.
        I wanted to like this film more than I did. I look at it as just
anothergreat idea, poorly realized. I can think of at least two other 
superior films where watching the film didn't mean we were seeing what 
was really happening. Bryan Singer's "The Usual Suspects" for one, a film
that was truly unique in its ability to get you lost in the details before
pulling back to show you the full masterpiece on the canvas. Also, there 
is the underrated "Jacob's Ladder," with Tim Robbins, a film that really
has to be watched twice before you recognize the significance of all its
symbolism. Here are two examples of films that don't simply manipulate for 
manipulations' sake. There are films that use their labyrinth structure 
to lead us to a meaningful place.
        One major issue that comes up in "The Game" is whether or not the
whole "illusion" is just a highly sophisticated con game.  Well, I can 
tell you right now, after you've spent your $7 dollars, you may be asking 
yourself the same thing.

Title
Review for L.A. Confidential (1997)
Starring: Kevin Spacey, Russell Crowe, Guy Pearce, James Cromwell with Kim
          Basinger and Danny DeVito.
        As a film critic, it   's rare to see a film of such quality where 
one has to wonder if heUll run out of superlatives to describe it. L. A. 
Confidential presents such a dilemma. Of course, these are problems a 
critic loves to have. Forget about The Game. Forget about Conspiracy 
Theory and these other wanna-be neo-noir impostors. L. A. Confidential is 
the RReal McCoy.S
        WhatUs truly amazing is how this film comes completely out of 
nowhere.  None of the major leads in this film are household names, nor 
is the director Curtis Hanson. Hanson achieved modest success with The 
Hand That Rocks The Cradle.  However, he also helmed Bad Influence and 
The River Wild.  This kind of inconsistency certainly demonstrates his 
ability to weave yarn that cloaks an audience in paranoia or steer his
shaky raft right into the rocks. Let it be known that Curtis Hanson is 
now on the A-list.
        There are other A-list names featured in the cast. Danny DeVito, 
Kim Basinger, James Cromwell and Oscar-winner Kevin Spacey all add their 
own spice to the mix. Yet, the real meat and potatoes are found in the 
performances of Russell Crowe (Virtuosity)  and newcomer Guy Pearce.
        Los Angeles, California, La-La Land, the city where dreams come 
true.  A city with an image of bright lights and even brighter stars. Yet 
as the say, RAll that glitters is not gold.S Underneath the surface of 
this glamorous town is an underbelly of organized crime and corruption. 
The kind of town where the Media and Law Enforcement can create their own 
news to control or simply destroy anyone who wonUt play ball. The kind of 
town that consumes the innocent souls of anyone who buys into the hype 
and the routine promises of fame and fortune. The kind of town the Los 
Angeles Police Department always claims to have under control. 
        If the city your picturing looks an awful lot like the L.A. of 
1997, roll your clock back about 40 years. Now youUre getting the idea. 
WeUve all heard the old cliche, RThe more things change, the more they 
stay the same.S  Well, thereUs a reason we have old sayings like that. If 
you take a good look at this film, you can see the roots of a cannibalizing
 system based on a tradition of violence, racism and self-glorification.
        To reveal anything more specific about the plot would be robbing 
you of all the pop-corn popping fun as you watch the story start to 
percolate before your eyes.  This is a movie for people who love going to 
the movies. The surprises are endless, the tension is thick, and the 
action hits you head-on. Every element of the film is so skillfully 
mounted on top of the other that even the most logical developments of 
the plot make you gasp. Curtis, we hardly knew ya.
        I hesitate to call L. A. Confidential  a Rthrow-back.S It 
certainly feels like one. Yet, I feel thatUs only because most of the 
people making films in Hollywood today are just lazy. One ironic note I 
find interesting is how, in the film, Kim Basinger plays a prostitute 
whose appearance is altered to make her look like a movie star (a subplot 
that provides the filmUs funniest scene).  To me, this is a great 
metaphor for Hollywood itself. Ultimately, everyone is in simply for the 
money and theyUll make themselves look like something they arenUt to 
whore themselves that much easier. Basinger delivers her role with style 
and grace; two words that perfectly epitomize this film.
        Having said all that, I cannot conclude this review without 
giving special praise to Russell Crowe and Guy Pearce. I know IUve talked 
a lot about clich s already. In crime-dramas, there is no cliche
 more enduring then RGood Cop-Bad Cop.S If there is one element of this 
film that I loved more than any other, it is the brilliant manner in 
which this cliche is turned on its ear. With Crowe as muscle cop, Bud 
White and Pearce as intrepid detective, Ed Exley, to simply call these men 
RGood CopS and RBad CopS would be a staggering over-simplification. These are
 two of the most complex police portrayals in screen history. The script allows them 
to drift within the gray area of law and order, but Crowe and Pearce 
never get lost. Comparisons could be made to Keitel, DeNiro, Nicholson, 
or even Bogart and Brando. Obviously, no one can become an instant 
legend, but these performances are as good as any of the aforementioned 
in their prime.
        With L. A. Confidential, Oscar season is officially open. I 
imagine Contact is the only other possibility for a Best Picture 
nomination, so far this year. As the fall season progresses, the 
competition is sure to get stiff. Will Hollywood be willing to do justice 
to a film that pulls back the curtain behind their glittering facade? 
Only time will tell. If not, well...thereUs a great line in the film 
where Russell Crowe asks Guy Pearce if heUs willing to tear down the 
corrupt system that established his career. He quietly replies, Rwith a 
wrecking ball.S Amen.

Title
Review for Starship Troopers (1997)
Dir: Paul Verhoeven
Starring: Casper Van Dien, Dina Meyer, Patrick Muldoon, Denise Richards
          Neil Patrick Harris, Clancy Brown & Michael Ironside
        Okay, so I admit maybe I'm getting old, but the best advice I can 
give for anyone thinking of seeing "Starship Troopers" can be summed in 
two words - Ear Plugs.
        Normally, IUm a tireless advocate of THX quality theaters with 
state-of -the-art digital sound.  But this film had me wishing I had my 
remote control. You don't so much watch "Starship Troopers" as survive 
it. By the end, youUll likely feel as battered and bombarded as the wounded 
troopers themselves.
        Somewhere amidst the carnage is a message from director Paul 
Verhoeven that we are a society addicted to violence, as capable of 
inhumanity as the creatures we so gleefully destroy.  But you'll probably 
miss that as you dodge the endless bullets, razor claws and
dismembered body parts hurling at you from every direction.
        Verhoeven has made another in the long line of technically 
brilliant "theme park" films we've come to expect BEFORE Labor Day.  I 
suppose by turning up the camp factor Verhoeven has convinced himself 
that this is social commentary. Sure, if you look hard enough you can find 
meaning watching the Coyote trying new ways to kill the Road Runner. 
Sorry Paul, I'm not impressed.  This film made me feel like I'd been 
dropped inside a video game during an earthquake. Of course, I mention 
video games on purpose because I know this film is coming to a Nintendo 
near you. Frankly, that might be more fun.
        Of course, such video game graphics won't compare to the computer 
generated images seen in this film. As supervised by Phil Tippet  of 
Jurassic Park fame, Industrial Light & Magic do their usual first rate 
job with the effects.  Visually, I haven't seen a film
with this many eye-popping wonders since "The Fifth Element." 
Interestingly, both these films only make me wonder how incredible it 
would be to see effects like these attached to a real story.  Let's just 
hope George "Skywalker" Lucas knows what I'm talking about.
        So, what about the story, you ask? Well, it centers around the 
hormonal tendencies and macho posturing of about a half dozen new 
recruits, some of whom will live and some of whom will die a grisly, 
horrible death.  Succeeding as a trooper is basically advancement by 
attrition. If you stick around long enough for the commanding officers to 
die, sooner or later they put you in charge. 
        The cast is made up of unkown actors because, let's face it, the 
bugs get top billing here (they must have a killer agent).  What's most 
remarkable about the actors is what perfect physical specimens they are. 
Their performances are so stiff you'd think the tongue that supposed to 
be in cheek got sucked out by aliens too.  Although, in fairness, 
straight is exactly how this material should be played. If anyone of 
these characers winked at the audience at all, the whole premise would 
collapse.
        The film is certainly not as derivative as say, "Independence 
Day."  Verhoeven seems to prefer borrowing from himself. The clever news 
sequences for example are very reminiscent of "RoboCop" (not to mention 
the incessant bloodshed).  The best moments occur when the film is 
clearly not taking itself seriously as it parodies the WWII newsreels and 
propaganda films trying to recruit young men and women to sign up for 
Federal (read: Military) Service.  
        By joining up, they can become "citizens" - valued members of 
society honored for their commitment to protecting the human race above 
all else. The youth are taught in school that being a citizen is a badge 
of honor making it easier for them to enjoy privleges like going to 
college, entering politics or obtaining a license to get pregnant.
These parodies of fascism arenUt new, but in this kind of film it comes 
across as rather witty.
        Unlike "RoboCop" "Total Recall" or even "Showgirls", "Starship 
Troopers" will not be remembered years from now.  Despite its 
bludgeon-like impact, none of the perfomances stand out. In fact, even 
the big, nasty bugs seem bland. In it's attempt to satirize overkill, 
thatUs exactly what it becomes.  The Audience is Listening...just not as 
well as we used to.

Title
Review for Boogie Nights (1997)
Dir: Paul Thomas Anderson
Starring: Mark Wahlberg, Julianne Moore, John C. Reilly, William H. Macy,
          Don Cheadle, Heather Graham, Nina Hartley & Burt Reynolds
        I was born in 1970, which makes me barely old enough to remember 
bell buttons, 8 tracks and disco.  However, since I was 17 years old I've 
seen more than my share of adult films.  I mention this only because I 
thinks its important to state up front that I'm not against pornogrpahy.  
I've seen enough of these films to know the range of content and quality 
available.
        Director Paul Thomas Anderson's Boogie Nights  offers us a view 
into the world of porn during the period considered to be the Golden Age 
of adult cinema, the mid to late
70s.
        This was the period when X-rated movies were real movies, shot on 
film, shown in movie theaters and even reviewed by legitimate critics.  
This was an age when porn directors actually aspired to make innovative 
often educational films, films that attempted to tell a real story.  One 
of the more fascinating aspects of this film is how, like in an any 
other billion dollar industry, the creative visionaries tend to be 
ignorant to the trends that will soon make them obsolete. In this case, 
the arrival of the now ubiquitous videocassette.
        Burt Reynold's manages to resuscitate his career portraying such 
an auteur, known as Jack Horner.  Horner's has a steady "family" of 
performers, some of whom live in his plush L.A. home.  But in the world 
of porn, performers are a commodity - the fresher, the  better.  
When Horner scouts a fresh faced stud bussing tables at his 
favorite discotheque, he decides to add him to his stable. It is a 
pairing that leads to a meteoric rise and fall for a young man 
reaching his prime and an old man rapidly speeding past his.
        As directed by Anderson, the camera moves through many of the 
scenes with an eerie omnipresence and an almost childlike curiosity to 
peer beyond the closed door.
        Boogie Nights provides a voyeuristic peep into the underbelly of 
L.A.'s hardcore film scene.  But the peep show doesnUt let us walk away 
when the titillation ends.  The downside of voyeurism is sometimes we end 
up seeing things we wish we hadnUt.
        By the film's final image, what we we once found titillating has 
now become a grim reminder of the vanity of fame and the high price of 
realizing your dreams.
        Boogie Nights is not about sex.  It does not glorify porn or the 
lifestyles of the performers.  In fact, the film isn't really about 
pornography at all.  Pornography is merely the setting to tell a 
compelling story about a lost and forgotten group of people who form 
their own sub-culture to find acceptance of who they are.
        The film goes to brilliant, often hilarious and sometimes 
harrowing lengths to show us that the people who choose to produce or 
perform in these films are generally not all that bright and lack the 
basic tools to function in the mainstream world.  Yet, like in the lauded 
Tarantino films, these people still have their own moral code, their own 
concepts of integrity and their own needs to experess themselves creatively.
        The characters we meet are like a road map of dysfuntion. First 
stop, the den mother (Julianne Moore) in denial about her addiction to 
cocaine as she tries to retain custody of her son. Second stop, the 
cuckold crewman (William H. Macy) who keeps discovering his wife having 
sex with anyone and everyone (the wife is played in hilarious cameos by 
real-life porn star Nina Hartley).     
        But the driving force behind the plot is 17 year old Eddie 
Adams.  Eddie is blessed with a natural endowment so famous that people 
actually pay just to see it.
        With no real ambition of his own, he hooks up with Jack Horner to 
fullfill his destiny of fame.  His alcoholic mother, clearly dissatisfied 
with her own lot, abuses him verbally and drives him out of the house.  
Horner introduces him to Amber Waves (Moore) who immediately adopts him, 
a nuclear family is born.  The surrogate relationship that develops 
between Amber Waves and her "babies" provides some of the films most 
poignant scenes. Clearly, she is not even fit to manage her own life, 
let alone nurture these lost children. But the need to love and be loved 
is so strong, they easily ignore the dangers of the less subtle addiction
she introduces them to. Even the viewer is somehow lulled into feeling like 
the love she offers is similar to being in a real family.  Then again,
perhaps its not so different from real families at all.
        Eddie Adams, who later takes on the screen name "Dirk Diggler", 
is skillfully acted by former pop-star, Mark Wahlberg. I say "former" pop 
star because with this performance Wahlberg can officially quit his day 
job.  This is bold and brave territory for such a young man.  He pulls it 
off marvelously. Wahlberg is a "big, bright star" with a big bright future.
        Boogie Nights  plays very much in the spirit of The People versus 
Larry Flynt, without the First Amendment preachiness.  Its intimate 
studies of character make it the superior film.  Wahlberg's surprising 
performance is on par with Woody Harrelson's.
        But in my opinion, Boogie Nights, is not the best film of the 
year.  I got the feeling that itUs 2 1/2 hour running time could have 
been cut by 15 or 20 minutes without losing any of its resonance.
        Still, if the subject matter of this film intimidates you, 
thereUs no doubt that once you start watching Boogie Nights  you may 
still feel like its not your thing, but youUll find yourself grooving to 
it anyway...ya know, kinda like disco.
