Authors
Joseph Toscano
Number of Reviews
3

Title
Review for Who Framed Roger Rabbit (1988)
        WHO FRAMED ROGER RABBIT? in a nutshell brings two worlds together that
many people have always dreamed about. The world of animated characters
and fantastical lore meet the real human world. Specifically the live
and wild one called, "Hollywood."
        If the special effects in WHO FRAMED ROGER RABBIT? had been done in a
poor manner, then the whole movie would be change. But fortunately, Ken
Ralston, of Star Wars and Forrest Gump fame, has done a splendid job in
meshing the two worlds together.
        As the tagline suggests, the film is about a man, a rabbit and a woman
in a triangle of trouble. The plot is set in Hollywood 1949, with the
sets and clothes perfectly matched for the time period. A mile away from
the Maroon Cartoon studios is a tunnel that leads to a town called Toon
Town, which is the home of the toons. "Every Joe loves Toon Town" except
for Eddie Valiant, a drunk of a PI, who's brother was killed by a toon
years back. Their team always cracked the important toon cases, and they
were admired until the accident.        Now Eddie is assigned to a new job, and
it unfolds into a plot to destroy Toon Town, and those loveable toons.
        Although the plot is a bit disjointed in a few spots, it holds together
well enough because of the magic of the toons. The toons are crazy, so
when the plot takes odd twists, it makes sense.
        There are many strengths in this film, and they do far outweigh the
weaknesses. The acting of Eddie Valiant (Bob Hoskins) and Judge Doom
(Christopher Lloyd) make the picture soar in parts. Hoskins plays a
great burnt out PI, and on top of that, he's usually acting solo since
there really isn't a Rabbit named Roger speaking to him. He conveys
great emotion without even having another actor to speak to.
        Another strength is the humor. It's done in a brilliant way, with the
toons and humans, and you find yourself cracking up at things that you
normally wouldn't. The voice acting of the talented Charles Fleischer,
as he plays four characters in the film, also elicits some chuckles. The
simple premise of mixing these two worlds alone just produces laughter,
as it's a fresh, new idea.
        The humor, along with the suspense of the storyline create a good
atmosphere. I've always liked when movies are two or more movies in one.
Like this one, which is a mystery and a comedy in one. And Zemeckis
manages to pull it off without making it look too corny.
        Musical score can be 50% of a movie sometimes. In the case of WHO
FRAMED ROGER RABBIT?, composer Alan Silvestri creates a brilliant score
that captures the very essence of the movie. Written with an old time
jazz feeling, the score soars at all times, making some scenes ooze with
a sense of completion. The music in this film deserved at least an Oscar
nomination, as it's wonderfully written and styled.
        Although the ending could use some adjustment, it is one of the most
suspenseful and hilarious closings to a movie that have come along.
Although movies don't need to always end with the bad guy getting
clocked, in this case it was almost needed, especially when the badguy
is seemingly invincible.
        The film passes along a message through the mayhem of the toons, which
is that laughter is important. Sometimes laughter is the only thing we
have. And with all the laughs produced by the film, it does carry the
message well.
        WHO FRAMED ROGER RABBIT? ends with style, and you'll find youself
chuckling as the credits roll, recalling events that occured during the
film. Even though quirky, corny, and confusing a few times, the movie
creates a sense of funny wonder, and definately does not dissapoint.
-- Joseph Toscano (January 9, 1998) scarjt@buffnet.net

Title
Review for Titanic (1997)
        No movies are really perfect. They always have flaws, and things that
just irk me the wrong way. Sometimes a movie can be close to perfect, in
my opinion. Titanic is one of the movies that is close to perfect in a
technical sense.
        One thing that many critics have been raving about is if the $200
million pricetag of Titanic can be paid off, or even if the movie was
worth that ammount of money. In my opinion, this shouldn't be the main
issue. The main issue should be wether the movie was simply a good movie
or not. But if I am to answer that question of wether it was worth that
hefty ammount, I'd have to answer with a resounding "YES!"
        First let's discuss what kind of movie Titanic is. Titanic is not an
action movie. Titanic is a well made love story that has elements of
classic Cameron suspense woven into it. After all, when a boat is
sinking, everything isn't okay. Things go wrong, and thus you have
suspense. But don't look at the movie as if it were a simple action
movie, because it's not. It's many things woven into one. A love story,
a comedy, and a thriller. One of the strengths of Titanic is how it's
many things at once.
        Titanic is also three stories at once. The story of Brock Lovett (Bill
Paxton) searching for the lost diamond that Rose Bukater (Kate Winslet)
wore back in 1912. It's also the story, being told in flashback,
regarding two lovers torn because of class destinction and a jealous
fiancee who wants nothing but to win. It also chronicles the sinking of
the Titanic, which is wonderfully portrayed through amazing special
effects.
        DiCaprio and Winslet work together seamlessly on the screen, and there
couldn't have been a better match-up for this movie. They both performed
wonderfully and are definate Oscar contenders.
        James Horner does perhaps one of his best scores yet with this movie,
incorperating nice vocals to make the mood explode into a colorful
experience. Without the music, Titanic would have gotten perhaps only a
6/10 on my rating scale. You don't know how much music adds to a movie
until it's taken out.
        All in all, this movie is a masterpiece. Although corny at times, it
soars with all of the elements that Cameron has masterfully arranged. It
really makes you think they went back in time and captured the whole
thing happening.
        Titanic is one of my favorites, but rates low on the scale of them,
simply because it's so highly depressing. But it is a very well made
movie. I'd reccomend it to anyone.
        -- Joseph Toscano (January 6, 1998) scarjt@buffnet.net

Title
Review for Contact (1997)
After being tortured endlessly with the "explosive summer films" which
contain special effects and nothing more, and some other cheesy wannabe
dramas, along comes a truly satisfying and thoroughly enjoyable experience.
An experience called "CONTACT."
You've read other reviews probably. And most state what a good movie
CONTACT was. But it was more than good. It was actually a relaxing,
cleansing, refreshing type of "good" because it really showed that the
movies still can be movies, not just a show of special effects wizardry or
a tiring piece of unimaginative drivel, even despite some raging stinkers
that have come along, such as "MR. NANNY" and "8 HEADS IN A DUFFEL BAG."
Now the film, many say, was too long. I don't view it as being too long. I
view it as being masterfully stretched out. I loved watching it and taking
in every little tiny detail -- not to confuse and boggle the mind (much
like MISSION:IMPOSSIBLE did... aye...) but to just make the experience much
more enjoyable.
But when it actually comes to scenes in the film, they couldn't have been
done better. The very first scene is a majestic trip through our galaxy and
beyond -- just to show how small we are in comparison to this great
vastness that has been created.
The word creation has meaning in the story, too. When people think of what
kind of movie CONTACT was, they usually say it was Sci-fi. And yes it
definitely is dealing with science, but it is also a drama of science and
religion actually conflicting. This isn't just a movie made for special
effects, like I said before, much like Independence Day, it's a move meant
to either make you think, or make you more secure in what you believe in.
But just because the movie wasn't made specifically to show off special
effects, that doesn't mean that the few special effects contained in the
movie weren't spectacular. Though only boasted for a short while, the
special effects are perhaps the most amazing effects I have ever seen. They
don't simply please the eye, they stir the mind in a fascinating, dark way.
When Ellie's face is "blurred" out, during her descent in the worm hole,
speaks, and then later you hear her speak the same exact thing, chills run
up your spine. Yes the effects are amazing, but what makes them even more
amazing is the fact that they are enclosed in an excellent film.
But, of course, no film is entirely "perfect." There are definitely some
things that could have been improved upon. One thing that I personally felt
could really use some work is the whole ordeal involving S.R. Hadden. It
just didn't make sense when you first saw the man. I mean, I thought he was
going to be some evil sadistic character when I first saw him on the
screen. But of course the outcome was different. The Palmer Joss character
played by McConaughey really needed a little more effort. The characters in
some cases were flat and 2-dimensional. But I think the wonder and
excellence of the movie cancels out the imperfections.
When it comes to the ending of the movie, I really was satisfied. I've
heard that many people were disappointed because of what occurred in the
hearing. Yes it was disappointing. But once I heard the comment made by
Angela Bassett's character, Rachel, "It recorded 18 hours of static..." I
knew that seeing this movie was not a disappointment after all. I was truly
satisfied.
Yes, CONTACT is satisfying. It's wonderful. It leaves you with things to
think about, and a sense of closure... many other things that just make a
movie great. Really, I've never heard such a quiet theater, such thunderous
applause, or so many gasps when the "For Carl" screen was shown.
So go see CONTACT, and treat yourself to a good time. ;)
-- Joseph Toscano (July 18, 1997) ShumJT@aol.com
