Authors
Jerry Saraiva
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Terms of Endearment (1983)
Aurora Greenway is one of those colorful, larger-than-life characters who exist
only in Southern novels, particularly those by Larry McMurtry ("The Last
Picture Show"). In "Terms of Endearment," coincidentally based on a novel by
McMurtry, Aurora (Shirley MacLaine) arose as a tender, full-blooded, fiercely
emotional creature. In the excruciating "The Evening Star," she is depicted as
a bloodless caricature, as if she drifted in from the latest soap opera series.
"Terms of Endearment" is one of the great movies of the 1980's - it is
captivating, unsentimental, brilliantly acted, and superbly directed by James
L. Brooks. The heart of that film was Aurora's troubling yet loving
relationship with her daughter Emma (Debra Winger). The trials and tribulations
they endure evoked a nice balance between humor and heartbreak. For example,
Aurora dates a swinging, hard-drinking bachelor and astronaut (Jack Nicholson),
and a tender love affair begins and ends abruptly between them. Emma marries
Flap (Jeff Daniels, who's been typecast ever since), a professor who teaches
English and has affairs with co-eds. In retaliation, Emma has an affair with a
banker (John Lithgow), and so on. 
"Terms of Endearment" has a wonderful ensemble of actors at their best, and
honest, vibrant writing. The beauty of the film is Brooks's careful balance
between comedy, seriousness and tragedy. "Terms" also never steps into
caricature or droll exaggeration resulting in a film that transcends its soap
opera origins. 
"The Evening Star" is at the opposite end of the pole. It is grossly
exaggerated, wildly uneven, contains numerous caricatures not characters, and
takes an eternity to end. This time, the eccentric Aurora (Shirley McClaine,
again) has Emma's sexy teenage daughter (Juliette Lewis) to contend with, a
grandchild in prison, and Emma's rich, snobbish friend (Miranda Richardson) who
is trying to buy Aurora's granddaughter's love. In addition, there's Aurora's
loving, loyal maid (Marion Ross) who seems more like an intrusion in her life
than anything else. Oh, and there's the local psychiatrist (Bill Paxton) who
has a brief, unbelievable fling with Aurora. 
"The Evening Star" suffers greatly in every department when compared to
"Terms." For one, the casting is actually awful. MacLaine overacts to the hilt
of all hilts - she's actually annoying and boring to watch. Juliette Lewis does
better with her role as a troubled teenager, but it is something she can play
in her sleep. Marion Ross and the late Ben Johnson, in his last role, seem to
be sleepwalking throughout. 
The one actress who is wrongfully cast, and an indication of what's wrong with
some sequels, is Miranda Richardson as the snobbish friend of the late Emma -
she spews seemingly delectable witticisms with a crooked drawl that brings out
the worst in Southern stereotypes and accents. Interestingly, her character was
played by Lisa Hart Carroll in "Terms" with complete restraint - a far cry from
Richardson's manic fits. Where's the dignity of Southerner Billy Bob Thornton
when you really need him? 
"Terms" was a real human drama and completely unpredictable and truthful from
beginning to end. "Evening Star" is utterly formulaic nonsense done with none
of the vigor or honesty of the original (and with a high mortality rate to
boot). The film is so desperate that it even brings back Jack Nicholson for an
unnecessary, heavy-handed cameo. Where's Jim Brooks when you really need him? 
For more reviews, check out JERRY AT THE MOVIES at
http://buffs.moviething.com/buffs/faust/
E-mail me with any questions, comments or general complaints at
faustus_08520@yahoo.com or at Faust667@aol.com
