Authors
Dean Jones
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Star Wars (1977)
Writer/Director: George Lucus
Cast: Mark Hamill, Harrison Ford, Carrie Fisher, Peter Cushing, Alec
Guiness.
I saw this at the cinema at its original release in 1977.  The main thing I
remember is stars spinning around the entire cinema at the start of the
film - very futuristic for then - and some great fighting scenes.  There
was little else to the film through the eyes of an eleven year old.
Twenty years later I decided the time was right to give it a second chance.
  Though this time the reissued special edition on video. 
The story is basically good against evil, Luke Skywalker versus Darth
Vadar.  This is blatantly obvious; pure young boy in white (who walks on
clouds - Skywalker) opposes nasty older guy in all black (death invader). 
Darth Vadar takes Princess Leia (damsel in distress) from her space ship. 
Luckily, because without this link the story would not work, two robots
escape from the ship.  They end up recruiting Luke Skywalker; who soon has
three reasons to help, namely: he sees an image of Princess Leia and feels
the urge to rescue the damsel in distress; is  guardians are killed by
Darth Vadar's evil forces; and he romanticises about being a fighter. They
are then joined by Obi-one Kenobi a Jedi Knight (an up to date samurai). 
Next the four get help from Han Solo (Harrison Ford) and his pal, borrowed
from the 'Planet of the Apes', Chewbacca.  All six end up at the home of
Darth Vadar and his equally bad cronies on the Death Star, a grand battle
commences and our good guys kick ass. 
There are, in my opinion, two bad points in this film: firstly, the
Characters, all but one, are definitely not Dickensian they are flat,
non-dimensional, unemotional and never develop.  Though there is one saving
grace, namely Han Solo played by Harrison Ford who never makes a bad film
(note - he remained the successful actor out of the main three).  He plays
the likable rogue that everybody knows is going to come good at the end. 
Having said this there is some interesting character contrasts and
relationships:  There's the obvious Darth Vadar/Obi-one Kenobi battle, and
Luke Skywalker/Darth Vadar good versus evil relationship.  And also
Princess Leia/Han Solo feminist versus chauvinist relationship, and Darth
Vadar/Han Solo good turned bad/bad turned good.
The second failing of this film is its lack of keeping the viewers
attention in parts, admittedly most of the film is action and has enough
plot to make you want to watch it unfold.  The main scene in question is
where they are on Planet Tatooine, this planet is like the film at this
stage, desolate.  The robots are all we have on offer for approximately 15
minutes, I even considered somebody had taped 'Lost In Space' over the top
of this copy of the video.
However, there are many good points: My favourite being the futuristic
chess type board game, this looks brilliant, fits the film perfectly and
produces good humour when Han Solo points out what happens if Chewbacca
loses.
The bar scene is also good, it again shows good special effects and
provides the perfect opportunity to introduce Han Solo in a natural habitat
for his character.
The 'Force' provides an element of intrigue and mysticism to the film.  It
nicely lurks in the background and is never overplayed.  Without the Force
the film would not work as well, it would become too real, instead of a
fantasy. 
The scene in which Princess Leia, Luke Skywalker and Han Solo end up in the
garbage should have been another high point of the film, perhaps in the
hands of Hitchcock it would have been.  The scene itself represents a low
point for our heroes, with a rare piece of symbolism, i.e. getting crushed,
thrown away like rubbish, which works well because it further emphasises
the film moments later when in contrast they defeat the Death Star.
I think it may be another twenty years before I watch this film again and
who knows it may be even further enhanced - a kind of special, special
edition.
