Authors
Jules N. Binocula
Number of Reviews
4

Title
Review for Before Sunrise (1995)
     When Irish author James Joyce (1882-1941) chose to immortalize his
first meeting with his wife Nora, he wrote ULYSSES, a dictionary-sized
comic parody of Homer's ancient epic ODYSSEY--compressing the account
of the 20-year wanderings of Odysseus into *one single day* in
Dublin--preserving for world history, a menagerie of stray thoughts and
actions from June 16, 1904.
     Shortly thereafter, Joyce left Ireland with his then-to-be
lifelong companion (and wrote all of his works in Italy, Paris, and
Zurich)--vowing never to return to his homeland.
     When Texas-bred Director Richard Linklater made his third film,
BEFORE SUNRISE--about the events in a single-night's romance in
Vienna--guess which date he chose to dramatize.  And why not?  If it
didn't make any money, he'd be in good company.
     There's a scene in Linklater's first film, SLACKER, where a
character called PRODDER, reads from ULYSSES while inducing another man
to throw a typewriter into a stream to cleanse himself from a woman's
adultery:
     "... If he had smiled, why would he have smiled?  To reflect that
each one who enters imagines himself to be the first ... last, only, and
alone...."
     In SLACKER and BEFORE SUNRISE, Linklater steals from literature to
be cute.  He realizes that transplanted cerebral ironies must be kept
on ice to keep from spoiling--but he knows how to serve them fresh
before they curdle.  As one male protagonist points out (quoting
another of Linklater's favorite philosophers): "All answers must be
found in the attempt."
     Once the director sells the idea that anything is possible--when
everything is permitted--he's off to the races.
     The races, however, turn out to be a partially disjointed
quasi-enchanting escapade between two attractive, perceptive, and
ingenuous travelers on their way to somewhere else.
     Linklater drops so many cinematic and literary dollops into his
stories, he risks putting his audience into mythic insulin shock.  Yet
miraculously, BEFORE SUNRISE is a nutritious entertainment: when all is
said (and little done), you're ready to visit a bookstore, call your
travel agent, and share your favorite libation with the next person who
excites you.  Life could be worse.
     In SLACKER, the camera mirrored the queasy conscience of the
audience, following dozens of superficially developed geeks in fuzzy
epiphanies of mere drifting through lives with no future.  So, if a
"Slacker" is *all talk and no walk*, then "Before Sunrisers" are
*mostly walk and endless talk*.  But this talk is pleasantly
contagious.
     Like Homer, Linklater follows characters through dead-end episodes
in strange places; and like Joyce, he bathes them in radiantly
incidental banalities.  But even a near-perfect night with someone new
isn't always perfect: we're perpetually waiting for these whimsical,
rambling, under-written souls to settle into more precise psychological
subtext.
     Yet, the viewer-friendly story never implodes, using informal
inflections to trace a tenuous path around weird, pathetic, and
ordinary locals on an ordinary night in Vienna.
     Technically, the camera perspectives are inconsistent, but somehow
interesting--dog-eared with low-budget technical flaws, redeemed with
laid-back rhythms.
     Despite its relentless emphasis on pure surface reality, BEFORE
SUNRISE lingers resonantly in the mind--a curiously satisfying
moment-to-moment adventure, peopled with uncertainty and
awkwardness--signifying nothing-in-particular.  But, that's the point.
In the words of yet another nameless philosopher recruited for
SLACKER:  "... my loves, what are they now?  But the more pain grows,
the more this instinct for life somehow asserts itself."
     Following boldly in the large footprints of his mentors,
Mr. Linklater coolly alchemizes his literary conceits into a minor
masterpiece of the mundane.

Title
Review for Last Seduction, The (1994) (TV)
     If you're trying to make a name for yourself as a
young-writer-director who loves to modernize 40's-and-50's-style
neo-Hellenic-film-noir-pseudo-tragedies--have fun.  But you *must* do
one thing above all else: have your characters understand that anyone
they meet who is beautiful--will be trying to f*** with them.
     If your characters don't suspect a slap-in-the-face and a
knife-in-the-back from every out-of-town brassiere with lace, then your
screen-world soon becomes boring and predictable.  If your characters
are lucky enough to suspect trouble, and they find themselves in moral
quicksand--helpless to stop it--you're in business.
     But, remember: once you let us meet your sensation-loving people,
you must guide us inside their psyches with gentle authority, and
induce us to promise to love, cherish and stick with them to the
rancid, bitter end.  Otherwise, you--the director--lose your customers
in a crowded, derivative, intellectual conceit--a seedy, aimless,
masquerade of your own perverse creation.
     Simply speaking, THE LAST SEDUCTION follows a sociopathic
nymphomaniac (symbolizing ambitious urban-amorality) who's toting
sin-tempting nipples and an unexplained impulse for theft and
compulsive adultery; spending her spare time trying to pump in extra
cash by pretending to murder other people's husbands--while she
seduces a countrified stooge to do her dirty work back home.  That's
the easy part.  The rest is more obvious.
     If director, JOHN DAHL wants to make answering-machine-era
adultery and murder seem fresh and promising by exposing his own
jaundiced fascination with eternally predatory, insatiably manipulative
Medusas, who are we to complain?  If he can pull it off....
     Dahl lays his talent at the feet of a famous male subconscious
agenda:  the repressed desire to possess a sophisticated, mysterious
woman who curiously exists only to have sex with you--while convincing
you to get rich being her one-and-only secret-illicit-adventure
partner.  An enviable lifestyle?  You make the call.
     On the surface, it's a harmlessly, entertaining masturbatory
extrapolation of the post-50's "PLAYBOY Philosophy," and, if plotted
properly, could yield a vigorous, lusty suspense-thriller--kind of like
a 90's James M. Cain story of yuppie hypocrites who get their kicks
murdering private detectives in sports-utility vehicles.
     But, to his discredit, Mr. Dahl is so enamored with his own
machinations of the "sex-and-greed-to-a-dead-end-lead" story angles,
that he forgets that the most important element in a good thriller is
not the "how," but the "why."
     (And borrowed-twists from THE CRYING GAME, DOUBLE INDEMNITY, and
BODY HEAT don't help endear us to his cerebral crusade.)
     Normally, in these types of twisty, dime-store plot-gymnastics,
the bewitching woman is a seemingly coincidentally placed, sensually
spidery "antagonist", who draws a self-doubting, emasculated male into
her hedonistic web of predatory plans.  But, anxious to outdo everyone
who has ever tried the genre, Mr. Dahl wants to swing both ways and
make her both the opaque seductress and the carnivorous, abused,
on-the-lam heroine (and corrupt anti-heroine).  Where can an
over-stimulated audience find some warmth and understanding?  Not in
this film.
     The story uses so much calculation, it dilutes any developing
audience-allegiances--only to drive us all nowhere but back to where we
started.
     Dahl kick-starts his needlessly dizzying story by reving the
sensual, testicle-slicing ambition of Linda Fiorentino's Brigid
(rhyming with "frigid,"--but that's where the resemblance ends).
     Then we meet her hazy, dope-dealing doctor-husband, who smacks her
face before she steals $350,000 of his stolen (narcotics-derived)
community assets.  Just another ordinary, genre-driven, domestically
dysfunctional screen-squabble, updated for current social mores.
     For a film reeking of ruthlessness, ironically, it's Dahl himself
who commits the most unpardonable sin--allowing us to be confused by
people's half-explained pasts, and fuzzy future plans.  He throws away
early scenes which could've helped us understand whether she's a
generic sociopath, oxymoronically dominant and insecure, terminally
impulsive, or just nakedly copying Hitchcock's PSYCHO, in her vain
escape from New York for Chicago with $700,000 in laundered bills.
     Yet, despite the schizoid character development, the film is more
than marginally likable, mostly because it doesn't try to "get-heavy"
with cumbersome personality explications.  Unfortunately, neither does
it try to "get serious" and make us care about its throbbing, but
philosophically stagnant, souls.
     The attempt at a deadpan tone keeps the plot afloat for a
while--only to submerge it with convoluted conceits--jammed into a
designer pair of black panties with nothing inside but naked schemes.
Recommendation: If you're desperate for lusty, vicious, gonad-eating 
women--then treat yourself to the genuine articles: DOUBLE INDEMNITY, 
an X-rated wall-to-wall-flesh-fest, and a campy, Russ Meyer bosomaniacal 
extravaganza.  
     If all else fails, you can sit it out and pray that Mr. Dahl
reaches narrative puberty before THE LAST SEDUCTION becomes his last
attempt at noirish-homage.

Title
Review for Pulp Fiction (1994)
     No doubt many will say that PULP FICTION is one of the year's
greatest films--how many will say it's one of cinematic history's
most offensive?  How many have the guts?
     It's not offensive because the word "nigger" must have been used
69 times (and that was by the African-Americans in the film), nor is it
offensive because Bruce Willis empties a round of automatic weapon fire
into a bloody John Travolta as Travolta exits a bathroom with his
defecatory reading material.
     Nor is it offensive because Uma Thurman snorts heroin by mistake
and is dragged (nose bloody and white scum pouring from her mouth) onto
the floor of a house of low-voltage substance abusers to have Travolta
ram a 6-inch syringe through her breast to snap her out of a coma with
prescription adrenaline.
     Nor is it offense because a bald, fat, chocolate parody of a
Blaxploitation crime godfather is draped over a gymnast's padded
exercise horse with a red rubber ball stuffed into his mouth and raped
anally by a Southern-accented security guard.  Nor is offensive because
the film's director himself appears in an extended cameo to remind his
two lead actors that his house is "not a dead nigger storage"
facility.
     When 19th Century British iconoclast and literary prankster, Oscar
Wilde was testifying in his own defense for writing offensive
literature--he was asked, "Mr. Wilde, do you feel that work was
immoral?," he answered, "It was worse than that.  It was badly
written."
     PULP FICTION is not offensive because it tries to be cute.  It's
offensive because it's a ponderously soulless sophomorically bloody
film-school abortion, masquerading as a parody of cliche of a
postmodernist cartoon.  Call it what you will, but call it "baaad!"
     It's probably good manners for your humble reviwer to summarize
the plot of this warped and anaemic ego-trip:
     A black hitman and a white hitman murder three Causcasian
burger-eating adolescents living in a cheesy la-apartment (one of whom
bears a frightening resemblance to an uncredited Jerry Seinfeld (believe
it or not).
     They take a black hostage because the black assassin feels that,
although they were shot at close range by the Seinfeld-look-alike, the
bullets miraculously only put holes in the wall behind them because God
intervened to save their candy a*ses.
     However, what God gives, he quickly takes away: Travolta, the
white hitman, shoots the black hostage in the face from the front seat
of their getaway car when the black hitman hits a bump in the road.
     Next, they visit Quentin Tarantino, playing a Caucasian suburban
Southern California husband married to an African-American nurse who's due
home any minute, and would be deeply offended to see a "dead nigger
stored in the garage."
 
     To make a 2-hour-and-44-minute story shorter:
     Harvey Keitel shows up in black tie and tuxedo to order the hitmen
to put the corpse in the trunk, and clean the car to remove blood and
"small pieces of brain and skull" with household disinfectants.
     During all the unfolding excitement, the white hitman finds time
to take his (black) boss's white wife out dancing in a 50's retro
drive-in juke joint before she overdoses but survives after heroic
medical instructions from Travolta's neurotic (white) drug dealer.
     After that, Bruce Willis, playing a white boxer who kills his
opponent and tries to leave town before slicing a greasy pawn-shop
owner with his own samarai sword while rescuing the same (black) boss
from passive sodomy by a sado-masochistic racist looking for some
forcible homosexual amusement in the back room.
     There's probably another subplot, but you get the idea.
     Here's the big secret: QT is way over his head!  The film is an
(amazingly) sometimes humorous non-stop rip-off of every 20th Century
media cliche imaginable--complete with no context, no soul, no
pacing, no proportion, and no ideas!
     Be sure to see it--if you want to encourage independent
filmmakers to continue their anal-ysis of modern culture!
     (Making this film was obviously a ploy to drive up the price of
silver used in all the release prints/)

Title
Review for Clerks (1994)
     Ever plan for a day off from a low-paying, dead-end job--and get
a call to come to work for half-a-day--and end up staying all day, to
be hassled by a steady stream of local weirdos--all because you just
can't say no to anyone?
     Ever wish you could stop complaining, but can't find the
time--because you're back-logged with your old complaints?
     Ever be so bored that you ask your girlfriend about her past
sex-life and find out she's given oral performances on more organs than
you could count in a suburban shopping mall?
     Ever imagine Estragon and Vladimir--from Samuel Beckett's
existential play, WAITING FOR GODOT--living in New Jersey, doing
penance with perverts, wasteoids, and involuntary necrophiles?
     If so, punch your clock, and spend an entertainingly annoying day
with Dante Hicks: convenience-store operative, sans elegance.  Help
him out--his producer-writer-director could use the business!
     After KEVIN SMITH, an East-coast-twenty-something-retail-factotum,
saw the low-budget film, SLACKER--he decided to immortalize his own
phlegmatic lifestyle on 16mm film.  Why?  That's all he could afford!
And why not?  It beats working for a living!
     CLERKS starts off on a gray morning--like a pillow filled with
rocks--and takes its time before strange dream-like sequences and
eccentric losers begin to define themselves and amuse us.
     Once we're fully awakened, we realize that all the unusual
suspects have been rounded up--and aren't going anywhere in
particular.  By then it's about time to go home.
     Like CLERKS' anti-heroes--we laugh, we're horrified, bored,
can't wait to leave, but end up having a little fun--wondering if
we'll be summoned for a sequel.
     What the film lacks in polish, it delivers with enthused,
rough-and-ready charm.  Most scenes look like they were photographed
through the bottom of a soda bottle (painted black-and-white).  The
actors seem like people you'd meet on a bus--on the way to a speech
pathology lab.  Since the budget precluded fancy locations, the
audience is given an uncensored, not-so-guided metaphysical tour of
sometime-collegiate male psyches.  The humor is partially-effective,
diarrhetically snappy, mostly-misogynistic, pseudo-educated schtick.
Imagine Groucho and Chico Marx with a hormone imbalance--before they
got rich.
     Yet, for all its solipsitic frivolity, the film delivers a
poignant philosophical message: you would be what you pretend you could
be, if only you could gather the courage to pretend you should be
something you're not.  And if not, there's always tomorrow--if you
don't have plans.
