Authors
Kevin Maguire
Number of Reviews
3

Title
Review for Deconstructing Harry (1997)
IN 'BULLETS OVER BROADWAY' and 'Mighty Aphrodite', supporting actresses
not only received nominations for Academy Awards(3) , but 2 won. The same
could have been said for 'Deconstructing Harry', but there were simply too
many to consider. 
On the surface (the first twenty minutes) of DECONSTRUCTING HARRY, Allen
(director, writer, actor) creates a disturbing element of comedy. He
despises so many things, and fears many more. A scene at the beginning is
so enigmatic, we wonder how he could, in any sense of the word, create a
comedic situation. In the beginning, two explicit sex scenes are noted, two
serious violent threats, one disturbing conversation with a psychologist,
and countless acts of swearing. The transition to comedy starts as
supporting actors start to detail Harry Block's situation (the main
character, played predictably by Allen) , when we here their troubling
trials with a man, who, self-proclaimingly states later in the movie, "I
put my art into my work." The onslaught of cynicism in this part of the
movie is at its highest, and also at the point where he criticizes himself,
and, acting childishly, expects everyone to forgive him. As a result, he
develops 'writing block.'
The middle of the movie focuses around a trip Harry Block is making with a
prostitute, a hypochondriac, and his son (who he kidnapped while exiting a
school bus). First on this trip is a stop at a carnival, where Allen has
surreal experiences with characters he himself creates, including one scene
of adultery in the process of being covered-up, with Judy Davis ( a scene,
by the way, that is worth being noted for its hilarious look at a person
who is flattered with herself.) The next stop is at a half-sister's estate,
where her right-wing Semetic husband seems bent on spreading criticism of
Allen's abstinence from Judaism, while, at the same time, intent on
spreading his own propaganda. Allen states to this man, "You're the
opposite of paranoid. Contrary to all the available evidence, you still
think people like you." The last stop places Allen at a university, where
they are hoping to present him with an award. However, the hypochondriac's
worst dream (or best hope) comes true as he dies. So Harry has shown up at
his old university with a prostitute and a dead body. 
In the conclusion, at some other location, Allen is arrested for
kidnapping his son, solicitation of prostitution, and possession of a
deadly weapon (from an early scene with Judy Davis.) But before this, Allen
is on an elevator which apparently leads to Hell. ( Example of who is in
Hell : "Third Floor : Media. Sorry, that level has filled up.") There he
runs into the devil (Billy Crystal) , who reviews all the horrible things
he's done in his life, and prophesized the above event. 
In jail, two friends bail him out, and he has a imaginary recognition
ceremony (obviously, when Allen was arrested, he hadn't received his award
yet.) At this ceremony, all of the characters in the movie are applauding
him, and, there and then, his writing block is solved, and he starts
writing a novel about, "A man who can only be artistic in work, not life." 
This film is as all Allen's released are : wonderful. The acting of
supporting characters is never very long, and as such, it would be very
hard to nominate any one person for an award. This certainly is not a movie
for everyone, and some may find it offensive. Actually, nearly all will
find it offensive, but some will not be able to draw comedy from this
offensiveness. I must lend my recommendation to this film, for it really
does capture the comedy that is so Woody Allen like. Ironically, most
people will like Woody Allen in this movie for hating himself.
Response is to be sent to Jmaguire@gwi.net , and is to have this as the
only contents of the subjects : "Kevin : Deconstructing Harry"
"It's the lie that gets you." - Richard M. Nixon

Title
Review for Harriet the Spy (1996)
Director: Bronwen Hughes
Producers: Tons Of People From Nickelodeon
Starring: Michelle Trachtenburg, Rosie O'Donnell.
        In the new movie HARRIET THE SPY, Michelle Trachtenburg plays an 
intrepid young girl set on spying people and things. However, as any 
movie must have it, Trachtenburg gets stuck several times doing things 
and spying on things that aren't really appropriate for her to be seeing. 
She has every piece of spy gear possible, glasses, rope, a huge 
treehouse. What more could go wrong?
        The movie she's in. HARRIET THE SPY, although sometimes strangely 
validating, and in one scene, touching, is a comedy that has been cranked 
out of a machine. Although the idea is based on a good book, it's not 
supposed to be funny. The idea is that Harriet can go around spying on 
people, and we should be able to really sense her intensity level. But 
comedy once again woes us. There are stupid fights, and flatulence 
attacks.
        Indeed, one of the biggest problems in HARRIET THE SPY is within 
its producers. Workers for Nickelodeon, these producers have made a half 
funny, half touching, and no thrilling movie that reminds me of sugar in 
a Pixy-Stik. It's just sugar, there's no real flavor in the different 
colors. Rosie O'Donnell, hot off her Merv Griffith approved TV program, 
THE ROSIE O'DONNELL SHOW, surprisingly keeps going on a roll. Her 
performance is spunky, and charged with wit that I don't see in a Woody 
Allen film. 
        To bad the writing shrinks her to another one of the movie's 
concocted characters. In HARRIET THE SPY, there's no way to separate 
what's corny, and what's not. Ideally, the movie would be an IT TAKES TWO 
takeoff. It does one step better than that movie, but this one's still 
way off base.

Title
Review for Independence Day (1996)
Director: Roland Emmerich
Producer: Dean Devlin
Stars: Will Smith, Jeff Goldblum, Bill Pullman, Harvey Feirstein, Randy 
Quaid, Mary McDonnell, James Rebhorn, Judd Hirsch, Harry Connick Jr., 
Robert Loggia.
        Moviegoers like two things about summer movies. For June and 
July, we ask for big, slick, hard-nosed thrillers. In August, we check 
our watches, and go down to the playhouse to watch films that prospered 
at Cannes and Sundance. 
        You would expect that INDEPENDENCE DAY(Twentieth Century Fox, 
PG-13) would be exactly number one. But really, ID4 is engineered so that 
ALL can see the forthright special effects. But really, the filmakers 
are eliminating where they can get the meat, the action. But no, not one 
star says a swear. I would expect if a 15 mile long object was hovering 
into your atmosphere, SOMEONE would say an expletive. 
        Let's steer clear of the complaints for a second, of which I 
could go on and on about. ID4 sets out to do something that it virtually 
can't lose at. It's a 75 million dollar picture, with the Empire State 
Building, the White House and other objects crashing to the ground. I 
mean, how could the audience be disapointed? The comedy is an engaging 
part, because it puts more into the characters that a regular action film 
would. Will Smith plays a fighter pilot, and his lines are well written. 
he's given one funny line after the other in a desert.
        But the thing is, when is the comedy appropriate? When Will Smith 
was in the desert, it was only several minutes after his buddy, played by 
Harry Connick Jr., was shot down and killed. Smith even laughs when he 
finds the body, and the alien that gobbled it up. Also, it a scene before 
that, the pilots are preparing a full-frontal attack on the ship, when we 
find Will Smith delivering lines again. ID4 seems to have fallen victim 
to the TWISTER syndrom. The filmmakers, too busy with high level effects, 
don't bother to give the film any emotional base. It's all action, so 
essentially, we can't follow the actors, and we can't understand what 
they do and why they do it.
        Of course, ID4 will keep you, at least for a good half of it, out 
of your seat. The advertising campaign, however, has put too many of the 
films shots in the previews, so I had seen half of them already. 
        ID4, althought not realizing it's trying, is striving to make 
STAR WARS 4. They're trying to reincarnate the Han Solo character as Will 
Smith. Of course, Will Smith is not as good an actor as Harrison Ford, 
and never will be. They try to put Luke Skywalker as the President, 
played by Bill Pullman, whose wife is in a plane crash, then is 
discovered by Will Smith's wife. After all this, the movie kills her.
        My final complaint, however, goes to the writers lack of 
ingenuity in creating new characters. Jeff Goldblum not only is a 
blueprint on Ian, the mathematician from JURASSIC PARK, but he has the 
same lines as him in the end of the movie, saying "Go faster. Must go 
faster." And Randy Quaid, from the upcoming KINGPIN, is redoing his part 
from the NATIONAL LAMPOON movies. Ditto for Harvey Feirstein, who plays 
the gay guy over and over again, so that it gets repetitive. 
        The summer is moving pretty fast, but so far, I'm still waiting 
for the emotional part of it. Which brings up a pretty interesting point, 
did ID4 show at Sundance...???
