Authors
Evelyn C. Leeper
Number of Reviews
14

Title
Review for Yun Nan qiu shi (1994)
THE ARCHITECTURE OF DOOM, directed by Peter Cohen, Sweden, 1989, 1:59:
"This fascinating film takes an amazing look at the Third Reich from
the point of view of aesthetics, particularly Hitler's.  With
shockingly accurate logic and a wealth of visual material, the
filmmaker offers a strong new answer to the question of how it could
have happened in the first place."
     This film starts at the beginning, discussing Hitler's early
artistic ambitions and his failure to be accepted into the Art School
in Vienna.  Some of Hitler's early water colors are shown (described as
being of the picture postcard level), and indeed the fact that many of
the upper echelon of the Third Reich were failed artists in one medium
or another figures strongly in Cohen's thesis.  This rejection of their
work, it is implied, may have led to the Third Reich's rejection of
modern art and its proponents as "degenerative," "decadent," and
representative of a general decay in society.  (Sound familiar?)
Hitler declared that the Reich would save society from this decay.
This was, of course, just another way of saying that art must serve the
state.
     Basing his artistic goals on his three obsessions--antiquity,
Richard Wagner, and his home town of Linz--Hitler gradually expanded
his artistic philosophy into other fields.  Cleanliness, for example,
was seen as an expression of beauty and stressed to the populace.
Later, when the gassings of "undesirables" began, this could be
presented as just another effort towards cleanliness.  And Hitler
fought the war not with 20th Century objectives, but with those of
antiquity: enslave the enemy, level their cities, destroy the land.
Had he not followed this policy, Cohen suggests, the Russians might not
have opposed him so strongly.
     Cohen uses only archival footage to demonstrate his theses.  While
he at times seems to drift somewhat off his purpose of showing the
aesthetic basis for all of Hitler's policies, on the whole he covers
that well and has produced a very engaging and thought-provoking film.
Rating: +2 (-4 to +4).
MISS AMERIGUA, directed by Luis Vera, Paraguay/Sweden, 1:33:
     We chose this film in part because the description reminded us of
SMILE, an unfairly over-looked American film about a day in the life of
a beauty pageant.  (Vera was present at the screening and I asked him
if he had seen SMILE--he hadn't.)  MISS AMERIGUA is much more political
than SMILE, but still contains a lot of wit and character development
as well.
     The film begins twenty years ago, when Evaristo Morales's father
is killed by Sergeant Banderas, and Evaristo, still a young child, must
flee for his life.  It then flashes forward to the present, the day of
the big beauty pageant in Amerigua, sponsored by many companies,
including "Coca-Cola--always Coca-Cola," as the rather nerdy-looking
reporter says.
     The film primarily follows three of the contestants through the
day: Rosa Morales, sister of Evaristo and mistress to the now-Colonel
Banderas; Maria Descamparo, fiancee to the Colonel's son; and Carmen
Banderas, the Colonel's daughter.  We also meet Inocencio Lopez, the
reporter; Reencarnacion, the somewhat effete hairdresser; and various
other characters who will shape the day's events.
     Imbued with an atmosphere of magical realism and witchcraft, MISS
AMERIGUA is an entertaining film with political content (though the
latter is fairly predictable and delivered as speeches as much to the
audience as to the other characters in the film).  The contrast between
the old ways and the new is perhaps more subtle and runs as an
undercurrent trough the film, without a blanket declaration that one is
better than the other.  The English subtitles were not always perfect
("know" instead of "now," for example), but were readable, and usually
fairly accurate to the Spanish dialogue (though I caught a couple of
mistranslations, such as "damned town" for what is closer to "shitty
town").  Rating: +2 (-4 to +4).
     (Vera was apparently very impressed at how many people were in the
audience for a 9 AM showing, since he commented on it not only when he
spoke at the showing, but also the next day in a radio interview.)
L'HISTOIRE DE YUNNAN (THE STORY OF YUNNAN), directed by Zhang Nuanxin,
China, 1:37:
     During the Japanese occupation of Manchuria, the Japanese often
brought their families over to Manchuria with them.  At the end of the
Sino-Japanese war (the Chinese aspect of World War II) most returned to
Japan, but some found themselves left behind in China.  Such was the
fate of Jai-Teng Shuzi, a young woman who came to Japan when she as
only fifteen.  Rescued from suicide by a Chinese soldier, Xiasha, she
eventually marries him and returns with him to the remote province of
Yunnan.  How she makes a life and a home there for the next thirty-five
years forms the core of this movie.
     It is quite a change to see a film from and about China that is
not terribly depressing.  Yes, Shuzi undergoes hardships, but she also
has much happiness and satisfaction in her life.  She isn't sold by her
husband, beaten by her mother-in-law, tortured by the government, or
subject to many of the trials that so many recent Chinese and Chinese-
American films (e.g., THE JOY LUCK CLUB) have emphasized.  This is
perhaps all the more surprising in that this film is about a woman and
directed by a woman, and commentary on the poor position of women in
Chinese society seems to be almost a trademark of Chinese film these
days.  But THE STORY OF YUNNAN is filled with good people--not all
perfect people, but not unthinking and uncaring people either.
     In her press conference afterwards, Zhang emphasized that this
film was not about war, but about a woman's life, and how what's best
is not money or material objects, but love and family life.  She said
that while this was an accurate portrayal of village life of the time
period, villages are much more modern today.  Interestingly, in order
to appeal to the Taiwanese market, the lead actress (Lu Xiuling) is not
Japanese, but Taiwanese.
     Although there is less government support for films in China than
previously, there is apparently still the same amount of control, and
Zhang had to make some compromises, such as spending very little time
on the Cultural Revolution and showing hardly any of the love scenes,
and this in spite of the fact that the film was financed out of Hong
Kong.  (I suppose I'm a bit surprised that the government didn't seem
to object to showing a large family as a good thing.)  Zhang said there
was equality between the sexes in the film industry in China, and that
there were probably twenty to thirty women directors, but I don't think
their pictures get as wide a distribution as some of the men directors'
films do.
     The scenery is, of course, gorgeous, and the music by Lin Wai Zhe
quite appropriate to the feel of the movie.  See this movie if it comes
your way.  Rating: +2 (-4 to +4)
THE REVENGE OF ITZIK FINKELSTEIN, directed by Enrique Rottenberg,
Israel, 1:23:
     Itzik Finkelstein is a failure at forty and just when he is about
to kill himself, help (of a sort) arrives.  It's not a deal with the
devil, but rather a deal with a monk from a secret order dedicated to
chaos and destruction.  "The Earth is a mess," Anselmo de Medici (the
monk) says.  "Lies and stupidity everywhere."  And the only way to save
the Earth is to find destroy it.  So he offers Finkelstein a chance for
him to get revenge on whichever person ruined his life.
     A lot of the jokes in this are old, but it's still funny,
certainly as funny as a lot of American comedies.  Though made in
Israel, there is no real Jewish content to the film.  Nevertheless, I
expect that if this plays at all in the United States, it will be in
cities with large Jewish populations.  It would appeal, I suspect
mostly to older audiences (meaning thirty and up), and is a pleasant
enough way to pass the time.  Rating: +1 (-4 to +4).
CARL--MY CHILDHOOD SYMPHONY, directed by Eric Clausen, Denmark, 2:05:
     We had originally planned to see only one film today, but then
decided to pick a couple more to fill in the day.  Our first choice was
a split choice: Mark wanted to see FEDERAL HILL and I wanted to see
FRESA Y CHOCOLATE.  unfortunately, both were sold out, so we decided on
the spur of the moment to see CARL--MY CHILDHOOD SYMPHONY instead.
     This is the story of the early life of Carl Nielsen, probably
Denmark's most famous classical composer.  The film starts in 1871 when
Carl is still a young child first being introduced to music, then shows
him as a slightly older boy, then joining the army to play in the
regimental band, and finally leaving the army to spend all his time
composing.
     The main problem with this film is that Nielsen's life seems to be
neither particularly harsh nor particularly wonderful.  In spite of
their poverty his family seems to live fairly comfortably.  There is
illness, injury, and death, but it seems to be taken as totally
ordinary, without any major angst over it.  There are lots of scenes of
beautiful scenery, and kindly, quirky villagers.  When Carl goes into
the army you figure, "Oh, now we'll see how brutalizing the army is,"
but, no, that's an easy and comfortable life for him as well.  Even his
disappointments in love don't seem to affect him very much.
     It's a very pretty picture, and I suppose sheds some light on
Nielsen's music, but cannot compare to other film biographies of
composers such as AMADEUS or MAHLER.  Rating: +1 (-4 to +4).
EL AMANTE DE LAS PELICULAS MUDAS, directed by Pablo Torre, Argentina,
1:32:
     I had hoped for more from this film, but it was somewhat of a
disappointment.  (It is, of course, possible that after seeing eighteen
other films, including three earlier today, I was not in as receptivea
mood as I might have been.)  This story of an aging silent film star
has strong echoes of SUNSET BOULEVARD, and also the same films of the
opening of THE JAZZ SINGER that we saw near the beginning of the
festival in JACK WARNER, THE LAST MOGUL.  Interestingly, in the Warner
documentary, they represented the start of something; here they
represent the end.  This film sounds a bit like CINEMA PARADISO: a
young boy meets a silent film star who talks about the early days of
the movies.  But this is a dark film, with far more menace and
unsettling atmosphere than CINEMA PARADISO.
     One of the mis-steps the film makes is in its use of music.  The
boy's mother gets a job playing the piano in the film star's funeral
home.  But she plays Schubert's "Trio for Piano, Violin, and
Violincello," and when she does, the sounds of a violin and a
violincello mysteriously appear from nowhere, and it is clear that the
piano music that is being played is not sufficient to stand on its own.
On the other hand there is good use of old film clips, as well as newly
created black-and-white footage purporting to be of the film star (as
played by Alfredo Alcon) in the Hollywood of the 1920s.  (The "fake"
footage is not as good an imitation of what the real old footage looks
like as that used in the television series "Young Indiana Jones," but
then Torre probably had neither the money nor the facilities that
Spielberg did.)
     For its somewhat nostalgic look at Hollywood in the era of the
silent film, this is worth seeing, but probably only for fans of that
era.  Rating: +1 (-4 to +4).
(See general article for comments on JEANNE LA PUCELLE I (LES BATAILLES)
and JEANNE LA PUCELLE II (LES PRISONS.))

Title
Review for Abbaleh, Bo L'Luna Park (1994)
THE ADVENTURES OF PRISCILLA, QUEEN OF THE DESERT, directed by Stephan
Elliott, Australia, 1:42:
     This is a "road picture," but what a road!  Through the wide open
spaces of the center of Australia travels "Priscilla, Queen of the
Desert," an old and not very luxurious bus, along with Priscilla's
passengers, three drag queens on their way to a gig in Alice Springs.
They meet various people (including the obligatory meeting with native
Australians), have adventures, and reveal their personalities and
problems to each other along the way.
     This is a movie with a lot of style--not surprising, given the
occupation of the main characters.  In fact, one of the film's messages
seems to be that when it comes to style, drag queens have it all over
the rest of us.  (The scene as the bus pulls out of Sydney is hardly
subtle in this regard.)
     THE ADVENTURES OF PRISCILLA, QUEEN OF THE DESERT has some things
to say, but its value lies in the interesting characters, especially
Terence Stamp as a transsexual drag queen past her prime, and the sheer
pleasure of watching flamboyance on a grand scale.  It may not be a
great film, but it certainly is a fun one.  Rating: +2 (-4 to +4).
THE SECRET ADVENTURES OF TOM THUMB, directed by Dave Borthwick, Great
Britain, 1:01:
     This is a very difficult film to describe.  It uses an animation
technique I can't recall seeing before in which the "live action"
actors are filmed in stop motion as well as the clay figures.  (Or
maybe they film the actors in the regular way, then remove some frames
and duplicate others.)  In any case this is fascinating from a visual
standpoint, but definitely not for children (in spite of what the title
might lead you to believe).  Tom lives in a very dark world, full of
disturbing images, swarms of strange insects, and unspeakable
scientific experiments.  It seems at times more like something out of
Franz Kafka than a children's fairy tale book.
     This is not for everyone's taste (though it played to an almost
full house here), and given its length (or lack thereof), is unlikely
to play in "normal" theaters anyway.  Look for this at theaters which
shown experimental film, film festivals, or perhaps science fiction
conventions (which seem a perfect venue for it).  Rating: +2 (-4 to
+4).
MESMER, directed by Roger Spottiswoode, Great Britain/Canada/Germany,
1:42:
     Franz Anton Mesmer has been considered both a charlatan and a
visionary. This film makes no definitive judgment, but seems to fall
into the visionary camp, albeit perhaps a misguided visionary.
     Played by Alan Rickman, Mesmer is a man who sees the practice of
medicine in his day (the 18th Century) as barbaric, which of course it
was.  The cure for almost every ill was to bleed the patient.  Mesmer
takes a different approach.  Calling on "animal magnetism," he attempts
to use magnetic currents and forces to cure his patients.  He achieves
some notable successes, but many of the cures seem to be temporary and
the patients relapse.
     Unfortunately, much of Mesmer's philosophy regarding his
treatments (the term "mesmerism" is never used) seems as bizarre today
as it did to the established medical professionals then.  It is left
for the audience to see the seeds of hypnotism, the power of
suggestion, holistic medicine, and the nature of psychosomatic
illnesses in Mesmer's explanations of the pull of the moon and magnetic
forces.  Although Rickman is very good (I refuse to call his portrayal
mesmerizing, though Lord knows someone will), and Amanda Ooms excellent
as his patient Maria Theresa Paradies, some of the supporting
characters are rather sketchily drawn.  In the end it is perhaps the
strangeness of Mesmer's philosophy which makes it difficult for
screen-writer Dennis Potter to give us a character we can understand.
Rating: +1 (-4 to +4).
THE ADVOCATE, directed by Leslie Megahey, Great Britain, 1:35:
     The year is 1452.  The place is Abbeville, France. To this small
village comes Robert Courtois to serve as the advocate (the public
defender).  His first case is defending a man accused of killing his
wife's lover.  That goes pretty well.  Then he defends a woman accused
of witchcraft; that case does not go so well.  His third case is even
more peculiar by own standards, and we begin to see that what at first
seemed like isolated aberrations in the law are actually part of a
larger insanity.  Or as the priest says, "In a world where nothing is
reasonable, nothing can be said to be truly mad."
     Colin Firth as the advocate in this film (which I might describe
as "THE RETURN OF MARTIN GUERRE Meets TWELVE ANGRY MEN") seems a bit
out of his depth in a cast containing Nicol Williamson as the local
seigneur, Ian Holm as the priest, Donald Pleasence as the local
prosecutor, and Michael Gough as the magistrate.  But then the
character of the advocate finds himself a bit out of his depth as well.
     It may seem odd to say that a mystery set in a period of
superstition, prejudice, and the Inquisition in France has some very
funny moments, but Megahey's script takes advantage of the weirdness
going on all around, and the actors carry the humor off quite well.
The supporting cast looks authentic to the era (perhaps more so than
most of the principals), although not quite to the level of the casting
in THE NAME OF THE ROSE.  If THE ADVOCATE occasionally has the look of
a made-for-television film, that may be in part due to the fact that
the BBC was one of its financiers, and also to the fact that Megahey's
background is in television and this is his first feature film.
     This is a very entertaining film that is (so far as I can tell)
historically accurate to its time period.  (For example, all the court
cases are based on actual court cases of the time.)  I recommend it
highly.  Rating: +3 (-4 to +4).
CYBERTEENS IN LOVE, directed by Brett Dowler, Canada, 1:33:
     Shot on video, this definitely has the look of a student film,
though technically the filmmakers were not students, but were working
under the auspices of British Columbia Film and the National Film Board
of Canada (Pacific Center).  The acting of some of the supporting cast
is mediocre to bad (although Carole Henshall is perfect as Kid Cutter).
The computer animation is fairly basic for today.  The staging of some
of the action sequences is pretty lame.  Even the basic plot is
unimaginative: girl escapes from state-run orphanage, finds love with
street-smart computer wiz, and gets involved in adventures and danger
in cyberspace.  But the script by John Dowler shows great imagination
and creativity in its use of "futurespeak."  For example, a rhetorical
question becomes an "answer-free question" and Su doesn't try to find
her family, she tries to "family-find."
     The film does have a lot of rough edges, but the dialogue helps
you past a lot of that, with its poetry and flow.  Rating: +1 (-4 to
+4).
TOTAL BALALAIKA SHOW, directed by Aki Kaurismaki, Finland, 0:56:
     One newspaper complained about the choice of this as one of the
free outdoor shows of the festival because they felt it was nothing but
an extended music video, and not even Canadian.  Of course, the same
could be said of WOODSTOCK, but wasn't--at least not by that writer.
In any case, we actually paid to be this indoors because 1) the free
showing was opposite THE ADVOCATE, and 2) rain was predicted for the
day of the free showing.  While the theater wasn't full, it still had
quite a respectable crowd for something that had just been shown for
free.
     On June 12, 1993, the largest stage ever erected in Finland was
set up in Senate Square (hey, we were just there!) for a joint concert
of the Leningrad Cowboys and the Alexandrov Red Army Chorus and Dance
Ensemble.  THE TOTAL BALALAIKA SHOW is the concert film made there by
noted Finnish director Aki Kaurismaki (who first introduced the
Leningrad Cowboys to the world in LENINGRAD COWOYS GO AMERICA).
     Songs included "Finlandia," "Together We Stand," "Volga Boatmen,"
"Happy Together," an absolutely wonderful rendition of "Delilah,"
"Knockin' on Heaven's Door," "Oh, Field," "Kalinka," "Gimme All Your
Lovin'" (with strains of the "Internationale" and the "Hallelujah
Chorus" added as background), "Sweet Home Alabama," "Dark Eyes," and
"Those Were the Days."
     I have to say that during "Happy Together" I found myself
comparing and contrasting this concert with "The Three Tenors."  It was
an even stronger feeling when the Russian soloist held the note in
"Kalinka" for what seemed like at least a minute.  I also got a real
feeling for the fact that the Cold War is over if the Red Army Chorus
is singing Western rock music, especially when they sang the lines from
Bob Dylan's "Knockin' on Heaven's Door": "Put my guns in the cold black
ground; I can't shoot them any more."
DADDY, COME TO THE FAIR, directed by Nitza Gonen, Israel, 1:16:
     One of the problems of reviewing a film about the Shoah
(Holocaust) is that the subject gives the film some element of
"untouchability"--it is very difficult to say anything negative about
it unless it is almost intentionally offensive.  But there are some
many mis-steps and misjudgments in the making of this made-for-
television documentary that I simply cannot recommend it.
     From the very beginning, or even before it in some sense, I think
there were problems.  This is a documentary of a man returning to
Poland, where his parents were murdered in the Holocaust.  With him
travel his son and his daughter, and the film (it's actually videotape,
but "film" has become generic) concentrates more on the son than on the
father.  It is true that during the trip, the relationship between the
son and the father undergoes a transformation, but how could they know
this would happen at the beginning of the shooting?  At time the camera
angles and other effects seem too studied, more suitable for a
narrative film than a documentary.  One almost gets the impression that
the entire project was the idea of the son, who just happens to be in
show business, and is more designed to promote his career than to focus
on his father.  Rating: 0 (-4 to +4).
(See general article for comments on KABLOONAK.)

Title
Review for What Happened Was... (1994)
     I don't normally review films, leaving that to Mark.  However, our
initial plan for this festival was that we would not necessarily be
seeing films together and so I figured I would review the ones Mark
didn't.  As it turned out, we ended up going to all the same movies but
I was already prepared to write some reviews, so what the heck.  I
will, however, avoid repeating the same comments about the festival
that he makes (regarding ticket procedures, etc.).
     One thing we had to be careful of in deciding what films to (try
to) see was what language(s) the film was in.  Many of the non-
English-language films are sub-titled in French rather than English.
We prefer not to repeat my MALEVIL experience: I went to see MALEVIL at
a science fiction convention in the Netherlands.  Unfortunately, it was
in French.  Fortunately, it was sub-titled.  Unfortunately, it was
sub-titled in Dutch.  This time the only thing we had initially
selected that had no English was JEANNE LA PUCELLE, PARTS I AND II, and
those turned out to be sold out anyway.  (The Cinema Imperial, a
magnificent older, and larger, theater, had what they called
"Softitles," which is an electronic subtitling system similar to what
is used for super-titles at operas.  This makes it possible to show
films subtitled in both English and French, with the English on the
film itself and the French on the board, and that is what was done
with, for example, the Chinese STORY OF YUNNAN.)
     The first night of the festival there were only two films,
KABLOONAK and NATURAL BORN KILLERS.  The first, because it was the
official opening of the festival, did not accept the coupons sold at
ten for C$45; the second was sold out by the time decided to try to go.
In fact, before the festival even opened, about two dozen screenings
were sold out, mostly French-language or high-profile films.  (The one
sold-out film that didn't meet either of these criteria was MRS. PARKER
AND THE VICIOUS CIRCLE--and that turned out to have been filmed in
Montreal.)  So we decided to spend our unexpectedly free
evening ... going to a movie!
JACK L. WARNER, THE LAST MOGUL, directed by Gregory Orr, USA, 1:44:
     I just know this will show up on television the week we get back-
-it is a made-for-TV film and that's usually how our luck runs.  But we
figured we might as well see a film about a film producer at a film
festival.  (Not too many agreed with us--while the theater for
PRISCILLA was packed, this had maybe three dozen people all together.)
Unfortunately, this is a rather run-of-the mill documentary.
     Gregory Orr is Jack Warner's grandson--well, actually, he's the
son of Warner's step-daughter (who by the way was the actress who
played the young Bulgarian woman in CASABLANCA), which makes his claim
to be Warner's grandson a bit debatable, and makes me wonder if the
truth isn't being stretched elsewhere as well.  (In fact, the
photographs shown while the narrator is talking about the Warners
emigrating to America include some of the Warners and many other which
are just general archival photographs, yet no distinction is made.)
     The film did have its interesting moments.  Neal Gabler talked
about the irony of Russian Jewish immigrants marginalized by American
society, founding the industry that would eventually come to define
American society.  It was also thought-provoking to see the contrast
between Warner Brothers Studios's actions during the 1930s, when they
shut down operations in any country occupied by the Nazis, and in the
1950s, when they completely caved in to pressure from HUAC.  (They had
made MISSION TO MOSCOW during he war at the express request of
President Roosevelt, who wanted a film favorable to our then-allies and
came under suspicion in the McCarthy era because of it.)
     It seemed to me that Orr spent too much time on HIS story, even
including a movie he made as a child, instead of concentrating on his
subject.  This will probably do well on television as a nostalgia
piece, but doesn't have any spark beyond that.  Rating: 0 (-4 to +4).
WHAT HAPPENED WAS..., directed by Tom Noonan, USA, 1:30:
     Tom Noonan wrote, directed, and co-starred in this two-person,
one-set film.  It cost $300,000 and was shot in just eleven days (proof
that the spirit of Roger Corman is alive in the land).  It then went on
to win the Grand Jury AND screen-writing prizes at the Sundance Film
Festival.
     Noonan and Karen Sillas play two co-workers at a law firm.  What
they discover when Sillas invites Noonan over for dinner one evening
forms the basis of the film.
     Noonan is not afraid to let the characters remain silent when that
is called for, nor does he insist on obvious "twists" or pat
resolutions.  The title refers to the story within the story, the
children's story Sillas's character is writing, and how you interpret
the film may be based on how you interpret this story.  Though a
dialogue, this film is reminiscent of some of Alan Bennett's monologue
plays (more so than to MY DINNER WITH ANDRE, which might seem the
obvious comparison), and is more likely to appeal to fans of theatrical
plays than to the average movie-goer.  Rating: +1 (-4 to +4).
WOODSTOCK, directed by Michael Wadleigh, USA, 4:00:
     This was being shown on a giant outdoor screen in the Place des
Arts.  Since we got there late, we ended up sitting a block away with
our view partially blocked by a tree, and we could still feel our ribs
vibrate from the sound.  We stayed for five songs (including Joan Baez
singing "Joe Hill"), but even twenty-five years ago, there was a lot of
this music that I didn't like and I haven't much mellowed toward it
since then.  I can't really give any rating based on this abbreviated
viewing.  However, it's interesting to note some of the changes in the
director's cut.  For example, the original cut had no footage of Janis
Joplin.  Now director Wadleigh says Joplin is possibly the best blues
singer in the last thirty years and has added footage of her to the new
version.
MEN LIE, directed by John Andrew Gallagher, USA, 1:27:
     There didn't seem to be much point to this film.  Jill is going
out with Scott and believes he is faithful to her.  He isn't.  She
finds out.  That's about it.
     Of course, that wouldn't fill the 87 minutes this film takes, so
screenwriter/director Gallagher fills in the time with what is fast
becoming a cliche--a bunch of people giving their comments and opinions
to the camera.  (Is it Spike Lee or Woody Allen who started this trend?
And speaking of similarities to Woody Allen films, almost everyone is
this film is of European descent too--I think there was one black
"comment character.")
     There is actually a positively portrayed male character, and I
thought many of the female characters were negatively portrayed, so I
wouldn't claim this as completely one-sided as the title might lead you
to believe, but it was certainly a pessimistic portrayal of
relationships, and not really worth the time.  Rating: 0 (-4 to +4).
KILLER, directed by Mark Malone, USA, 1:33:
     This film with its cast of five relies on writing and acting
rather than on special effects or action sequences for its appeal
(although it does have a couple of steamy sex scenes).  Anthony
LaPaglia plays a hitman whose assignment is to kill a woman (played by
Mimi Rogers) who seems strangely accepting of the fact.  Complicating
the job is LaPaglia's assistant, who bungled his last job and is
looking for a way to redeem himself.
     This is, as I indicated, more a character study than anything
else, and the actors do a convincing job of portraying their
characters.  Rating: +1 (-4 to +4).
     And of course, even though we did see nineteen films in a week,
there were several more that sounded interesting that we didn't get to
(several of which played only during the second week after we were
gone).  These included:
KABLOONAK, directed by Claude Massot, Canada/France, 1:45:
     This was the official opening film of the film festival and tells
the story of Nanook, who in 1922 was the "star" of Robert Flaherty's
NANOOK OF THE NORTH.  Later when people went back to see him again,
they discovered he had died the following winter during a seal hunt.
(Today, of course, they would have signed him to a multi-picture deal
and flown him all over the world for press conferences.)
PRINCESS CARABOO, directed by Michael Austin, USA, 1:37:
     A mysterious young woman appears in an English village in 1817,
and the villagers decide she is a Javanese princess.  We went to a
press conference with Austin (who also authored the script) at which
some of the questioners gave away a fair amount of the film, leading
one of the film's promoters to ask the press not to reveal too much in
their articles or reviews.  So I won't, except to say this is based on
a true story written up in ENGLISH ECCENTRICS, stars Phoebe Cates and
Kevin Kline, and cost under $10 million.
SEX, DRUGS, AND DEMOCRACY, directed by Jonathan Blank, USA, 1:27:
     This documentary look at how the Netherlands treats sex and drugs
in terms of laws and attitudes.  Blank is quoted in the daily magazine
distributed at the festival as saying that it was the Commissioner of
Police in Amsterdam who explained to him the provisions made for the
handicapped in the city's brothels.  "The Dutch were all really proud
of them," Blank said.  Apparently marijuana is illegal (to make the
Americans happy), but no one pays any attention to the law, and
abortions are illegal but the government pays for them.  Blank finds
the attitudes of many Americans very strange.  For example, the anti-
pornography lobbyists have claim pornography affects the viewer, yet
they have probably seen more pornography than anyone else and claim to
be unaffected.
     JEANNE LA PUCELLE I (LES BATAILLES) and JEANNE LA PUCELLE II (LES
PRISONS), directed by Jacques Rivette, France, 2:40 and 2:56:
     Even if these hadn't been sold out before we had a chance to get
tickets, the fact that they were in French and un-subtitled would have
made us give these a miss here, but a six-hour epic about Joan of Arc
is something in which I would definitely be interested if it were
subtitled in English (or even dubbed, though dubbing a six-hour movie
is probably prohibitively expensive).  The two parts will probably make
the rounds separately in most areas, since I suspect they are each
self-contained stories.

Title
Review for Shy People (1987)
     As you watch SHY PEOPLE, you're sure you know what it's about.  Don't
be so sure.  At the end, it makes a right turn in another direction
entirely.  This is not bad, just unexpected.
     Jill Clayburgh is a writer for COSMOPOLITAN who decides to visit her
distant relatives in Louisiana as research for a series on family roots that
she is doing.  She drags her teen-age daughter along to get her away from
the daughter's 45-year-old boyfriend and they head off into the swamp.
There she finds her cousin, played by Barbara Hersey.  Hersey rules her
family with an iron hand, and a somewhat odd family it is.  One son has left
the swamp and is treated as dead by Hersey, one son is kept locked in the
shed, one son is "missing a button," and one son is trying to trap enough
crayfish to keep the family fed.  Clayburgh and her daughter have difficulty
understanding the life their cousins lead; for their part, Hersey and her
sons look askance at Clayburgh and city people in general.  (They keep
saying Hersey comes from Baltimore, even though she repeatedly tells them
she is from New York, probably to soften the blow of having "Yankee" city
relatives.)
     Some of the subplots seem unnecessary, but they all fit together in the
end.  Only Hersey's character is fully developed.  Clayburgh doesn't seem to
know how to play her character and remains unconvincing (or perhaps vague is
a better term) through most of the film.  Hersey's sons and Clayburgh's
daughter seem more like types than characters, but the wonderful acting job
by Hersey manages to overcome these flaws and make this a film worth
watching.

Title
Review for Giulia e Giulia (1987)
     When we first see Julia (played by Kathleen Turner) she's happily
married--just married.  Her happiness lasts but a few hours, though, before
her husband Paolo (played by Gabriel Byrne) is killed in a car accident.
     We then jump forward seven years and see Julia going through the daily
routine of her life in a state not unlike that of a zombie.  Then suddenly
she finds herself in another world, one in which her husband didn't die, one
in which she is still married and has a young son.  But this world isn't all
sweetness and light either--Julia in this world is cheating on her husband
and being blackmailed by her lover to continue their relationship.  Like a
pendulum, she finds herself swinging back and forth between the two worlds,
first trying to understand what is happening and then trying to create the
world she wants.  This is made even more confused by the fact that the
person who in world two is her lover (played by Sting) also exists in world
one as someone Julia meets in the course of the film.
     Alternate histories are not common in film or television: QUEST FOR
LOVE, "City on the Edge of Forever" (STAR TREK), "Stay Tuned, We'll Be Right
Back" (DARKROOM), AN ENGLISHMAN'S CASTLE, and a few others.  Why are they
not common?  Well, maybe it's because alternate worlds are a mental concept
rather than an action concept (like car chases).  JULIA AND JULIA demands a
mental effort on the part of the viewer to keep track of who's where.  The
film itself is slow-moving and has a cold and distant feel.
     JULIA AND JULIA was shot on video, giving it a made-for-TV look.  The
Italian setting (it was made by RAI) is well-used but tends to distance the
story and make both worlds unfamiliar, adding to the distant feel.
Recommended for the more intellectually oriented viewer.

Title
Review for No Way Out (1987)
     NO WAY OUT was billed as a suspense thriller along the lines of Hitchcock.
Let's take a look at the dramatic elements:
     Action?  Yes, there's plenty of action: chase scenes in cars, trains, and
on foot and one that is predominantly horizontal.
     Acting?!?!  Forget it!  There are so *many* actors involved and so much
action (I guess simple movement qualifies) that there isn't any time for
acting.  Although there are a few exceptions:
     Will Patton plays the part of Gene Hackman's aide.  His character appears
to be the most rounded, or at least the most intense.  His performance will get
some Hollywood heads turning.  He may (should) get an Oscar nomination.
     Kevin Costner plays the lead as a naval officer who performs a heroic deed
and subsequently gets involved with the Secretary of Defense.  The only segment
of his acting that was valuable was when he found out about his girlfriend's
death.  Costner's performance in THE UNTOUCHABLES was far more dynamic.  We
will no doubt be seeing more of him.  We hope he will be screening any future
scripts more carefully.
     Sean Young delivers interesting insight to the term "Washington
Socialite."  A very provocative role.   Unfortunately, Susan appears to have
majored in "vaginal gymnastics" at junior college.
     Gene Hackman has taken on a role that hardly suits his capabilities.  His
horror of killing Susan was the only portion of his role that stands out.
     Howard Duff had a very insignificant role.  His was almost as empty as
Gene Hackman's except Gene had 10 times as much camera time.
     The problem here is that writing has failed some very capable actors.
Action (movement) has taken over the movie.  There was a lot of role-playing,
but very little in character development.  Plot has suffered due to logistical
error.  Here are some examples:  A door-to-door search for the elusive bad guy
in the largest building in the world.  Oh...that ought to take a few weeks.
How about this?  The Secretary's aide (who is gay and is in love with the
secretary) hears the secretary (right in front of him) decide to betray the
aide as the murderer of the secretary's girlfriend.  What does the aide do?  He
shoots himself!  It seems to me that if one is about to be betrayed by someone
as omnipotent as the Secretary of Defense, has a gun in possession, and is
within range that he would shoot the secretary.  Worst of all, why is it that a
man who is paid cash for the use of a boat is found as a witness and yet they
never question the secretary's limo driver?  The limo driver would have ended
the movie before the first 60 boring minutes would have ended.  I give this one
1+1/2 *

Title
Review for Born in East L.A. (1987)
     When you head "Cheech Marin," you don't think "romantic comedy with a
message," but believe it or not, that's what BORN IN EAST L.A. is.  Yes,
there are drugs, but Cheech isn't doing them (he accidentally meets up with
a couple of drug smugglers).  (Maybe it has something to do with the absence
of Thomas Chong, Cheech's long-time partner.)  So what is this RARA AVIS,
this "family-oriented" Cheech Marin movie?
     BORN IN EAST L.A. is the story of an American of Mexican origin, but
born and raised in East Los Angeles, who accidentally gets caught up in an
immigration raid on a factory.  So while his cousin, the true illegal alien
(played by stand-up comedian Paul Rodriguez), escapes and begins to enjoy
the pleasures of life in the United States (occasionally with hilarious
results), Cheech finds himself south of the border with no way to get home
or prove his citizenship.  But Yanqui ingenuity prevails and Cheech manages
to find ways to hustle enough money to pay someone to smuggle him back
across the border.  His life is complicated by a Nicaraguan (?) refugee he
meets and falls in love with who is also trying to get to the United States.
     As I said, this film also carries a message, a very positive message
about life in the United States and what is valuable about it.  (It also has
the best video to Neil Diamond's "America" that I have seen.)  It points out
the problems caused by an immigration policy that makes everyone of Hispanic
origin an alien until proved otherwise.  If you avoided this film in the
theaters because you don't like Cheech Marin movies, give it a try now on
video or cable.

Title
Review for Wizard of Oz, The (1939)
     Most viewers see THE WIZARD OF OZ as merely a children's film, or as a
fantasy that entertains without edifying.  This is probably due to Baum's
(and Fleming's) subtlety, since in reality the film is an intense
philosophical statement.
     Consider for example Fleming's use of color.  Reality, to Fleming, is
drab and colorless; only the world of our dreams has life and color to it.
(i.e., the belief that the self is the only reality) in cinematic terms.
Dorothy is not so much using her dreams to allow herself to fit into reality
as she is discovering that reality exists only in her dreams.
     The characters that Dorothy meets in her dream (which is, in turn, her
reality) are symbolic characters, and her journey represents a rite of
passage to adulthood.  Her three companions, for example, represent the
three facets of her person: intellectual, emotional, and spiritual.
Throughout the film we see fertility symbols which represent her transition
from child to woman.  Although Baum's Dorothy was only six years old, it is
evident that Fleming's Dorothy is twelve or thirteen.  The ruby slippers
which are forced upon her are obviously a symbol of menstruation,
particularly since the slippers in Baum's book were silver.  And the menace
of the witch in the cyclone is emphasized by the use of the broom, an
obvious phallic symbol.  Dorothy has reached an age where womanhood and its
consequences are frightening, and her dreams reflect this.  Again and again,
we see symbols of her passage to womanhood:  the corn field, the apples
(representing the fruit of the harvest as well as the Biblical concept of
original sin).  In addition we see her confusion symbolized by the long
tunnel in the Wizard's palace which she travels UP in an obvious attempt to
return to the womb and escape her problems.
     As was stated before, her three companions represent the three aspects
of her person.  The Scarecrow is the embodiment of Dorothy's realization
that she must develop and use her intellectual abilities to a much greater
extent as an adult that she needed to as a child.  The Tin Man represents
Dorothy's emotional growth.  She eventually, through the character of the
Tin Man, comes to realize and accept her emotional side, even with the
dangers that such acceptance entails.  The Cowardly Lion is the
manifestation of Dorothy's spiritual growth (her belief in herself, if you
prefer).  Dorothy realizes that she must become more secure in herself if
she is to pass from childhood to adulthood.
     That Dorothy is undergoing a rite of passage is stressed in several
smaller ways.  The hourglass, for example, represents the inexorable passing
of time; Dorothy must leave her childhood behind whether she wants to or
not.  (Note also that when she tries to give up the ruby slippers, i.e.
womanhood, she is unable to, again pointing up the impossibility of
retreating to childhood again.) Also, though she wishes to remain in the
Emerald City (which like the rest of Munchkinland is populated by children),
she must leave its safety if she is ever to pass to adulthood.
     The famous "jitterbugging" scene, which was cut from the film prior to
release (presumably because it would have "dated" the film in a few years),
would have stressed this transition even more.  The Wicked Witch, before
sending her flying monkeys to kidnap Dorothy, says that she will send
something before them, "to take the fight out of [Dorothy]." The following
scene, which was cut, showed Dorothy and her companions being bitten by
"jitterbugs," whose poison caused them to dance until exhausted.  But the
jitterbug (as a dance) is very similar to many primitive dances which
represent the frenzy of the sexual act.  Hence here we have Dorothy
threatened by symbolic rape.  Given the moral climate of the time, it is not
surprising that the scene was cut.
     Dorothy's fourth companion in the film is Toto, her dog.  Since "toto"
is Latin for "all," we can interpret him as representing the totality of
Dorothy's personality, the union of the three aspects.  Using this
interpretation, we realize that Fleming has given us a dream within a dream,
further emphasizing the solipsism inherent in the film.  For, if we
interpret Dorothy's trip through Oz as a dream in which she (i.e., her
personality) is separated from her physical body, then Toto's escape from
the witch's castle represents the ultimate core of her self departing from
the imperfections of her personality's various aspects.  (The original
conflict, recall, was the attempted destruction of Dorothy's "all" or Toto.)
Just as beneath the physical layer there is a "spiritual" layer, so beneath
the "spiritual" layer there is yet a third, more essential, layer.  Only
when Dorothy is in harmony with the three aspects of her personality (i.e.,
when she is reunited with the Scarecrow, the Tin Man, and the Cowardly
Lion), can she attain her ultimate self (i.e., be joined again with Toto).
     So we see that far from a meaningless fantasy, THE WIZARD OF OZ is in
fact a deep philosophical statement which causes us to reflect on the
harmony or disharmony of the aspects of our own personalities.

Title
Review for Blue Steel (1990)
     Competent and earnest acting on the part of the ever-reliable Jamie Lee
Curtis and imaginative cinematography are not enough to wrest BLUE STEEL from
the jaws of a bad script.  Curtis stars in this new thriller as a rookie New
York cop who, through no fault of her own, sees more gunplay in her first 48
hours on the job than most police officers see in an entire career.
     Ron Silver co-stars as a psychotic commodity trader (perhaps a tautology)
apparently obsessed with Jamie Lee.  I say apparently, because one of the
scripts major weaknesses is a lack of motivation or explanation for anything he
does.  Once you think you understand this guy, he has a scene where he hears
voices in his head.
     The script is also all over the map in terms of logic.  At several points
I found myself wondering how in the world *that* happened, or how they wound up
together *there*, and how did she know *that*.  The film also expects you to
believe that wrapping a .44 Magnum in a towel will make it quiet enough for a
person in the next room not to hear it go off.  In short, the suspension of
disbelief required exceeded my threshold.
     There are some fine, tense moments, and I liked the director's use of
short depth of field telephoto shots.  BLUE STEEL wants to be SEA OF LOVE meets
FATAL ATTRACTION, but lacks the style and intelligence of either.  Die-hard
Jamie Lee Curtis fans should wait to catch it on video.  Others need not apply.

Title
Review for Hexed (1993)
92 min., R, Comedy, 1993
Director: Alan Spencer
Cast: Arye Gross, Claudia Christian, Adrienne Shelly, Ray Baker,
      R. Lee Ermey, Michael Knight, Robin Curtis, Norman Fell
     Hotel clerk Arye Gross is in love with French model Claudia
Christian.  He finds out that Christian is going to be staying at the
hotel where he works.  Gross tricks Christian into going out with him,
and while they are out, Christian kills a man.  Christian sets up Gross
so that police officer R. Lee Ermey thinks that he did it.  Gross has
to prove that Christian did it before he gets caught.
     HEXED is a very funny film that is enjoyable to just sit down and
watch.  I recommend HEXED to fans of slapstick comedy.  I enjoyed
watching this film, and so did the audience in the showing that I went
to.  On a scale of zero to five, I give HEXED a four.  HEXED is rated R
for female nudity, adult situations, explicit language, adult humor, and
violence.
     The cast for this film does a good job.  My favorite person in the
film is R.  Lee Ermey (FULL METAL JACKET).  He does an excellent job.
Adrienne Shelly (TRUTH, THE UNBELIEVABLE TRUTH) outshines most of the
cast.  Claudia Christian (CLEAN AND SOBER, RELENTLESS: MIND OF A KILLER)
does a reasonably good job.  Arye Gross (HOUSE 2: THE SECOND STORY, SOUL
MAN) gives a great performance.
     This film may offend some people with a scene mocking the Rodney
King beating which involves a white man being unnecessarily beaten in a
hotel lobby by several police officers and being videotaped by a
tourist.  I happen to have found this scene funny, even though I also
thought it was in bad taste.
     Like the soon-coming NATIONAL LAMPOON'S LOADED WEAPON 1, HEXED
makes fun of many of the movies that have come out.  And for those who
haven't seen the movies that HEXED is lampooning, there are plenty of
sight gags.  The funniest are: the sex scene between Claudia Christian
and Arye Gross, the dead hotel worker, the Rodney King beating mockery,
and the ending.
     This film is not one that it matters greatly if you see it in the
theater or see it on videocassette.  If you have the time, definitely go
see this film.  If you don't, the film will probably be released on
videocassette in about six months and you can see it then.

Title
Review for Jurassic Park (1993)
     The current hit movie JURASSIC PARK stars several holdovers from
65 million years ago.  It also shows errors in network security that
seem to be as old.
     For those of you who have just returned from Neptune, JURASSIC
PARK is about a dinosaur theme park that displays live dinosaurs
created after scientists cracked extinct dinosaur DNA code recovered
from petrified mosquitos.  The film has terrific live action dinosaur
replicas and some heart stopping scenes.  It also dramatizes awful
network management and security.  Unfortunately, the policies are as
realistic as the dinosaurs.
     Consider a network security risk analysis for Jurassic Park.  The
entire complex depends on computer controlled electric fences and gates
to keep a range of prehistoric critters from eating the tourists and
staff.  So at a simple level, if the network fails, people turn into
dinosaur food.
     Jurassic Park's security network is controlled by an ultramodern
UNIX system, but its management structures date from the Stone Age.
There is only one person who maintains the programs which control the
security network.  This breaks Kabay's Law of Redundancy, which states,
"No knowledge shall be the property of only one member of the team."
After all, if that solitary guru were to leave, go on vacation, or get
eaten by a dinosaur, you'd be left without a safety net.
     Jurassic Park's security system is controlled by computer programs
consisting of two million lines of proprietary code.  These critical
programs are not properly documented.  An undocumented system is by
definition a time bomb.  In the movie, this bomb is triggered by a
vindictive programmer who is angry because he feels overworked and
underpaid.
     One of the key principles of security is that people are the most
important component of any security system.  Disgruntled and dishonest
employees cause far more damage to networks and computer systems than
hackers.  The authoritarian owner of the Park dismisses the programmer's
arguments and complaints as if owning a bunch of dinosaurs gives him
the privilege of treating his employees rudely.  He pays no attention to
explicit indications of discontent, including aggressive language,
resentful retorts, and sullen expressions.  If the owner had taken the
time to listen to his employee's grievances and take steps to address
them, he could have prevented several dinosaur meals.
     Bad housekeeping is another sign of trouble.  The console where
the disgruntled programmer works looks like a garbage dump; it's
covered in coffee cup fungus gardens, historically significant
chocolate bar wrappers, and a treasure trove of recyclable soft drink
cans.  You'd think that a reasonable manager would be alarmed simply by
the number of empty calories per hour being consumed by this critically
important programmer.  The poor fellow is so overweight that his life
expectancy would be short even if he didn't become dinosaur fodder.
     Ironically, the owner repeats, "No expense spared" at several
points during the movie.  It doesn't seem to occur to him that with
hundreds of millions of dollars spent on hardware and software not to
mention the buildings and grounds and an entire private island, modest
raises for the staff would be trivial in terms of operating expenses
but significant for morale.
     In the movie, the network programmer is bribed by competitors to
steal dinosaur embryos.  He does so by setting off a logic bomb that
disrupts network operations completely.  The network outage causes
surveillance and containment systems to fail, stranding visitors in,
well, uncomfortable situations.  Even though the plot is not exactly
brilliant, I'd like to leave at least something to surprise those who
haven't seen the movie yet.
     When the systems fail, for some reason all the electric locks in
the park's laboratory are instantly switched to the open position.  Why
aren't they automatically locked instead? Normally, when a security
controller fails, the default should be to keep security high, not
eliminate it completely.  Manual overrides such as crash bars (the
horizontal bars that open latches on emergency exits) can provide
emergency egress without compromising security.
     As all of this is happening, a tropical storm is bearing down on
the island.  The contingency plan appears to consist of sending almost
everyone away to the mainland, leaving a pitifully inadequate skeleton
crew.  The film suggests that the skeleton crew is not in physical
danger from the storm, so why send essential personnel away?
Contingency plans are supposed to include redundancy at every level.
Reducing the staff when more are needed is incomprehensible.
     At one point, the systems are rebooted by turning the power off to
the entire island on which the park is located.  This is equivalent to
turning the power off in your city because you had an application
failure on your PC.  Talk about overkill: why couldn't they just power
off the computers themselves?
     Where were the DPMRP (Dinosaur Prevention, Mitigation and Recovery
Planning) consultants when the park was being designed? Surely
everybody should know by now that the only way to be ready for
dinosaurs, uh, disasters, is to think, plan, rehearse, refine and
update.  Didn't anyone think about what would happen if the critters
got loose? Where are the failsafe systems? The uninterruptible power
supplies? The backup power generators? Sounds like Stupidosaurians were
in charge.
     We may be far from cloning dinosaurs, but we are uncomfortably
close to managing security with all the grace of a Brontosaurus trying
to type.
The above text is Copyright (c) 1993 by Network World.  All rights reserved.
Permission is granted by the copyright holder and the author to distribute
this file electronically or otherwise as long as the entire file is printed
without modification.

Title
Review for Gods Must Be Crazy II, The (1989)
          CAPSULE:  Not really a sequel, but another film using the same
     clever basis as its predecessor.  A Bushman's children are carried
     away in a truck, which they have never seen before.  He follows the
     tracks, hoping to find them.  Along his way, he encounters a
     biologist, a lost lawyer, poachers and soldiers.  A very funny film
     with a mild philosophical lesson.  Suitable for everyone.
     Following the rule that a sequel must stand on its own, Part Two can be
seen by anyone, whether they saw the original or not.  The producers clearly
knew they had a winning formula, and so (mercifully) not one thing has changed
about how the story is told.  The production values are much higher this time,
which is a plus.  The humor, acting and scenery are virtually identical to the
first film.  That is, there is a droll narrator, some slapstick, a man and a
woman, lots and lots of funny one liners, and interesting and funny animals
(with one creature I cannot identify being entitled to an Oscar for best
supporting beast).
     The only returning character is Xixo (KEE-ko), played once again by N!xua
(I think the ! is a clucking sound made with the tongue; used in the Bushman
language, apparently).  But the formula is identical.  It would be pointless to
summarize the plot beyond what is said in the capsule; the story really isn't
important.  The point of the film is to show the silliness more "advanced"
society can achieve, by comparing its members to Xixo and his simpler ways.
But, the message is very gently delivered, and even the most staunch
conservatives (like me) will not be put off.

Title
Review for Miller's Crossing (1990)
     Since the movie reviews are normally handled by the more hirsute member
of the Leeper Consortium, it is rare indeed that I take pen in hand (or in
this case, keyboard in lap) to review a film.  But circumstances compel me
to do so for MILLER'S CROSSING.  What circumstances?  Well, if I don't, you
won't know to drop everything and go see this movie.
     Of course, for many of you, just the statement that this is another
movie from Joel and Ethan Cohn (RAISING ARIZONA, BLOOD SIMPLE) is enough.
And if I say Albert Finney is in it, that will drag a few more of you down
to your local cinema (or not-so-local cinema--this film is not exactly in
what might be termed wide release).  But if that isn't enough, how about the
following:
   - Excellent acting, especially by Gabriel Byrne (as Tom Regan) and Joe
     Polito (as Joe Caspar).
   - Wonderful cinematography by Barry Sonnenfield
   - Beautiful Irish-inspired score by Carter Burwell, including the most
     perfect rendition of "Danny Boy" I have ever heard (special screen
     credit was given to tenor William Preston Robertson for this).
     Regarding the script, you should be warned: buy your popcorn and make
your rest stops *before* the film starts.  If you leave the theater, even for
five minutes, you will never figure out what's going on when you get back.
This is a very dense plot, and much of what is important about the
relationships between the various people is given in "toss-away" lines.
This, of course, is a lot like real life, where people generally do not say,
"Well, ever since Tom passed Bill over for that promotion, Bill has had it
in for Tom," but rather things like, "You shouldn't be surprised at what
Bill did; after all, remember that promotion."
     Unfortunately, this film has come and gone in most areas (or, more
likely, not come at all).  Luckily, this means that it will probably be on
videocassette in a few months.  While the wide screen is better for the
appreciation of the technical details in this film, the ability to pause,
play back, and in general analyze the script may make up for that loss.
This is a definite "must-see" film.

Title
Review for Final Fantasy: The Spirits Within (2001)
    CAPSULE: This very dark sci-fi fantasy is magnificent visually 
    but it has a nearly incoherent plot.  FINAL FANTASY is a 
    Japanese-American co-production entirely animated but with a 
    very real three-dimensional look and with very real-looking 
    characters.  In the year 2065 aliens that appear to us as 
    translucent images, but still very deadly creatures, have 
    invaded Earth.  Saving the Earth requires resorting to 
    semi-mystical means to understand and halt the enemy.  If this 
    film had been done in live-action the scenes more spectacular 
    than those of BLADERUNNER would have been hailed as a triumph.
    Rating: 6 (0 to 10), high +1 (-4 to +4)
The art of the animated film continues to evolve before our eyes 
at an incredible rate.  It seems that one animated film after 
another is released and advances the art of animation.  I 
personally was very impressed with the visual images created in 
TITAN A.E.  But there are images in FINAL FANTASY that go well 
beyond the power of that film's animation.  The one problem is 
that if I applaud this film it will have to be mostly on the 
imagination of the concepts and on the visuals.  I don't think the 
story was a very good one.  And the uncertain terms in which I say 
that are intentional.  The telling of the story and the 
explanation of what is going on lies somewhere in the range 
between terse and incoherent.  I frequently had no idea what was 
happening in the plot, thought FINAL FANTASY was never failed to 
be an enjoyable film to watch.
The greatest part of what was remarkable about the film was the 
animation work.  The entire film is done in a three-dimensional 
technique.  Every single image is as three-dimensional as a live 
action film.  Of course, I am afraid one could always distinguish 
the images from real live action.  And that is (intentionally) 
praising the animation with faint criticism.  The computer-
generated images were almost photographic.  And what images they 
were!  There were planet-scapes and futuristic battlefields.  
There were alien monsters of towering height.  There were things 
that cannot be described; they have to be seen.
The story opens in 2065, with the Earth already mostly destroyed 
and conquered by a diaphanous life form from space.  Well, not 
just one diaphanous life form, but a whole class of gossamer life 
forms.  There are things that are insect-like and things that look 
like floating dragons.  It is like a whole planet of creatures are 
cooperating and taking part in the invasion.  Why?  Dr. Sid 
(voiced by Donald Sutherland) and his protege Dr. Aki Ross (Ming-
Na) want to find out.  The creatures seem to burrow into the 
ground then attack with deadly potency.  Humans have reacted by 
retreating to force-field protected cities.  A guard of power-
suited soldiers protects these cities and what is left of the 
human race.  Dr. Sid believes in the Gaia theory that planets are 
like a living organism with self-protection mechanisms.  Perhaps 
they can be triggered to protect the planet.  But Sid and Aki have 
to act fast.  Aki's body has been invaded by one form of the 
aliens' essence.  AIDS-like it will prove deadly if the nature of 
the aliens is not better understood soon.  Hironobu Sakaguchi, who 
is connected with the Final Fantasy video games wrote the story 
for this film as well as directed and acted as executive producer.  
Jeff Vintar and Al Reinert wrote the screenplay.
Generally in an animated film of this sort, I complain that any 
starving actor could have gotten a good job doing the voice of an 
animated character.  It usually seems wasteful and useless to give 
these voice roles to established and successful actors.  In this 
film it really did serve a purpose.  The animation technique makes 
the characters realistic and even gives them some marvelous facial 
expression, but it leaves them seeming cold and without much 
personality.  That makes it hard to keep straight who is who.  One 
thing that helped was that I found it easy to track four of the 
characters because they spoke with voices I immediately 
recognized.  Those were Alec Baldwin, Steve Buscemi, Donald 
Sutherland, and James Woods.  I probably should have recognized 
the voice of Ving Rhames, but did not.  The main character is 
played by Ming-Na best known for her roles in THE JOY LUCK CLUB 
and in the various Disney productions in which she plays the 
Chinese historic figure Mulan.  What is a little disconcerting is 
not that the voices are familiar, but that the faces do not 
resemble those of the actors.  Dr. Sid may have unmistakably 
sounded like Donald Sutherland, but he looked very different.  I 
kept expecting to see Dr. Sid with the Sutherland face.
This film from Square Pictures (whose logo is a rectangle) is 
animated to be just one step from live action.  The viewer may 
come away not understanding the story or the future Earth on which 
is it set, but he will have seen some marvelous images set to the 
tune of some really terrible music.  I rate the film a 6 on the 0 
to 10 scale and a high +1 on the -4 to +4 scale.
