Authors
Tyler
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Gandhi (1982)
In a society rife with Robin Williams waterworks and Ben Affleck angst,
it's nice to have an occasional jolt of truth.  Gandhi, while a couple
of decades old now, still has that bold-faced honesty which we find so
often lacking in many contemporary films.
Gandhi stars Ben Kingsley in a retelling of the life and times of
revered Indian leader Mohandas Gandhi, renowned peace lover, sage, and
all around worldly wise man.  There is little told here that cannot be
read in any history book, for Gandhi is not some sort of Hollywood
trumped up, Pearl Harbored dramatization of history.  Rather, it's just
the facts, nothing but truth.
Yet for all its realistic honesty and pure dedication to the truth of
the life and times of this amazing man, Gandhi's strength does not come
from its script nor from its direction.  Its writing is nothing more
than a history book, put down on in script form.  Its direction, while
well done, lacks any noteworthy flair or creativity.  Both script and
camera serve only as a canvas upon which the masterful Ben Kingsley
paints a touchingly lifelike picture of one of the greatest men in
history.
Gandhi was a private and humble man, a thing which Kingsley reflects
with tender care.  His dialogue is not extensive, nor does he engage in
long, rambling speeches.  His eyes speak humility, his movements speak
love.  He is the embodiment of everything Gandhi was, or was supposed to
have been, without the need for showy displays of acting talent or
loudly proclaimed diatribes.
Sometimes, there is nothing more powerful than the truth.  No matter how
it is delivered, Gandhi is a film of and about truth.  By the movie's
end, Mohandas Gandhi is reduced to a battered and aged man, resembling
more an elderly, green Jedi master than a world-changing leader.  But
his message is not weakened, nor is its honesty.  And for that, Gandhi
is a film not to be missed.
Director: Richard Attenborough
Producer: Richard Attenborough
Writer: John Briley
Starring: Ben Kingsley, Candice Bergon, Edward Fox, Martin Sheen, John
Gielgud, Trevor Howard, John Mills, Saeed Jaffri, Geraldine James
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com
