Authors
Michael Soukup
Number of Reviews
3

Title
Review for Crossing Delancey (1988)
     Joan Micklin Silver's CROSSING DELANCY is a gem that should be cherished
by filmgoers.  One doesn't want to overpraise a film like this because it
deserves to be enjoyed as one would a light dessert.  It is not a heavy
cinematic feast, but a delightful romantic truffle.
     Isabelle (Amy Irving) is a modern career woman of thirty-three living in
Manhattan.  She is fulfilled by her work, has terrific friends but is
unattached romantically.  However, she is not "holding her breath" waiting for
"Mr. Right"; she is perfectly comfortable without a man in her life.  Her
grandmother (Reizl Bozyk) has other ideas.  She hires a marriage broker (Sylvia
Miles) to find a husband for Issy.  What ensues is a clash between Issy's
modern way of life and the traditional values of her grandmother.
     Micklin Silver has pitched the film perfectly.  It is sweet and
sentimental without being saccharine; it is wise and funny without being
preachy or silly.  Each scene is packed with wit and warmth.  These characters
seem real.  The humor is the humor of everyday life and not contrived sitcom
shenanigans.  Susan Sandler is credited with the wondrous screenplay.
     The acting is exceptional.  Irving is perfect in the lead but the show
stealers are Bozyk as her grandmother and Miles as the marriage broker.  Miles
literally chews the scenery and is hilarious.  Look for these two when the
year-end award nominations are announced.

Title
Review for Gorillas in the Mist (1988)
     GORILLAS IN THE MIST unfortunately draws its style from its many Hollywood
"biopic" predecessors.  It's earnest, straightforward, and without much point.
Indeed, the filmmakers have dragged out the hoary old devices of a love
interest, the faithful servant, and the wizened older-woman-as-advice-giver.
The film is almost painful in its predictability.
     The film opens with Dian Fossey (Sigourney Weaver) rushing in to catch the
last of a speech by Dr. Louis Leaky (read "exposition").  She, of course, is
single-minded (read "character development") in her attempts to corner Leaky
and talk with him about going to Africa to study the near extinct mountain
gorilla.  After two seconds of hesitation (suspense!), he agrees.  From them on
we get several standard episodes that could be borrowed from nearly any
"adventure" movie script.  Dian arrives in Africa.  See naive Dian overloaded
with luggage (comedy!).  See determined Dian patiently track the elusive
gorillas.  See Dian get discouraged and consider giving it all up only to be
talked out of it by the "Wizened Older Woman."  The film continues in this vein
but without any real insight into Fossey, her work, or what her work might have
meant.  The audience can take nothing away with them.  The film indicts itself
on this score when it has to insert a title card at the end explaining the
importance of Fossey's work.  If it has to be explained, the film doesn't seem
to have accomplished much.  This is biography solely as entertainment--and even
then pretty pallid entertainment.
     I don't mean to imply that this film is inept.  It certainly is not.
Indeed, the "gorilla effects" by Rick Baker are more than convincing.  [Most of
the gorillas, however, are real. -Moderator]  The acting, too, is generally
good.  Michael Apted is certainly a capable director (AGATHA, COAL MINER'S
DAUGHTER) but the entire package is limp and lacking in imagination and energy.
For a cinematic biography that really soars, rent Alex Cox's SID & NANCY one
more time.

Title
Review for Leviathan (1989)
LEVIATHAN  (no stars out of four)
Director:  George P. Cosmatos 
    Cast:  Peter Weller, Amanda Pays, Richard Crenna, Hector Elizondo,
           Daniel Stern, Lisa Eilbacher, Ernie Hudson, Meg Foster
     Okay, no one expects a movie like LEVIATHAN to be great.  Or even
necessarily very good.  But even in this era of lowered expectations, LEVIATHAN
proves that one's expectations can never be too low.  This is not an underwater
ripoff of ALIEN; it is a virtual remake.  But Mr. Cosmatos, you're no Ridley
Scott.
     All of the elements of Scott's film are assembled.  As the following
diagram illustrates, Shack Number 7's crew matches very nicely with the  crew
of the Nostromo.  
          Tom Skerritt ------------->  Peter Weller
      Sigourney Weaver ------------->  Amanda Pays
              Ian Holm ------------->  Richard Crenna
          Yaphet Kotto ------------->  Ernie Hudson
   Veronica Cartwright ------------->  Lisa Eilbacher
    Harry Dean Stanton ------------->  Hector Elizondo
     This is not an exaggeration.  It gets even worse.  While out mining one
day, two of the crew members (attired in underwater gear that closely resembles
 space suits) discover a ship (!).  Needless to say,  through a
series of events, a monster invades the mining shack and weeds down the size of
the crew.  At one point, the crew is even sitting around complaining about the
size of their shares (homage or plagiarism--you be the judge!).  And, of
course, there is "The Company" which may or may not be lying to them.   Hmmm.
Where have I seen all of this before?  
     Obviously LEVIATHAN isn't original.  Okay.  That was kind of obvious from
the outset.  But what is unforgivable is LEVIATHAN'S utter ineptitude.  Every
opportunity for suspense or tension is frittered away.  Everything is flat and
uninspired.  Cosmatos simply doesn't know how to build a scene.  He seems more
interested in getting Ms. Pays into her underwear (not once but twice) than
moving the story along.  By the end, it has become so completely ridiculous
that there is nothing left to do but laugh.  Except I wasn't laughing.  This is
the kind of moviemaking that is really depressing--aiming low and missing.
