Authors
Donald J Marion
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Jin zhi yu ye (1980)
     Labeling this romantic comedy derivative would be like saying that
King Kong was larger than your average gorilla.  Basically a remake of
VICTOR/VICTORIA, it borrows its basic premise from PYGMALION and its
climax directly from WHEN HARRY MET SALLY.  In between there are other
scenes and situations that seem taken from American films, but at some
point I began seeing them everywhere.  For Leslie Cheung, most familiar
to Western audiences as the "female" opera performer in FAREWELL TO MY
CONCUBINE, this is another involvement with the theme of
cross-dressing, although this time someone else is the dresser.
     The movie's title is a classical euphemism for relatives of the
Emperor, people who derived high social position and privilege from
their kinship, no matter how distant.  In this case, it refers to the
entourage of Cheung's character, an "emperor" in his own milieu.  In
Hong Kong's "Cantopop" music world, Sam Koo is at the top:  a star
performer turned producer, he has become a contemporary legend.  A
renowned queenmaker (he only produces female singers) he has fame,
money, and his protege/mistress, the beautiful and sexy Rose, has just
won her third straight "Best Artist" award at Hong Kong's version of
the Grammys.  Out of boredom and a feeling of emptiness, Sam decides to
nurture a new star, only this time the newcomer will be selected from
open auditions of ordinary people, and for once will be a male.
     One of those auditioning is a star-struck young woman named Wing
who disguises herself as a man to get into the auditions.  She has
neither hope nor intention of winning:  she just wants to get a closeup
look at Sam and Rose, her ideal of the perfect couple.  But Rose has
grown angry at Sam for spending more time on the project than on her,
and she challenges him to select Wing, the least talented of the lot.
He accepts, and events develop from there.  Wing is moved into Sam's
home for the duration of "his" musical training, and soon becomes
Rose's friend and confidant.  Much of the comedy of course stems from
gender confusion:  Rose is convinced the newcomer is gay, since even
her most blatant flirtations elicit no reponse; Sam's gay friends in
the music world reach the opposite conclusion; and Sam becomes confused
about his own preference, as he finds himself increasingly attracted to
Wing.  The outcome is never in doubt, of course, with a happy ending
all around.
     While not exactly classic comedy, this is a pleasant reminder that
Hong Kong does turn out movies other than gangster or martial arts
epics.  Its likable characters provide some laughs and there are some
nice songs from Leslie Cheung and Liu Jialing, each of whom was a
top-ranked singer before turning to acting.  Also worth mentioning is
the subtitling, which can be unintentionally laughable in Asian films,
but in this case is done in standard American idiom.
     Rating on a scale of 1 to 10, with one being an absolute disaster
and 10 being required viewing in film studies courses:  5.

