Authors
Rory Mackay
Number of Reviews
8

Title
Review for Titanic (1997)
_In Brief:_ This film needs no introduction. If you haven't heard of it,
then you must have been up in space on a sabbatical, and if you haven't
seen it -- well, I suspect you're in a small minority! First thing's
firstis it all it's hyped up to be? Well, yesand no. It's a good film,
and there's a lot to like about it, but it's not without its problems.
When I saw the first trailer for "Titanic", it was when I went to see
"Bean" last Summer, I think, my intial reaction was -- ain't that downright
sick to make a disaster movie out of such a dreadful, real-life tragedy?! I
mean, what's happened to Hollywood's script-writers, have they run entirely
out of new ideas? Gads, whatever next, I asked myself, how about an action
film based on Hiroshima starring Jean Claude Van Damme? I was not entirely
filled with anticipation, but then I wasn't alone in that respect.
It's when it came out in the cinema, to rave reviews (well, mostly) and
anyone who'd been to see it seemed disturbingly obsessed by it that I
started to take notice! I didn't see the film until several months after
its release (by which time my sister had seen it about four times!), so I
went with a slightly more open mind, but I still didn't think I'd enjoy it
much. Did I? Yes and no. 
Mainly yes, I'm happy to say. The first hour or so was beautifully done,
not so much because of the scripting (I'll talk about that later) but
because the re-created ship and sets were stunning to look at, as was
Cameron's directing, and the performances of the principal cast were so
strong that the "human" aspect of the story, the romance between Rose (Kate
Winslet) and Jack (Leonardo DiCaprio), was enchanting.
The film is told via flashback, with Gloria Stuart playing the elderly Rose
in the modern day (you knew that, a' course! :-) ). Well, it's an often
effective device to use in storytelling -- though sometimes it can fall
flat. Does it work here? In script form it doesn't add all that much to the
story. What does add a lot to the story is Gloria Stuart, whose stunning
performance is the strongest, most moving of the film. Her presence brings
a much deeper level of passion, and depth to the story, and though her
appearances are relatively brief, the film would have suffered without her.
Also impressive are DiCaprio and Winslet, who wholly succeed in rising
above the often poor dialogue, and the bond they form is both heartfelt and
moving. It's an old story, you know -- forbidden love ala Romeo and Juliet
-- but it works, and Jack's "rescuing" Rose (in both literal and figurative
senses) and teaching her to live life for what counts was pointed and
touching. In fact, I enjoyed the first half of the film a lot, largely
because Winslet and DiCaprio bring such and charm, energy to the romance.
It's engaging, touching and very enjoyable. There's more than a tinge of
poignancy to it as well, simply because you know it's not going to be a
happy ending. 
Which leads us to the second half of the film. We all knew it was coming.
I'm sure director Cameron was looking forward with eager anticipation to
it, because as he's stated in interviews, the real thrust of the story (for
him) was the sinking, and the Jack/Rose romance was a merely a manipulative
plot device to get you emotionally into the film. I think that understates
the importance of the romance, as I found it far more enjoyable than an
hour of watching people die. The iceberg arrives, and the Captain announces
that Titanic will have sunk in about an hour. And it is an hour. My
goodness, we don't miss a second of that hour 
Gratuitous? Well, perhaps not by today's standards, I'm sure there's been
far worse produced under the banner of "entertainment" in other films. But
I certainly wasn't prepared for how shocking and graphic the last hour or
so would be. Not that I'd expect the word "understatement" to be part of
Cameron's vocabulary (he who brought us such, umm, vivid films as
"Terminator 2" and "Aliens"). Is it overdone? I thought so. Understatement
can sometimes work wonders in conveying tragedy. No, no one expected a
happy ending, but I didn't quite expect the horrendously shocking and
powerful scenes we were bombarded throughout the film's second half. Still,
whether it was overdone and heavy-handed or not, if it was the shock-factor
Cameron was after it worked, because I was shocked and moved, in fact I
spent most of the last hour in tears!
You really couldn't help but get emotionally involved, whether it was
wishing someone would knock that dreadfully psychotic fiance of Rose's
overboard or desperately hoping that Rose would rescue Jack, or that Jack
would rescue Rose, or that they would both survive. Perhaps the most
harrowing scene was when the ship has sunk, and those that sunk along with
the ship freeze to death on the water surface. The bit where Rose lets go
of Jack's hand, while promising she'll never let go in her heart was
particularly heart-wrenching, and the sight of rescue boats sailing amid
the ocean of corpses was a pretty powerful image, to put no fine a point on
it. I loved the ending, however, which was both moving and slightly
uplifting following the horror of the past hour and a half.
So, we've established that the film is powerful and moving, if the last
hour was rather excessive. Haven't mentioned the script. Plot-wise it's OK,
though the Jack/Rose relationship was beautifully developed, but I've a
feeling that's to the actors credit if anything. As for the dialoguewell,
Titanic is set in 1912. It's a period drama. But I saw very little
indication of period in so far as the dialogue is concerned. Did they
really use phrases like "Goddamn it!" back in the turn of the century? I
doubt it. Would someone talk like this: "Do ya love the guy or what?". I
doubt it. Is such dialogue as "I saw the iceberg, and I see it in your eyes
now" not just a bitclumsy? Yes it is. A little more attention to dialogue
would not have gone astray, and Cameron himself is to blame (he wrote the
script). Stick with directing, dude.
But its more than redeemed by the acting, with DiCaprio and Winslet on fine
form, ably supported by a strong cast. Star of the show was Gloria Stuart,
though -- why didn't she win that Oscar?! After all, they were throwing
Oscars at "Titanic" left, right and centre, but Gloria was perhaps the most
deserving nominee. Directing-wise Cameron does a spectacular job. Like I
said, his vision was a bit excessive, but at least he directed it well. I
haven't even mentioned James Horner's beautiful score. Utterly heavenly,
though when your Dad and sister play the soundtrack a lot you do start to
get a bit bored with it! ;-) 
I've finished my rant, which lasted a lot longer than I thought it would!
Just leaves a couple of questions; was it worth all those Oscars? Hell,
don't talk to me about Oscars. Bloomin' farce. It was deserving in a number
of departments, though. Last question; is it, as some suggest, one of the
best films of all-time? Nope, I don't think so. It's certainly one of the
most powerful and memorable films I've ever seen, but I don't think it
quite ranks as one of my all-time favourites. And as for the fact they're
reportedly making a "Titanic 2"well I guess that's typical Hollywood for
you! 
For the regularly updated TV and Film Reviews, check out my new website
"The Cool Critique" -- http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Bungalow/4960
(best viewed with Internet Explorer).

Title
Review for Romeo + Juliet (1996)
THE CREDITS: Directed by Baz Luhrmann; Starring Leonardo DiCaprio, Claire
Danes, John Leguizamo, Harold Perrineau, Pete Postlethwaite, Paul Sorvino
THE VERDICT: Bizarre isn't the word, but it's still a reasonably successful
re-working of an immortal classic.
Now here's an odd film! I almost still don't quite know what to make of it.
You can almost hear the initial discussions of the studio on deciding to
make this film --
Producer #1: "Hey, dude, I found like this waaay old play by some dude
named Willy Shakespeare and it's far out!"
Producer #2: "Wow, dude! You've just given me the cooolest idea! Why don't
we like do a film about it!"
Producer #1: "Yeah! That'd be bodacious! But it's set in these like
prehistoric times with all this 
well-weird speech!"
Producer #2: "Well, I guess we could like...set it in modern times!"
Producer #1: "No, make it the future - that way it'll look most
triumphant!"
Producer #2: "Yeah, and we could cast like two reeeeally good-looking
actors in the title roles, 
and have lots of loud music and funky camera movements..."
Producer #1: "And lots of explosions and car chases and guns and drugs and
more explosions! But what will we do about all this weird dialogue? Should
we get some dude to translate it?"
Producer #2: "Nah! That'll take too much time, let's just leave it as it
is! Oh, this film is going to be sooooo cool!"
Cynical - moi?! Seriously, I don't see a much higher line of thought than
that going into this. Do they pull it off? Yes, I think they do.
First of all, it's just bizarre seeing Shakespeare done with drugs, guns,
car chases and police helicopters! But the most striking thing about the
film is Baz Luhrmann's off-beat directing. He's obviously going for fast
'n' furious, and that it most certainly is - never more so than the film's
opening scenes. Frankly he goes far too over-the-top - the camera-work is
dizzyingly frenetic going on incoherent. It's certainly visually stunning,
and I mean that in quite a literal sense! He almost gives the impression of
a director gone completely insane! Despite this, his approach is sometimes
quite stylish, sometimes funny, sometimes annoying.
Thankfully Luhrmann calms down a bit once we get deeper into the film,
though the whole thing remains more than a little excessive. From the
costumes, to the sets, lighting - and even the performances - everything
seems to be done deliberately over-the-top. Is this to make it feel
"operatic"? And why hasn't the dialogue been updated along with the
setting? Is there some special significance? And what's with the
"apocalyptic look", anyway? Just a few of the questions that popped into
mind while I watched this.
The first half of the film left me grappling with the questions and musings
above. Despite the delightfully big, bold and flamboyant party scenes,
where Romeo and Juliet first meet, I felt the first hour or so was a little
choppy - Luhrmann seems to be concentrating so hard on making the film look
funky that he seems to neglect the actual storyline itself - almost as if
the whole Romeo and Juliet affair is an afterthought. However, once things
start to go wrong - the chain of events that lead to the inevitable tragedy
- that the film really starts to find its feet.
The film's second half kicks into gear with the violent, rather excessive
scenes where the Capulet Tybalt murders Mercutio, and in a fit of rage
Romeo kills Tybalt. Luhrmann's directing actually starts to prove quite
effective; ranging from his adept handling of the build-up to Juliet's
faked death, and the final tomb scene, which Luhrmann, to his credit,
manages tenderly and poignantly. It's this closing scene that makes the
film - it's moving, stirring and perfectly captures the tragedy of the
story. The final pull-back shot is beautifully executed.
Haven't mentioned the performances yet! Leonardo DiCaprio and Claire Danes
make a gorgeous-looking Romeo and Juliet, and they handle their roles
beautifully. DiCaprio gives one of his strongest performances - not only
does he succeed in delivering the dialogue convincingly, but he propels
emotion at the screen with real feeling - ranging from his pain at
Mercutio's death to his rage toward Tybalt, and his innate pain and sorrow
at Juliet's death. If anything he perhaps over-plays it a little, but that
doesn't matter because everything else about the film is! Danes is equally
fine as Juliet, though she doesn't really get much to sink her teeth into
until near the end. I'm not actually too sure about the resonance of much
of the scenes they had together - didn't seem to be that much spark,
particularly considering that these are supposed to be literature's most
infamous lovers. Still, as I said above, the final scene is every bit as
tragic and heart-breaking as it ought to be. 
Summing up; it took a while to get used to Luhrmann's rather crazy
directing-style, and I still have some reservations about why he makes
certain choices. You almost feel as if he spend too much time making the
film look good while neglecting the actual thrust of the story - the
romance. Still, it's hard to lose when you're using one of the greatest
plays ever written, and the performances are good.  All in all, I think
this is a rather successful adaptation of Shakespeare's classic play,
designed for a nineties' audience. Not perfect, but still quite good.
-*-*-*-*-*-*-*-*- 
For more regularly-updated Film and TV reviews, check out my site!
http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Bungalow/4960
-*-*-*-*-*-*-*-*- 
Review written by and (c) Rory B Mackay, 1998

Title
Review for Legends of the Fall (1994)
THE CREDITS: Directed by Edward Zwick  Starring Brad Pitt, Anothony
Hopkins, Aidan Quinn, Henry Thomas, Julia Ormond
THE VERDICT: Grim and unyielding, but nevertheless a powerful and striking
epic.
You know it's often the case that while the majority of films keep you
occupied (hopefully even entertained!) for their duration, afterwards
you're often left with a feeling of indifference. A really good film should
have the ability to either stir your senses, engage your mind or touch your
heart. Every so often you come across a film like LEGENDS OF THE FALL, a
film which not only succeeds in doing the above, but also quite literally
punches you in the stomach! It's not a very pleasant sensation, but by
heck, it means the film-makers are doing something right!
LEGENDS OF THE FALL is a downbeat tale about three brothers, spanning the
American Indian Wars through the First World War and beyond. It's an epic
in the true sense of the world - spanning several years (and several hours
in real-time!). Director Edward Zwick does a masterful job coaxing terrific
performances from his all-star cast, and milking the beautifully location
scenery and passing events for all they're worth.
There are, however, some problems with the plotting. First of all, it's a
very grim tale - with not even a particularly happy ending, either. I can't
actually think of any real moment of happiness throughout the entire film -
there may be the odd glimmer, but I assure you it's a given that tragedy
will be lurking around the corner. There's also a rather tenuous connection
with the Native American Indians which isn't fully capitalised on. The
story is related by an Indian friend of the boy's father, One Stab, played
by Gordon Tootoosis. Other than that there seems little point to this plot
element other than glamour, which is a bit of a shame. There seems to be a
conscious attempt to somehow elevate the tale to almost "legend" status,
hence the title of the film. Sometimes it works, but generally it just
seems a bit superficial. It's a family drama, which occassionally veers
into melodrama, but is bolstered by the talent of its cast and director.
That's about it; I don't really buy into any deeper pretensions the film
may have about itself.
Kudos must be paid to the actors, who elevate a script which may have
otherwise descended into melodramatic hokum. Brad Pitt does a marvellous
job as the film's lead, the intense, disturbed Tristan. Pitt's performance
very effectively conveys a tortured soul, and with the focus primarily
resting on him as the film progresses, he carries the film nicely.
Unfortunately, Anthony Hopkins seems rather wasted as the father,
particularly as he spends half the film paralysed from a stroke and unable
to speak! But if he is only window dressing, then he's first class window
dressing at that! Julia Ormond also gives a strong performance as the
lovely Susannah, who finds herself torn between the brothers. Acting wise,
this is top of the range, and very often the performances elevate many a
scene from maudlin to emotionally poignant.
As I believe I mentioned above, director Zwick does a brilliant job
bringing to life a potentially tricky film. Whilst some lesser efforts
easily trip up when they try to do sweeping epics that span many years, for
the most part LEGENDS OF THE FALL flows effortlessly. The cinematography is
utterly beautiful, and the location work in the gorgeous hills of Montana
spectacular. Oh, and also to be highly commended is James Horner's
bombastic, majestic score - this guy knows how to score a film!
So, summing up then, a flawed but sufficient script is beautifully
performed and executed. It gets the thumbs up, but I would warn anything
thinking of watching it that it is certainly not feel-good viewing. It's a
grim and depressing tale, but brought to life by its magnificient acting,
directing and production values.
-*-*-*-*-*-*-*-*- 
For more regularly-updated Film and TV reviews, check out my site!
http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Bungalow/4960
-*-*-*-*-*-*-*-*- 
Review written by and (c) Rory B Mackay, 1998

Title
Review for Full Monty, The (1997)
In Brief: Fun, enjoyable, amusing and touchingbut maybe a tad over-rated.
THE FULL MONTY, I believe, has become the most successful British film of
all time, surpassing FOUR WEDDINGS AND A FUNERAL which previously held that
distinction. To be honest, its success is perhaps a bit baffling -- I mean
it certainly has a lot going for it (a lot more than its title or premise
would seem to suggest) but it's not the type of film that seems to thrive
in the Film industry nowadays. It's low-key, understated, with no real
big-star names (perhaps excepting Robert Carlyle), no big action scenes, or
no gimmicky special effects. Unfortunately, that's the kind of film that
seems to be most popular these days, and low-key character pieces tend to
slip by unnoticed, regardless of how good they are.
In a way, the success garnered by THE FULL MONTY is quite encouraging. It
goes to show that we're capable of watching and enjoying something other
than the brainless or violent mediocrity than generally tends to
proliferate Hollywood. THE FULL MONTY is a quiet, rather unassuming
character drama (touted as more of a comedy, I know) which has heart. Let's
face it, though, based on its premise -- unemployed guys who decide to
become strippers -- it doesn't exactly sound enthralling. If it hadn't been
for its critical and commercial success, I very much doubt I'd have had the
urge to go and see it.
But it takes a potentially iffy premise and builds on it, adding some
emotional resonance and milking it for all the humour its worth. It has to
be said that as a comedy, THE FULL MONTY isn't one of the funniest I've
seen. The humour is very much understated, and whilst some may find this
disappointing, it's still quite effective. However, the film's biggest
triumph is the adept way it portrays an ensemble of interesting,
three-dimensional and very human characters. It avoids lapsing into
redundant sentimentality but still manages to be quietly touching. It
touches upon some very real issues that affect real people, such as
divorce, impotence, and unemployment. It looks at how we tend to value
ourselves on the jobs we have and the money we make, and how losing that
stability can shatter one's self esteem.
The film follows several blokes who have recently lost their jobs, and they
decide to become male strippers. The justification is rather flimsy, but
it's merely a plot device - the real gist of it is them reclaiming their
sense of self-worth, realising that it's basically up to you whether you
lose your sense of purpose or simply move on in life. That's a relevant,
important message to get across, and I suspect that's why the film has
struck a chord in so many people. It's a feel-good film, not too reliant on
its slippery plot nor its humour as much as its undertones of optimism.
THE FULL MONTY boasts some charismatic performances by its solid cast,
including Robert Carlyle, who gives his characteristically understated, yet
compelling performance. Directing-wise it's certainly proficient, if
perhaps lacking much visual flair. As far as production goes, well, it's
not a film that required a huge budget, and all the more effective for it,
being eloquent in its simplicity. 
The more I think about this one, the more I like it. But it's not, as some
suggest, one of the very best films ever made. It takes a good while to get
going, and the plot itself is pretty thin. The humour, as I've noted, feels
rather restrained, and as well-played and poignant as it is, the character
drama often lacks the emotion to give it real punch. What makes THE FULL
MONTY so enjoyable is, to a large extent, the reasoning behind the plot.
The story's wonderfully optimistic, feel-good underpinnings are both
inspiring and uplifting. And that more than overcomes the film's (few)
shortcomings.
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
For more Film and TV Reviews, check out my site!
http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Bungalow/4960

Title
Review for Sliding Doors (1998)
THE CREDITS: Directed by Peter Howitt; Starring Gwynyth Paltrow, John
Hannah, John Lynch
THE VERDICT: A solid, innovative high-concept story that's well-executed
and quite effective. Not quite a masterpiece, but there's a lot to like
about this film. 
Did you happen to read my review of THE FULL MONTY the other week? If so,
you may recall I described the film as a quiet, rather unassuming character
drama with heart. The same could equally be said of SLIDING DOORS, which is
not at all dissimilar in style or tone. However, there is one big
difference between the two films -- the plot. Frankly, THE FULL MONTY was
extremely lucky to pull of its rather flimsy plot about male strippers,
whereas right from the offset SLIDING DOORS had a no-lose script.
It's an fresh slant on that most eternal of questions -- "what if?". Who
among us can honestly say they never ask themselves "what if I'd only done
such-and-suchwhat if I'd acted differently in situation x"? Well, SLIDING
DOORS actually answers that question, in the case of Helen (Paltrow) who
narrowly misses her train by a half second. But we also see, in a parallel
universe if you like, a Helen "B" who does catch the train, and how doing
so affects her life in so many ways.
The film follows the unfolding lives of both Helens. The Helen who caught
the train arrives home early and finds her husband Gerry (John Lynch) in
bed with another woman. She dumps him, and soon meets the ever-so charming
James (John Hannah) who soon succeeds in winning her heart. At his
suggestion she sets up her own, successful P.R. business. This Helen
becomes a winner in love and business. But the "other" Helen -- the one who
missed that train -- never discovered her husband was having an affair (at
least not until much later on in the film), and is trapped in a menial job,
living with an adulterous husband. 
First of all, you have to give credit to writer Peter Howitt. It's a very
tricky concept to dramatise, and the film could easily have degenerated
into a convoluted, confusing shambles. But it doesn't. Both storylines are
intertwined beautifully, and I, for one, had no difficulty following them
at all (of course it helped that both Helen's had different hairdos!). It's
not until the end of the film that both storylines again converge in a
clever, unpredictable and very satisfying conclusion. I'm sure it wasn't
easy to come up with an ending that would tie up both storylines, and I was
well aware that a lot of the success of this film would depend on its
resolution. I won't give anything away in case you've yet to see the film,
but the conclusion features a poignant but brilliantly conceived twist that
neatly bookends 
the two storylines in an appropriately bittersweet coda.
As I've said, it's a very good film, but there are one or two slight
problems that prevent it from being truly outstanding. As in THE FULL
MONTY, the comedy is underplayed and the character drama maybe a little too
low-key for some tastes. You might also notice that the film tends to focus
on Helen's love life more than anything. That's all good and well -- it's a
romantic comedy, after all -- but it almost gives the impression that the
film is under-ambitious. Heck, I don't mean I expected anything
ridiculously over-the-top like FOREST GUMP (Look! She's a sports star! Now
she's a war hero! A shrimp boat captain! A millionaire!!). But it just all
feels a little too low-brow. Thankfully it's just a minor niggle, and it
doesn't hurt the film that badly at all.
The splendid performances of the cast give the film a remarkable boost, and
more than overcome any minor problems that might otherwise mar this film.
Gwynyth Paltrow is perfectly cast in the lead role. Not only is her London
twang faultless, but she's an engaging, likeable screen presence and she
carries the film magnificently. John Hannah is similarly good as the
charismatic James, though he isn't actually given much to do in the role
other than "be charming"! John Lynch also does a pretty good job as Helen's
two-timing husband, managing to be sleazy but likeable at the same time.
Certainly no problems the acting department, and the directing is equally
competent.
Summing up -- SLIDING DOORS is a well-plotted and thought-provoking
treatment of that ol' "What if?" scenario. Sometimes a little too mellow
for its own good, but an otherwise intriguing, beautifully-performed and
touching character drama that's well worth a look.
-*-*-*-*-*-*-*-*- 
For more regularly-updated Film and TV reviews, check out my site!
http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Bungalow/4960
-*-*-*-*-*-*-*-*- 
Review written by and (c) Rory B Mackay, 1998

Title
Review for Wayne's World (1992)
THE CREDITS: Director: Penelope Spheeris; Starring: Mike Meyers, Dana
Carvey, Rob Lowe, Tia Carrere
THE VERDICT: You know something, people? I just *love* this film! Party on!
Despite being yet another entry into the American Teenage Airhead (tm)
genre (ala BILL AND TED), WAYNE'S WORLD is a resounding triumph. For a film
based around two brainless idiots, it's actually surprisingly intelligent -
the writing is sharp, the jokes witty and the script is packed with
well-observed parodies and social comment.
The film is a visual feast of gags, and the come fast and furious. Forget
the plot, because there's really not that much to it, but it's executed
with such energy, enthusiasm, wit and finesse, that WAYNE'S WORLD is a
winner - big time! Mike Meyers and Dana Carvey star as two "himbos", Wayne
and Garth, who run a cheap, tacky (and supposedly funny!) public access TV
show which is picked up by a big network (headed by the slimey Rob Lowe)
with the intent to exploit it. The plot does afford some clever satire with
regard to the scruples (or lack thereof) of television advertising, but it
plays second fiddle to some inspired performances and some genuinely
hilarious gags. Myers does a great job as ageing teenager Wayne, and Ron
Lowe is suitable sleazy as the double-crossing network exec, but it is Dana
Carvey who steals the show as the geeky Garth! He gets some wonderful
moments and some of the best lines - and there's a hysterical sequence
where he sings "Foxy Lady".
WAYNE'S WORLD is one of the most inventive, consistently funny and
downright endearing comedies I've seen in a long time. Needless to say,
it's also responsible for a number of phrases that have since crept into
our everyday vocabulary! Sch-wing! 
-*-*-*-*-*-*-*-*- 
For more regularly-updated Film and TV reviews, check out my site!
http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Bungalow/4960
-*-*-*-*-*-*-*-*- 
Review written by and (c) Rory B Mackay, 1998

Title
Review for Romy and Michele's High School Reunion (1997)
In Brief: Nothing original, or even that funny, but not without its charm.
Lisa Kudrow (Phoebe from "Friends") and Mira Sorvino star in this aimiable
comedy. Remember Jim Carrey's "Dumb and Dumber"? Well this film might well
have been named "Blonde and Blonder". It was a bit of a surprise, actually,
that Lisa Kudrow is basically playing a mirror image of her kooky "Friends"
character, Phoebe Buffay. Not that I mind, after all I love "Friends" and
Phoebe's probably my favourite character. It's just a wonder that Kudrow
agreed to star in a film that basically stereotypes her as the scatty
blonde. Still, she plays the part tremendously well, and joined by Mira
Sorvino -- well, there's too Phoebes!
The plot revolves around Romy and Michelle's impending High School reunion
(funnily enough!) and their attempts to make themselves appear more
successful than they have actually turned out ("You won't believe this, but
I invented the Post-it!"). Maybe you've already figured that there's
nothing terribly original or fresh about the plot. True, there's not, in
fact the film is riddled with cliches. But I don't really care, 'cos
they're fun cliches, and this is a fun film.
I'm not so sure it's that funny a film, though. There are some funny
moments, but it's more the type of comedy that'll have you quietly smiling
to yourself, occasionally giggling, as opposed to rolling around the floor
in hysterics. It's a quiet, gentle humour but quite enjoyable all the same.
Kudrow and Sorvino are made for the roles, and are a lot of fun throughout.
There are also a number of other engaging (if cliched) characters who were
good fun.
One thing I could have done without was the obligatory "Romy and Michelle
fall out" which popped up, jarringly, in the middle of the film. It felt
forced and unoriginal. We knew they'd make up by the end of the film,
anyway. Another annoying thing was one of those exceptionally frustrating
"Oh, I've just woken up -- the past half hour was all a dream!" sequences.
I wanted to cry out "Cheat! Cheat! CHEAT!"
So, summing up; the film is unashamedly unoriginal and maybe not quite as
funny as it could have been it's an enjoyable, feel-good yarn. Worth a
look.
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Bungalow/4960
Check out my site for regularly-updated Film and TV Reviews!

Title
Review for Clueless (1995)
In Brief: An awful lot better than I thought it would be. Definitely
designed to appeal to an elite taste, but it's well written, well performed
and quite charming nonetheless.
Just the other week I reviewed ROMY AND MICHELLE'S HIGH SCHOOL REUNION, and
this week it's CLUELESS. You might well worry about the fact I've been
watching too many "chick flicks", but the main reason is it's cheaper to
watch and review videos that my sister has hired than it is to pay for my
own ones! So, that's my reasoning. :-) To be honest, I didn't think
CLUELESS sounded particularly interesting, and I wasn't expecting a great
deal from it.
I was actually pleasantly surprised with what I saw. This could easily have
been a feature film version of the dreaded CLARISSA EXPLAINS IT ALL -- a
rather excruciating US 'sitcom', for those of you blissfully ignorant,
about an annoying all-American teen girl stereotype. One first glance the
two looked startlingly similar. CLUELESS is aboutyup, an all-American teen
girl stereotype, living in Beverly Hills. But, mercifully, the film is a
full hundred-percent less irritating and stilted than the aforementioned
series, and actually quite well-written and acted.
But like I said, it was treading near potentially dangerous territory.
Films about airhead American teenagers who have a lot more money than
brains have become something of a cliché, based on some sort of parody of
American teenagers in general. It was a novelty when this whole sub-genre
began (a lot inspired by BILL AND TED, perhaps?) but as with all things
cinematic, over-use tends to generate boredom. Luckily Clueless is a cut
above the rest, largely due to clever, sharp scripting with just the right
degree of self-indulgence to draw you into the story.
That said, it's not a film that'll appeal to everyone. It's obviously
targeted at teenage girls (my seventeen year old sister loves it), and I
don't suppose anyone over twenty-five will get much out of the film. I'm
not a girl, but I am a teenager, so I guess I fall into part of that
demographic! And I did, as I said, rather enjoy the film. I've certainly
been exposed to far worse in my time.
Alicia Silverstone does a marvellous job breathing charm and wit into a
potentially unsympathetic role, and she's a joy to watch. Other standout
performances include that of Dan Hedaya as Cher's grumpy father, who's a
delight to watch (Cher: "Daddy, this is my new friend Tai" Daddy: "Get out
my chair!") and veteran character actor Wallace Shawn as Cher's lovelorn
teacher. 
The last twenty minutes or so get a bit too bogged-down by focussing too
much Cher's love-life, forsaking the happy-go-lucky wit of the film's first
hour or so, but it still remains an enjoyable, well-performed and rather
endearing diversion. Worth a look, though - not to be ageist or anything -
it'll probably appeal more to the younger generation.
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
For more Film and TV Reviews check out my site!
http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Bungalow/4960
Written and (c) by Rory B Mackay - Emissary@goplay.com
