Authors
Nigel Bridgeman
Number of Reviews
9

Title
Review for Payback (1999)
Starring: Mel Gibson, Gregg Henry, Maria Bello & David Paymer
Written by: Brian Helgeland and Terry Hayes
Directed by: Brian Helgeland
It is always refreshing to see a superstar actor who gets paid more than
enough to forget about working for a living to want to take a chance and
play a less-than-savoury character as Mel Gibson does in Payback. Of
course, if I was being paid $25 million for one month's work, I'd probably
be willing to take risks as well, but that's neither here nor there.
Payback is based on a novel by Richard Stark (apparently actually Donald E.
Westlake, author of The Grifters, itself a fine crime film) which was also
filmed in the 1960s as Point Blank starring one of the toughest of tough
guys, Lee Marvin. The film opens with Gibson having recovered from being
shot several times in the back, by whom we don't know yet. All we know is
that Gibson, as Porter, isn't a happy chappy and is hellbent on getting the
money stolen from him back, and getting even in the process, no matter what
the consequences.
It turns out that the man he's after is Val (Gregg Henry), his sometime
partner with whom he stole a briefcase full of cash from a gang of Chinese
mobsters. Obviously not having much of a crisis of the soul, Val figures
Porter is dead and goes about using his share of the money to pay off a
debt to his employers. Porter, however, is the sort of man who holds a
grudge and once on his feet, goes about exacting revenge on the
double-crossing Val.
Gibson gives a terrific performance in the sort of role which he was born
to play, that of a slightly unhinged guy who doesn't mind beating up or
shooting people to get what he wants. You probably wouldn't see other
actors in his salary range take such an offbeat, out-of-character role such
as Porter (Jim Carrey won't be doing anything like this in a hurry after
what happened the last time he tried - The Cable Guy, anyone?). Harrison
Ford's idea of playing an unsympathetic character is Presumed Innocent; the
last time Schwarzenegger played a villain was Batman and Robin, which we
won't mention further; and has Stallone ever really played a villain at all?
This is not to say that Porter is a villain, per se. While he isn't the
sort of character you wouldn't want to get on the wrong side of, he's
nothing compared to some of the ones we are forced to watch in countless
bad thrillers and action films where they kill innocent people in the blink
of an eye or execute their right-hand men just to prove how mean they are.
Porter is only trying to get back what is not-so-rightfully his, which in a
way is almost understandable.
Payback is an enjoyable dramatic black comedy-thriller which won't be
remembered as being among Gibson's most important work, but is still one of
the finer films he's done. The only real problem with it is that, while
everything seems to work out in the end, I was left feeling something was
lacking; was that all? The ending looks as if it was tacked on at the last
minute, and the final voice-over doesn't ring true, even though it was used
to good effect elsewhere in the film-noir style the rest of the film
embodies. The film just ends far too suddenly, after a huge build-up in the
penultimate scenes.
A fine film, even though it needs just a little something more to be the
kind of a film that can be recommended without hesitation. Just be ready
for a possible letdown of an ending.

Title
Review for L.A. Confidential (1997)
L.A. Confidenial is a rare bird indeed: a modern American crime epic with
great acting, a great script, great direction and a great look to boot. How
many films these days can you say such a thing about these days? The old
saying that 'they don't make them like they used to' can really be put to
the test here.
Director Curtis Hanson is not the sort of filmmaker who would normally be
associated with this sort of movie - best known for his escapist films such
as The Hand That Rocked the Cradle and The River Wild (which costarred
Confidential's David Strathairn), Hanson managed to get enough street cred
to be able to risk making a film which could finally launch him to the
Hollywood A-list.
A risk because L.A. Confidential doesn't have what one would consider bona
fide movie stars, in the U.S., at least - Kevin Spacey, while being an
Oscar winner and having a sizable cult following, has never proven that he
can open a film; Russell Crowe, while an award-winning actor for his
Australian films Proof and Romper Stomper (which managed to make headlines
by creating controversy because of its racist characters), has had a
Hollywood career which so far been less than successful; and Guy Pearce,
the former soapy heartthrob who only came to international prominence with
The Adventures of Priscilla, Queen of the Desert and who seemed to be
destined afterwards to a life of more Australian films (the gender-swapping
comedy Dating the Enemy, for example) and television series (The Man From
Snowy River).
Hanson, then, should definately be applauded for managing to overcome the
obvious difficulties he would have had in securing such a risky cast and
succeeding. Casting two little known, non-American actors in a major
Hollywood picture is almost unheard of, but hopefully we'll be seeing more
of it in the future after this film. "No stars, just talent," indeed.
Bud White (Crowe) is a firey young cop who acts before he thinks, beats up
on men who beat up on women and is fiercely loyal to his comrades,
especially when he's pressured into giving evidence to an inquiry when he
and his partner Dick Strensland (Graham Beckel) are photographed beating
into a group of Mexican prisoners suspected of assailing a couple of
policemen.
White's polar opposite is Ed Exley (Pearce), a by-the-book college boy who
doesn't mind creating a few enemies if it can further his career. After
spilling the beans on the beating, he becomes a Detective Lieutenant and
becomes second-in-command behind police captain Dudley Smith (the brilliant
James Cromwell) in a murder investigation which runs far deeper than either
he or White could imagine.
The entire cast (which also includes Danny De Vito, Kim Basinger and
another former Australian soap star, Simon Baker Denny) are terrific, but
special mention must of course go to Crowe, Pearce and Spacey (as Jack
Vincennes, another cop who gets caught up in the investigation) for their
exceptional performances.
Hanson proves that he is definately a force to be reckoned with as a
director. He has made a modern classic with this film, one that can very
admirably stand alongside the films from the 40s and 50s. See it.
Nigel Bridgeman (nigelb@powerup.com.au)
The Movie Pages - a movie page: http://www.powerup.com.au/~nigelb/movies

Title
Review for Thin Red Line, The (1998)
Starring: Sean Penn, James Caviezel, Elias Koteas & Nick Nolte
Written by: Terrence Malick
Directed by: Terrence Malick
When you see a film which is a true work of art, you know it. Previously, I
knew after watching "Three Colours Red", "Paths of Glory", "Contact" and
"Heat" that I had seen something different, something special, and after
viewing The Thin Red Line I had that feeling all over again. This film -
definately a film, not a mere movie - is a beautiful ode to the futility
and brutality of war, and the effects it has on the human soul and psyche.
It also marks, as everyone should know by now, the return after twenty
years of Terrence Malick to the world of cinema (after seemingly abandoning
it following his critically acclaimed Badlands and Days of Heaven).
The film takes place around the fight for Guadalcanal during World War II
and focuses on a group of men in C Company. Rather than being a collection
of increasingly brutal war scenes, however, The Thin Red Line is more of a
character study as we follow the men as they head on their way to securing
the island from the Japanese or, in the cases of some, dying in the
attempt. The almost-court martialled Witt (James Cavaziel) recently went
AWOL to spend time with the natives of Guadalcanal and has started thinking
about the brutality of human nature; Private Bell (Ben Chaplin) longs for
the wife (Miranda Otto) he left behind; battle-hungry Doll (Dash Mihok)
delights in his first kill; Welsh (Sean Penn) only seems to see the
futility in not only the war but life in general; and Captain Staros (Elias
Koteas, a long way from Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles) is apprehensive about
sending his men onwards in what is obviously a suicide mission.
The performances from Malick's cast are superb. With little-known actors in
the main roles, Malick has done what Curtis Hanson successfully
accomplished with "L.A. Confidential" by making more believable the
characters which the actors play. Cavaziel is fine in what could be
considered the film's lead role, giving an air of innocence and weariness
to Private Witt. Chaplin, as Bell, gives a good performance which is helped
a great deal by the flashbacks and images he has of his wife. Sean Penn's
bitter, defeated Welsh is one of his best roles yet, and
he is excellent without stealing the spotlight from his lesser-known cast
members. Best of all, though, is Nick Nolte as the ambitious Colonel in
charge of the operation. His scene with Koteas, when the latter tells him
that he refuses to follow an order to send his troops against the Japanese
and face certain death, is one of the best of the year.
Much of the discussion that has surrounded Malick's film is the extensive
use of voice-over and the apparent lack of real narrative, especially in
the third hour. I'm not entirely sure if the narrative is really a problem;
Malick doesn't appear to be telling a story so much as letting his
characters discuss with themselves what is going on around them. This isn't
a film about a war, this is a film about war itself.
It must be said that nothing much in the way of action actually happens in
the final year, but nothing happens brilliantly. John Toll, who failed to
really impress me with his Oscar-winning cinematography in "Legends of the
Fall" and "Braveheart", beautifully captures the mayhem and slaughter of
the battle scenes on the island, as well as the serene moments away from
the carnage. This is photography which has to be seen to be believed.
Other technical aspects of the film are also excellent. The battle scenes
are at least on par with those from 1998's other WWII epic, "Saving Private
Ryan", and just as disturbing and enthralling. As with Spielberg's film,
the editing and sound crew have come into their own here, showing what film
as a medium is all about; it's not just great performances, screenplays and
direction that are important in the craft of filmmaking but the less
obvious, behind-the-scenes crew which help make cinema great without even
being noticed by the average moviegoer.
Malick has created a work of art which will not be fully appreciated by the
masses who expect "Saving Private Ryan" in the Pacific. The Thin Red Line
demands a great deal from the audience, and if people are willing to do
some thinking for themselves they should be able to fully appreciate what
Malick has created; something that embodies everything there is about film.

Title
Review for Titanic (1997)
With Titanic, writer/editor/producer/director James Cameron has hit his
peak; nothing he can come up with next will be able to match the adrenaline
rush and emotional wallop one receives after seeing this masterpiece.
Cameron has always been that rare filmmaker, one who can make a big-budget
special effects feast with an emotional core, and he doesn't disappoint
here. While it definately is a visual spectacle in the last half, the
entire film is dominated by the rivetting romance between the two central
characters, Jack Dawson and Rose DeWitt Bukater. Titanic is definately a
film that has something for almost everyone.
Brock Lovett (Bill Paxton), while on an expedition through the wreckage of
the eponymous ocean liner, discovers a drawing of a young woman wearing
what he has been searching three years for, an extremely rare and fabled
diamond, the Heart of the Ocean. Upon seeing Lovett on a news report one
day, Rose Calvert (Gloria Stuart) contacts Lovett, telling him that she is
the woman in the picture. He has her flown to his ship, where she tells her
version of what happened on the fateful night of April 14, 1912.
The younger Rose (Kate Winslet) is travelling across the Atlantic back to
America with her mother (Frances Fisher) and fiance Cal (Billy Zane) to an
impending marriage she'd rather do without. Feeling trapped in her
lifestyle among the high society and unable to see an escape route from a
loveless marriage with Cal, she tries to leap to an icy death from the back
of the ship when she is rescued by Jack Dawson (Leonardo DiCaprio), a poor
drifter who won his third-class ticket in a lucky hand of poker. They
strike up a friendship and soon discover that they are both lost souls who
belong to each other. Fate has other plans, however.
Titanic is as close to being a perfect Hollywood film there has been in
fifty years. Visually, the film is stunning; the production design is among
the most authentic I have ever seen. It may seem cliched, but it is easy to
believe that Cameron & Co. really filmed on the decks of the ship. The
special effects, while iffy in places, are nonetheless amazing. There is no
doubt that the $US200 million budget was money well spent.
The film would be nothing, however, if it didn't have a story one could
care about, and in this department Cameron does not disappoint. DiCaprio
and Winslet are perfect in their roles, generating an onscreen chemistry
that brings the film a heart and soul unseen in recent Hollywood films.
Both actors are terrific; DiCaprio brings youthful charm early on, but in
the later scenes dominates with the determination and maturity required.
Winslet, however, is extraordinary. Whether casually flirting with
DiCaprio, standing up to her mother or floating helplessly in the middle of
the Atlantic, she is absolutely rivetting. Another Oscar nomination (her
first being for Sense & Sensibility) will not be a surprise in the least.
She could very well become my favourite actress in the near future.
Gloria Stuart, as the older Rose, is fine in her return to film. I was
completely unfamiliar with her before the release of Titanic, but now I am
very tempted to check out some of her earlier work. Even though she is very
subdued and without any phony theatrics, she keeps you glued to the screen
whenever she appears. An Oscar nomination is only a formality.
Most people know about Titanic because of it's budget and, realistically,
Paramount and Fox may never see all of their money back. It's a testament
to both studios, however, that they were willing to put so much money into
such an emotionally involving film. Titanic is the best film of the year,
despite its minor flaws, and I doubt I'll see a better example of how to
make a great movie for a long, long time.
---
Nigel Bridgeman (nigelb@powerup.com.au)
The Movie Pages - a movie page: http://www.powerup.com.au/~nigelb/movies

Title
Review for Rushmore (1998)
Starring: Jason Schwartzman, Olivia Williams and Bill Murray
Written by: Wes Anderson & Owen Wilson
Directed by: Wes Anderson
While watching Wes Anderson's Rushmore, it may be surprising to think that
the role of Max Fischer, the film's anti-hero, was not written with Jason
Schwartzman in mind. The young actor, making his film debut as a 15 year
old student at the exclusive Rushmore Academy is so perfect in the role
that it comes as a shock that Anderson auditioned some two thousand other
prospective stars before discovering Schwarztman.
Schwartzman plays Max, a student who is more interested in his
extra-curricular activities (such as writing edgy plays like "Serpico" and
being president of the Rushmore Beekeepers) but sees his grades suffer as a
result. On the brink of being thrown out, he lands himself in even more hot
water when he falls for first grade teacher Rosemary Cross (Olivia
Williams) and enlists the help of millionaire acquaintance Herman Blume
(the great Bill Murray) to build an aquarium (on Rushmore's baseball field)
in her honour. Unfortunately for everyone involved, Blume finds that he has
feelings for Miss Cross as well, which gets in the way of Max's plans to
woo her.
Max is one of the best-written characters we've yet seen in the 90s, and
Schwartzman plays him to perfection in one of the finest comedy
performances ever given by someone of his age. As everyone else has
probably already pointed out, he is reminiscent of a young Dustin Hoffman
(although I was reminded more of Paul from "The Wonder Years", from a
visual standpoint, at least). Hopefully, if he avoids typecasting as weird,
quirky loner-types he should earn himself a good career. Bill Murray is his
equal as Blume, displaying a depth we haven't yet seen from him. While this
isn't his best performance (that honour goes to Groundhog Day) he is still
terrific here. Williams isn't given much to do except react to Schwartzman
and Murray, but still does fine work.
Rushmore seems to go just a little too long but, while it isn't a perfect
film, it is a definate must-see for anyone who wants to see that rarity, an
American coming-of-age film that actually works well without an excessive
amount of sentimentality. Anderson has created a modern classic with a star
who should, with any luck, rise to even greater success.

Title
Review for Game, The (1997)
In 1992, director David Fincher made his feature debut with the
long-awaited Alien 3 and met with a savaging by critics and audiences
alike. It's doubtful if anyone thought they would hear from Fincher again
after this reception.
Three years later he hit back with the Brad Pitt/Morgan Freeman film Seven,
probably the best thriller of the Nineties. Suddenly Fincher became the
critics' darling; everyone seemed to conveniently forget his earlier effort
and, if they did remember it, of course it was because of problems with the
producers/screenplay/studio. Fincher was hailed as one of the best of the
new breed of directors and Seven received some of the best reviews of the
year. The Game, then, had a lot of expectations to live up to.
Michael Douglas stars as Nicholas Van Orton, an investment banker without
much to live for - he's rich, but is also divorced, lives alone and has no
life to speak of. On his 48th birthday, his younger brother Conrad (Sean
Penn) gives him a gift certificate for Consumer Recreation Services, a
company that specialises in entertaining clients. That's pretty much all
Nicholas knows about them when he decides, after much reservation, to pay
them visit, which doesn't help him in figuring out just what it is they do.
Not long after, though, his life is turned upside down by a series of
freakish events.
Douglas gives one of his best performances here. I've never been a huge fan
of his, so it was a pleasure to see him in the sort of role that Harrison
Ford could have made his own. In fact, it reminded me somewhat of Ford's
earlier Frantic, with both main characters not knowing just what the hell
is going on around them.
Penn appears briefly but is terrific. Jodie Foster was considered for this
role, which makes no sense at all. Foster, admirable actress though she is,
could not in a million years acquit herself, although it's probable that
the part would have been rewritten to accommodate her.
I liked The Game until the much talked-about ending. I knew that there was
some consternation regarding it from some critics, but I understandably
refrained from finding out what it was until I saw the actual film. I liked
the final scenes at first, but after the film finished I found that it just
didn't work for me, and so it tainted the rest of the movie. This is a
pity, because, for the most part, The Game is a fine psychological thriller
which, while overlong and in some parts over the top, is very enjoyable.
Some scenes are especially good (Nicholas' episode in the runaway taxi, for
example) but, in the end, this is one of the few movies I've seen where the
ending was so disappointing that the film as a whole suffered.
An admirable but disappointing effort, all the more so because it could
have very easily been a truly great piece of work. A second viewing may be
in order, I think.

Title
Review for My Best Friend's Wedding (1997)
Starring: Julia Roberts, Dermot Mulroney, Cameron Diaz, Rupert Everett
Written by Ronald Bass
Directed by P.J. Hogan
It only seems like yesterday when a small romantic comedy was released,
reviving the career of its male star and launching the career proper of
it's female one. Pretty Woman was the sleeper hit of the year and managed
to land Julia Roberts her second consecutive Oscar nomination, as well as
putting Richard Gere into the hearts of women everywhere (for a year or
two, at least).
Roberts started to make a career for herself playing beautiful women either
in love or in peril, but after a supporting role in Steven Spielberg's Hook
she took a break, only taking a cameo in Robert Altman's The Player before
returning in Alan J. Pakula's The Pelican Brief, which lead to a string of
relatively unsuccessful roles in such films as Something to Talk About and
I Love Trouble. Roberts' honeymoon with American audiences, it seemed, was
over, and moviegoers had a new sweetheart, in the sickening guise of Sandra
Bullock (critics even raved that her hit romantic comedy, While You Were
Sleeping, was "The Pretty Woman of the Nineties!" - conveniently forgetting
that the latter was, indeed, released in 1990). Roberts started putting
quality before salary by appearing in less commercial fare such as Everyone
Says I Love You and Michael Collins, but that didn't seem to be enough.
My Best Friend's Wedding is a complete success for Roberts, who plays
Julianne, a restaurant critic who's life is thrown into turmoil when her
ex-lover/best friend Michael (the comatose Dermot Mulroney) announces his
engagement to his brand new love, Kimmy (future star Cameron Diaz), who in
turn recruits Julianne to be her maid of honour. Julianne becomes insanely
jealous and plots to break the relationship by any means necessary to win
Michael, for whom she suddenly realises her true feelings.
Lending a helping hand is the disapproving George (Rupert Everett) who,
while sympathetic to Julianne's cause, decides to run things his own way,
much to Julianne's dismay.
The film was directed by Muriel's Wedding's writer-director P.J. Hogan and
so there are, predictably, some terrific set pieces, most notably Kimmy's
brave attempt at karaoke and George's scene in the restaurant, where he and
the other patrons break into song. There are also numourous little touches
that are far funnier than you'd fine in a romantic comedy directed by a
Hollywood filmmaker; the opening title sequence, for example, as well as
scenes involving, among other things, helium and Michelangelo's David
(don't ask).
Roberts gives her best performance yet. After seeing this, I realised
something I had never thought would happen - I was becoming a Julia Roberts
fan, a statement which would have appalled me six months ago. On the
strength of her work here she has easily wrestled Sandra Bullock off her
perch and should be able to rest comfortably for a couple of years yet,
although she should definately look out for her co-star, Cameron Diaz, who
has the charisma and personality to be a major screen presence in the near
future.
Someone with a distinct lack of charisma, however, is Dermot Mulroney. His
casting is puzzling; although he does turn in an adequate performance, he
just doesn't fit the role. Why would anyone even care about this man? Why
would someone as dull as Michael have two women such as Julianne and Kimmy
fighting for him?
At the other end of the spectrum is Rupert Everett. He is perfect as
George, Julianne's editor who just happens to be gay. Every single scene he
appears in is a delight, and if he doesn't turn his role here into at least
an Oscar nomination then the performances that are given nods will have to
be extraordinary.
This is the film that should redefine the American romantic comedy. While
mildly predictable, the screenplay is fine, and Hogan's direction is
flawless. Mulroney is the only real flaw, but with such fine actors as
Roberts, Diaz and especially Everett, it is a flaw that can be easily
overlooked.

Title
Review for Simple Plan, A (1998)
Starring: Bill Paxton, Billy Bob Thornton & Bridget Fonda
Written by: Scott B. Smith
Directed by: Sam Raimi
Billy Bob Thornton, who had a sudden rise to fame with 1996's Sling Blade
after spending years as a virtually unknown actor and writer, is becoming
one of the most versatile - and most accomplished - American actors around
at the moment. As Jacob, the simple but at times very bright loser brother
of Bill Paxton's Hank, Thornton gives a performance which should leave an
indelible mark on all but the most hardened viewers.
Three men, Hank (Paxton), Jacob (Thornton) and their friend Lou (Brent
Briscoe) stumble upon a plane wreck which, upon closer inspection, yields a
rotting corpse and a bag full of money. Jacob and Lou want to pocket the
cash. Hank, the smarter - and perhaps more naive - of the three, insists on
leaving the money for the authorities to find. Eventually, they agree to
keep the cash safe until the plane is found, and then split the money three
ways. Things start going wrong, though, with greed and violence weaving
their ways through their plan. Disaster is sure
to strike.
Director Sam Raimi, of The Evil Dead and Darkman fame, has made an
excellent and thought-provoking film, worlds away from the comic horror
films which made his name. While there are a couple of moments which might
remind one of his earlier work, Raimi has made an intelligent and mature
departure which will hopefully be
a sign of even greater films to come.
Scott B. Smith's screenplay, based on his novel (which I haven't read) is a
fine example of escalating tension. While it does remind one of Danny
Boyle's Shallow Grave without the abundance of black humour, it keeps the
drama that should really be a part of such a story on morality, or the lack
thereof, found in a film with this subject matter. Alar Kivilo's
cinematography reminds one of Joel and Ethan Coen's Fargo, with the bleak,
snowy landscape almost becoming another character. Danny Elfman also does
well with his moody, finely-written score.
If there's a flaw in the film, it's that it goes on for just a little too
long. Just when we think that they are about to wrap things up, Raimi and
Smith decide to let the film go on a little further. While this isn't
really a bad thing, it
did become a little frustrating at times (this may have been due to the
fact that I had consumed a large Sprite beforehand). The performances are
excellent, with the usually annoying Paxton in fine form and Bridget Fonda
giving a scene-stealing turn as Hank's scheming wife.
This is an excellent showcase for Thornton's fine skills as an actor and a
great change in direction for Raimi, who could very well have a career
ahead of him as an accomplished director of dramatic films. Fingers
crossed, though, that this doesn't stop him from making another Evil Dead
sequel.

Title
Review for Breakdown (1997)
I must say from the outset that I have never been much of a Kurt Russell
fan. I've seen some of his films (Silkwood, Backdraft, Unlawful Entry) and
while he gave adequate performances, I have never been impressed with his
work.
Breakdown, then, is something of a surprise. Russell gives a fine
performance, as do most of the cast, one that is not upstaged by the action
orchestrated in the second half of the film. To say that he holds the film
together would not be completely true, but he does it no harm.
Russell plays Jeff, one half of a married couple travelling with his wife
Amy (Kathleen Quinlan) cross country to San Diego to start a new job and a
new life. While journeying through the desert their car breaks down and,
left helpless and stranded, Jeff waves down a passing truck driver (J.T.
Walsh) who offers to take them to a nearby diner to call for a tow truck.
Because of a nasty incident earlier with a couple of ruffians, Jeff decides
to stay with the car while Amy gets help. That, it seems, is the last time
Jeff (or anyone else) sees her.
Breakdown has been compared to several movies: George Sluizer's The
Vanishing (the original, hopefully, not his appalling Hollywood remake),
Steven Spielberg's Duel and any number of Hitchcock films. As with these,
Breakdown does not, for the most part, stray down the conventional path of
the American action-thriller. Jeff does not become a gun-toting vigilante
on the hunt for his wife, but instead becomes a scared, confused everyman
who has no idea what the hell is going on. When we do find out what has
happened to Amy, it does come as a slight disappointment, if only because
it's too early in the film; I for one could have done with an extra twenty
minutes or so of mystery and bewilderment, but this affects the film little.
Russell, as mentioned earlier, is very good in his role, and Kathleen
Quinlan is nowhere near as annoying as she was in Apollo 13. J.T. Walsh, as
the possibly evil truck driver, is terrific; he is one of the best of the
fine batch of character actors Hollywood doesn't seem to know what to do
with, but director Jonathan Mostow is on the right track here. The reason
he makes such a great villain is that he actually looks like a real person,
one anyone would be able to trust, which makes the plot that much more
believable.
Breakdown is what Hollywood doesn't make enough of, a great thriller with
believable characters and scenes that do, indeed, have viewers on the edge
of their seats. One of the most genuinely exciting films I've seen in a
long time.
Nigel Bridgeman (nigelb@powerup.com.au)
The Movie Pages - a movie page: http://www.powerup.com.au/~nigelb/movies
