Authors
Ken Pierce
Number of Reviews
3

Title
Review for Matrix, The (1999)
The following review is supplied by www.dvdfuture.com
Review: Well, The Matrix has to be one of the most difficult reviews I've ever
had the pleasure of writing. I say "difficult", because it's an incredibly
difficult movie to critique without giving away too much of the plot. Like so
many movies which have intricate, weaving plotlines, a lot of the fun is
watching the twists and turns unfold. As such, I will not go into a long
explanation of what The Matrix is about, but will instead talk about some of
the hits and misses for this film.
First and foremost, I expected a lot from this film. I should say out front,
though, that the filmmakers' previous effort, Bound, did not impress me at
all. I thought it was pretty standard fare, and suffered from a plot line
which dragged intensely at some points. Still, though, there was certainly a
dramatic flair, and a touch for those things odd. This is what excited me
about The Matrix, I didn't expect it to be standard fare, and I was right.
The Matrix is a movie that almost everyone can enjoy. I've heard some older
critics complain that the soundtrack is too loud, but I found it fit the look
and feel of the movie perfectly. This movie has the same art director as Dark
City, and it shows. It also shares more than a few plot elements with Dark
City, but goes places Dark City should've gone. The Matrix owes a lot to Dark
City and Terminator, but in most ways expands upon the ideas presented in
those films. I would have to say that The Matrix is much better than Dark
City, and (here is a huge compliment) as good as The Terminator. This movie
will be a science-fiction/action film classic.
First the pros: The art direction, set design and special effects are
outstanding. As is Carrie-Ann Moss as Trinity, Hugo Weaving as Agent Smith
and Joe Pantoliano as Cypher. The action sequences are incredibly well
filmed, and the movie clips along at an incredible pace. Warner Brothers gets
bonus points for not giving away the whole freakin' movie in the trailer.
Most of the "COOL!" shots in the trailer take place in the first three to
five minutes of the film (!), there's a LOT more here than the trailer shows.
The plot line is beautifully intricate, and keeps you guessing at various
points in the movie. It has a tendency to go left when you expect to go
right, except when you start to expect it to go left, then it goes right.
Great stuff!
The cons: Keanu Reeves is (as usual), quite wooden. I can't offer a better
casting suggestion, because quite frankly, his "look" is perfect for this
film. Still, though, I think any director using Reeves in future projects
would be wise to avoid having his character use the phrases "NO WAY!" or
"WHOA!". Flashbacks to Bill and Ted are inevitable at points. Surprisingly, I
found Laurence Fishburne to be somewhat wooden at the beginning of his
performance. He seemed to get more into it as the movie progressed, but I
have come to expect more of him. Also, there is a series of three
rear-projection shots used in the film which look absolutely terrible. You'll
know the shots I refer to when you see them. I suspect this wasn't re-shot
because of the relatively small budget for a film of this type($63-68
million). Last, and definitely least, I found the sound mix to be a little
underwhelming. The theatre I saw the movie in was Dolby Digital equipped, and
I found the directional effects limited and the low frequency range muted. It
wasn't terrible, it just seemed like it wasn't "enough". The next time I see
this movie (and I will be seeing it again, probably later this weekend), we
plan on going to The Coliseum here in town. The cinema it is playing in at
the Coliseum is THX certified, and if my opinion of the sound mix changes I
will let you know. 
That's it! It doesn't tell you much, I know, but I don't want to go into
specifics for fear of spoiling the movie. All I can really say is "go see it."
You won't be disappointed. This movie kicks some serious ass, and is the best
action film I've seen in a long time. It has a complex, but still coherent
plot, and relatively few plot holes considering the gaping possibilities that
were opened. Great stuff, and I hope the rest of 1999 is this good!
-----------== Posted via Deja News, The Discussion Network ==----------
http://www.dejanews.com/       Search, Read, Discuss, or Start Your Own    

Title
Review for Gods and Monsters (1998)
This review is supplied by the DVD Future website!  www.dvdfuture.com
`To a New World of gods and monsters!' – from James Whale's classic film,
Bride of Frankenstein.
Some films are just so amazing that they have to be seen more than once.  Gods
and Monsters is one of those films.
This film is about the last few weeks of director James Whale's life
(Frankenstein, Bride of Frankenstein, Showboat).  It delves very deeply into
his personal life and his past, showing his day to day routine after a stroke
has destroyed a portion of his brain and is causing him to hallucinate.  Of
course, it's the revelations that occur during this process which make the
movie so good.
The story is fictional, but based on real-life accounts of Whale's life.  As
far as anyone knows, Brendan Fraser's character is fictional, though Lynn
Redgrave's character, Hanna, is based on Whale's real-life maid and caretaker,
and of course several supporting characters are based in reality.
The film starts out by showing Whale as a dirty old man, interested only in
getting young guests out of their clothes and into his pool in a state of
nakedness.  It immediately becomes apparent that this is not going to be an
ordinary Point A to B to Z story as most Hollywood movies are.  In this case,
this is a very good thing.
The story weaves its web around you, slowly introducing those characters who
are important, and through a series of flashbacks, hallucinations and
monologues explains Whale's childhood and young adult years.  This all helps
to bring McKellan's character even more to life, and to bring sympathy to an
otherwise misogynistic man.  All the meanwhile, subplots are evolving and
coming to a head in a brilliant climax which will remain unrevealed here.
Ian McKellan, Lynn Redgrave and Brendan Fraser all give great performances
here.  McKellan and Redgrave both have received Oscar nods for their work in
this film (we'll see if they win on Sunday…), and both deserve to take home
the Golden Boy.  Fraser's performance seems to have been underrated because
he plays `the dumb guy'.  I don't see it this way at all, since Fraser's
character is completely believable.  No, he's not an Oxford-educated snob,
he's a regular joe, and he plays it that way.  He also shows with a few
simple gestures that there's a lot more going on under the surface.  As the
movie progresses, Fraser's character literally `bubbles' with interesting
revelations, and this helps to keep the movie flowing.        An absolutely
stunning performance, and proof that there's more to this guy than Encino Man
or George of the Jungle (though both are films which I enjoyed immensely,
they hardly stretch his acting muscles).  Unfortunately, Fraser still spends
a lot of time in this movie with his clothes off…maybe in the Mummy he'll get
to wear a shirt.
Needless to say, Bill Condon has impressed me with this film.  I'm even more
impressed when I consider that Condon's previous work is the little-seen
horror flick sequel Candyman: Farewell to the Flesh.  It's obvious that
Condon sees a little bit of himself in James Whale, and allows that to
reflect into his vision.  The difference is, that whereas Whale is best
remembered for his films which he didn't really care for, Condon will easily
be remembered for brilliant works of art if this is to be his quality of film
from now on.  Of course, with him being such a close friend of Clive Barker,
there is a very real possibility that he could end up back in the horror
genre before long.  With the right script, though, this could be a great
thing for horror.
-----------== Posted via Deja News, The Discussion Network ==----------
http://www.dejanews.com/       Search, Read, Discuss, or Start Your Own    

Title
Review for 8MM (1999)
The following review is supplied by www.dvdfuture.com
Director: Joel Schumacher
Producor: Gavin Polone, Judy Hofflund, Joel Schumacher
Writer: Andrew Kevin Walker
Review: I was originally going to write a review of the new Joel
Schumacher/Nicolas Cage flick 8MM, but determined it was too short to carry
itself, so I'll include it here as a part of a larger overall editorial.
If Joel Schumacher wanted to make a movie about snuff films, he started out on
the right track. What he should have done though, is set up a camera, then
given some poor hapless viewer a gun, one bullet, and a copy of this movie.
Voila! Instant snuff.
Now, I'm not saying that 8MM was a bad film, it was terrible! From the
terrible shots, to the terrible editing, to the bland lighting (there's a
scene in a bedroom where a light switch behind Cage is turned on...only
there's no light!) to the boring sound mix. This film just reeks of bad.
The blame here lies squarely on the shoulders of Joel Schumacher, who hasn't
made a worthwhile film since 1987 (The Lost Boys), and has never made a film
which has had a large social impact (unless you count the negative impact of
Batman & Robin).
Schumacher took Andrew Kevin Walker's (Seven) script, and homogenized it to
the point where Walker left the picture. Walker's take on the new version of
the script? "If you can't say something nice, don't say anything at all."
Now, anyone who's ever watched a movie knows that great movies start with a
great script. Schumacher has managed to screw up more great scripts than
anyone in Hollywood history. Don't believe me? Let's look at a list of his
film work:
His career in film work started with The Incredible Shrinking Woman in 1981
starring Lily Tomlin. Mediocre at best. This segued into D.C. Cab in 1983.
Again, mediocre. We then have Schumacher's first genuine "hit", St. Elmo's
Fire (1985). Lots of people absolutely love this movie. I found it bland,
boring and pretentious. This is followed by The Lost Boys (1987), which I
enjoyed, but would hardly call a classic like some people. He followed
probably his two most popular movies with Cousins (1989) starring Ted Danson
and Isabella Rossellini. Great...a flick about wife-swapping. He then went on
to make Flatliners (1990), which could have been fantastic. Of course,
Schumacher screwed it up. He decided the best way to follow up a film about
death was with another film about...death...this time starring Julia Robers
and Campbell Scott, Dying Young (1991). A movie which absolutely failed in
its effort to bring emotion to the screen because of its absolute desire to
be as dark and depressing as possible. Note to Schumacher: people with
terminal illnesses still know how to have fun sometimes, and if you would've
showed that the dark moments would've had more emotional impact. If
everything is depressing all time, nobody knows what to relate to. Schumacher
then created what is probably one of his most controversial films, Falling
Down (1993). Michael Douglas carried this film. His performance was
outstanding. Schumacher's direction was far from special (go back and watch
it again, you'll see exactly what I mean). Schumacher then proceeded to screw
up The Client (1994) by making it too preachy. After that, some drunken fool
at Warner Brothers gave Schumacher the Batman franchise and he wasted no time
in driving it into the ground. First by letting Jim Carrey do all the work in
Batman Forever (1995). I felt sorry for Carrey, because it has to be hard to
be the only good thing in a film. Then he put the final nails in the Batman
coffin with Batman & Robin (1997). In between his two Batman "films",
Schumacher had time to screw up another Grisham novel, A Time to Kill (1996).
Samuel L. Jackson carried the film this time (but he wasn't in it enough to
actually save it). That brings us to the present, and the ever- excellent
Cage in the incredibly bad 8MM. Not exactly a stellar record.
This brings me to the point. Schumacher is directing a new film now,
Flawless. This film is due sometime later this year. Once again he has
somehow managed to con a great cast (led by Robert DeNiro), and I'm sure the
film will have a fantastic marketing campaign (as all his films do). I think
I've finally had enough. I'll be skipping this one. I'm a huge DeNiro fan,
but Schumacher is just too much of a hack to make it work. I'm skipping it,
and his next one, and his next one. Maybe if enough people do this, someone
will force Schumacher to stop making films.
Until next time, go see a movie (not 8MM!).
-----------== Posted via Deja News, The Discussion Network ==----------
http://www.dejanews.com/       Search, Read, Discuss, or Start Your Own    
