Authors
Vallejo
Number of Reviews
7

Title
Review for No Looking Back (1998)
  In 1995, THE BROTHERS McMULLEN, the feature film debut by filmmaker Edward
Burns, won the audience prize at the Sundance film festival and automatically
placed him into the limelight as one of the *hottest* young filmmakers,
virtually gearing him for a prosperous future. The film, a slight but
undeniably charming confection of three Irish Catholic brothers struggling
with their multiple rendezvous with women was a shrewd, cleverly written
account of the parallels between religion and morality.
  One year later, Burns crafted SHE'S THE ONE, a cloyingly cutesy comedy that
forced me to my bad side. It ran over similar territory, only this time it the
material wasn't as fresh, the acting was second-rate and the photography
abysmal. Furthermore, it made me question Burns' integrity as a filmmaker.
After all, it was his first "studio" film, one with higher goals and more
responsibilities.
 Edward Burns' latest venture is Irish Catholic-free, which could account for
his first female protagonist in the three films his made, odd, since all of
his films have been about women. NO LOOKING BACK is a flimsy, homespun
melodrama about nasty people acting nastily towards each other.It doesn't
avoid the conventionalities presented and instead embraces the meat-and-
potatoes values their characters don't embrace. 
  The film's humdrum setup stars Lauren Holly as Claudia, an attractive
waitress in an unnamed small East Coast town, who yearns for an alternate
existence that differs from the monotonous, draggy reality she experiences
with Michael (Jon Bon Jovi), her unimaginative and homey boyfriend whose
aspirations of marriage ultimately frighten Claudia. This hunger is further
accentuated by the return of Charlie (Edward Burns) her ex-boyfriend who left
the town to deal his cards in California, shortly after Claudia become
pregnant and opted for an abortion. Soon thereafter, Charlie abandoned her,
never really devoting himself to Claudia's full recovery. Three years later,
and with a part-time job at a gas station,  he's back with a vengeance, and
although he's informed she's "basically" engaged to Michael, his flirtation is
ceaseless. Predictably, this sets a dilemma as to wether she shall take a
chance with Charlie or maintain loyalty with Michael. 
  Jon Bon Jovi, once again proving he's more than a capable actor, and Lauren
Holly, in her first true role she can chew on, stand out above the rest of the
vacuous cast which includes Blythe Danner as the all-wise grandmother
suffering from grandpa's bitterness (years ago, he too left the family and
flew to Vegas), Connie Britton as the sister who renders valuable advice, and
yes, Edward Burns. Bon Jovi shines with an understated performance that
underlines the character's faithfulness in Small Town, USA. It's a very
poignant piece of acting, one that will make Bon Jovi more recognizable.
Holly, with her exquisitely golden smile, gives Claudia a sweetly ethereal
touch blending the impatience of a woman who can no longer stand the same
faces and the one native side that calls for a restraint to her choices. 
  Burns, however, clunks. Badly. Doesn't he realize, as a filmmaker and a
screenwriter, that he possesses the acting abilities of a dried-out turnip? He
casts himself, in a woefully written role, that mainly consist of charmless
smirks and witless wisecracks, designed for someone like, say, Stephen
Baldwin. "What wasn't okay?" he naively responds, after Claudia questions his
sudden departure. He constantly drinks, lies, and re-affirms his role as a
heartthrob by persuading a jailbait to rent a "motel," and letting everybody
know by displaying her at a bar at happy hour. I have no business objecting to
these moral choices, only when they interfere with the plausibility of
characters do I take a stand. And, idiotically, Claudia falls for this
routine. Which leads to an even more improbable conclusion. 
  NO LOOKING BACK more than any Edward Burns movie, exposes what he can and
can't do as a screenwriter. At times you want him to take a more harsh
approach to the situation, a la CRIMES AND MISDEMEANORS. Why should we bother
to behave morally in a universe where God may not exist, and where goodness is
so rarely rewarded? But then again, this standpoint is anti-Burns. He stays
within the frames of his stories, letting the actors do the talking and figure
it out for themselves. 
  Despite its faults, NO LOOKING BACK isn't a complete failure. The
cinematography by Frank Prinzi is gorgeous. The film has moments of dramatic
intensity and Burns is refreshingly unpretentious and uncynical when it comes
to modeling his characters. But their trepidations, their goals, their dreams,
their "unhealthy" lifestyles are film-student cliches that Burns looked to be
done with in BROTHERS McMULLEN. But now, three years later, his self-pitying
is pitiable. (1:36)

Title
Review for Breakdown (1997)
  Imagine this  scenario: you and any of your family members are scudding
through one of those long, excruciating cross-country car trips, far from the
city and into the deserted rural routes. So far, the trip is idyllic when,
abruptly, your car malfunctions and you are stranded in the middle of nowhere.
It is not an easy situation, but a perfectly plausible one, the panorama in
which BREAKDOWN musters it's throbbing suspense and skillfully executed
tautness. It is not easy to cobble a distinct and gripping thriller nowadays,
but  BREAKDOWN doesn't bungle into rudimentary plot holes or cliches and it
derives a masterful, titillating climax that by it's finale, engrosses a
viewer with total absorption. 
   The plot is somewhat reminiscent of 1988's THE VANISHING. Kurt Russell and
Kathleen Quinlan respectively play Jeff and Amy Taylor, a Massachusetts couple
en route to California for a brand new job. When they stop for gas somewhere
in the arid Southwest, Jeff is confronted by a pugnacious driver, who later,
will be an important player in the plot department. Minutes later after that,
their brand new, strikingly red, Jeep Grand Cherokee unexpectedly stops. Jeff
cannot detect the car's problem, so he allows Amy to take a ride with Red (J.
T Walsh), a heedful truck driver who will convey her to the nearest town,
where Jeff will meet her at a local diner. It is facile for the film to turn
into a pseudo-suspenser , but instead it opts for maximum fervor.
   Jeff manages to re-start the car himself, but when he arrives at the diner,
she is nowhere in sight. Disconcerted, the coffee shop's bartender informs
Jeff where to search for his wife, a town about twenty miles from here. There,
trouble arises. And I shall not reveal anything else, since that would be
spoiling the fun of what's head.
   There are many involving, tight scenes in BREAKDOWN but the final climactic
period which includes a magnificent chase with three cars and a huge truck,
will have you feeling as if your legs are made out of pure foam. It is a
pleasure to be part of a classic confrontation of good Vs evil, and rooting
for the good guys, in this case Jeff. 
 Kurt Russell is one of the few top-notch Hollywood actors which doesn't
overblow his acting, and gradually gains reliance on his role as it
progresses. So you can assume his alteration in BREAKDOWN is letter-perfect.
Suffice it is to say he undergoes a transformation, from a jolly man, to a guy
frantically pursuing a loved one. Not many well-paid actors can deliver these
type of performances, but Russell is one of them. As an everyday man , he
pulls it off extremely convincingly, what also surprised me more was his
rigorous physicality, which he effectively practices almost all throughout the
films 93 minutes. 
  Although the film is blotted with a couple of portentous action sequences
(very well done) yet the tightness is generated by the subtle circumstances
this man is presented with. Faced with an enigma about his wife's whereabouts,
the movie succeeds by conveying us in realistic territory with veritable
characters, including the cryptic villains, who in essence, make the movie
what it is.
  What's most  impressive however, is the feature debut by writer/director
Jonathan Mostow. Mostow, hitherto directed the Showtime thriller FLIGHT OF A
BLACK ANGLE, alleviates the contrivances and generics of the script by
gingerly pursuing the trajectory of the plot, efficiently letting the tone and
the mood of the story generate that nail-biting suspense sought for in a well-
made affair. Contrary to most American thrillers, he doesn't rely on visual
flair, but on aesthetics and substance. After BREAKDOWN,  he should gain vast
notoriety. 
   The villains in the movie aren't your routine out-of-this-world
idiosyncratic psychos that are harming for no particular objective. The
baddies in BREAKDOWN, all well acted,  are normal, seemingly inoffensive
townspeople who beneath their trustworthy layer, conduct an amoral business of
corruption and murder. The movie smartly portrays these men as loathsome
rednecks, and, of all things in the world, it is becoming rather easy to root
for villains (Jon Voight in ANACONDA) in today's movies. Worth a special
mentioning is J.T Walsh (who previously worked with Kurt Russell in EXECUTIVE
DECISION ) as the leader of the gang, he renders a deliciously wicked
performance, temporarily stepping out of the minor roles he is known for. 
   Alfred Hitchcock used suspense--and action-- not only to stimulate, but as
a way of aiding his audience's fascination in his stories, which were slowly
realizing man's biggest fears. BREAKDOWN yields exactly that. It magnificently
taps into the psyche of an ordinary man,acting like an ordinary man, looking
like an ordinary and some sort of superhero. Despite one or two iffy moments
even Hitchcock, I think, would approve of  BREAKDOWN. (1:33)

Title
Review for Wild Things (1998)
 _________________________________________________________
 The recent onslaught of film noir that has popped up in multiplexes, with
everything ranging from "L.A. Confidential" to "Palmetto" to "The Big
Lebowski," has proved to be an artistic commodity for veteran, talented
directors. With this particular genre, directors are able to collate the
sleazy underworld of the lower-class and the glamorous, opulent upper-class,
while maintaining the noirish, ambiguous ambience, the staple of film noir.
 "Wild Things" could be classified as a black comedy, a sultry film noir or a
plain ol' erotic thriller, but the one category it doesn't qualify for is that
of a quality motion picture. Overacted, overwrought and overlong, "Wild
Things" is a confused mess, a movie that wants to have its cake and eat it
too. With its incalculable twists, turns, more twists and more turns, it soon
becomes a tedious exercise in pointlessness. In spite of game efforts by Kevin
Bacon and Matt Dillon, who manage to sustain straight faces throughout the
ordeal, "Wild Things" not once jells in its eroticism, unpredictability,
character motivation, sense of the world, plot, etc. There's not one redeeming
quality in the picture that is not technical.
 Directed by John McNaughton ("Henry: Portrait of a Serial Killer"), "Wild
Things" follows Sam Lombardo (Matt Dillon), a hunkish, suburban Florida high
school teacher who's the dream of every spruced up female in the community.
Particularly one. Kelly Van Ryan (Denise Richards) adores him to such extent
that she offers to wash his Jeep with a partner. Soon, her tiny shorts are
soaked and tells the other girl to take a hike, enabling her to come into his
house. Next thing, she cries rape. And the so-called "roller-coaster ride"
ensues.
 A second accuser comes front, Suzie Toller (Neve Campbell), a booze-drinkin',
tattooed piece of trailer trash that charges Lombardo of sexually molesting
her, virtually guaranteeing a trial where preposterous confessions, asinine
occurrences and laughable courtroom procedures are bound to happen. Even Bill
Murray gets into the act as Lombardo's zany lawyer. He wears a fake neck-
brace, waves the finger at the other client and infuses the script with some
Billy Murray. You can tell McNaughton knew he had nothing to lose assigning
Murray to this role. As ridiculous as it sounds, he's the most sane character
in the movie. 
The community is astonished. Reporters flee to the scene. There's an
8.5-million settlement for a libel suit against Kelly's mother (Theresa
Russell). There's the ambiguous cop (Kevin Bacon, who also executive produced)
who sniffs something iffy in this concoction of deceit, murder and lust. We,
the audience, sniff something
not so lustful.
 Like so many thrillers these days, including "The Usual Suspects" and "The
Game," "Wild Things" eschews character for plot. McNaughton knows how to
handle the camera, and he keeps the campy fillings of the script flowing with
workmanlike ease, as if he knows the territory he's covering is a harmless
appetizer to accompany "Henry," a furious, unsettling film directorial tour-
de-force. George Clinton's score is a delight to behold. But it's the humans.
The characters are mere devices for the "nasty" twists. What writer Stephen
Peters does not grasp is this becomes tediously uninvolving, almost
unbearable,  if those who inhibit this twisted world are not interesting,
don't feel real or we don't care for them. Not even the unintentionally funny
moments work. The people in "Wild Things" are not so much people as they are
caricatures.
 Then there's the erotic content, which nearly earned the film an NC-17, for a
sexless, badly edited, poorly lit menage-a-trois. And in what has to be one of
the most flabbergastingly inept scenes that has graced this country, Kevin
Bacon's member makes a cameo appearance with ten minutes to go. Ironically,
the wildest elements of "Wild Things" are not wild at all.

Title
Review for Basquiat (1996)
 _____________________________________________________________
 Basquiat is a reason to believe why I still go to the movies. Jean-Michel
Basquiat, the urban New York painter which began as a nighttime graffiti
artist and went on to become an Andy Warhol protege, was not salvaged by his
art like Al Hirschfield or Robert Crumb. At age 27, he died of a heroin
overdose. 
  Basquiat, the miraculous biopic directed by Julian Schnabel and tenderly
acted by Jeffrey Wright, treats its central character as credulous enigma, one
which every question posed to him was a rhetorical one.We never quite see the
world in his eyes because no one ever really knew Jean-Michel Basquiat.
Schnabel doesn't sway us into insinuating the inspiration for his Creole art
-- a mix of Africa and Europe -- and this move, one of sheer bliss, is the key
to understanding this film and not understanding Basquiat.  
  The film chronicles the Haitian native from his early days as a homeless
adolescent in the late 70's, surviving in a cardboard box and feeding off his
graffiti art which rapidly grew conspicuous (signing everything with the tag
"SAMO"), striking enough to allure writer Rene Ricard (Michael Wincott), who
presents Basquiat to notable art and gallery dealer such as Mary Boone (Parker
Posey), Bruno Bischofberger (Dennis Hopper) and even Andy Warhol (a witty
David Bowie), with whom he becomes attached via an impromptu encounter.
 As he skyrocketed to being the filet mignon of the New York art scene, his
drug habit was as gradual as it was irreversible. His very successfulness
transformed Basquiat into an even more bewildering artist, both to his
companionship (Claire Forlani) and to his close friend Benny (Benicio Del
Toro), a Puerto Rican painter that tries to settle him down.
 For all its unknowingness Basquiat isn't detached. While his political,
social and spiritual views are inundated with mystery, Basquiat's feelings,
dreams and accomplishments are vividly drawn out in the movie, very
affectingly so. A surf board rippling through some crystal-blue waves signify
his hopes of someday visiting Hawaii, a land of purity and cleansing, one free
of exasperation, exasperation that may not be visible, but that's indicated by
his relentless drug use. The emptiness he experiences during his gallery
opening, as every extra freezes and he's left wondering: what next?
  Given this unusual protagonist, the stature and power of the work is highly
stylized by Schnabel gives the movie an unusual treatment. The New York
spotlight of the 80's -- a key movement for avante-garde artists -- is
presented as a universe of opportunity with an exquisite mix of black & white
footage, plenty of shots of the art, delightful locales and an exceptional
compilation of songs. Schnabel moves the camera around conservatively, but
with enough freedom to relieve any signs of staginess. 
  The cast excels brilliantly. Jeffrey Wright, the Tony-winning actor, is at
once wonderfully funny and immensely sympathetic, brazen and romantic, heroic
and shy; were it for his performance alone the picture would be well worth
seeing. Gary Oldman, Dennis Hopper, Benicio Del Toro, Michael Wincott, Parker
Posey and Willem Dafoe all bring flair to the supporting roles, but David
Bowie is the stand-out portraying Andie Warhol right down to his
characteristic "hand" moves. 
 It's sad it was overlooked by critics and audiences alike. While filmgoers
were in their fiftieth viewing of "Independence Day," Basquiat was struggling
to gain back its budget. I commend those who make the effort to view films
such as Basquiat. It's an experience that, unlike the bulk of what's out
there, is durable. (1:48)

Title
Review for Welcome To Sarajevo (1997)
  Starring Stephen Dillane, Woody Harrelson, Marisa Tomei,mira Nusevic, Kerry
Fox, Goran Visnjic, Emily Lloyd, James Nesbitt, Igor Dzambazov, Gordana
Gadzic. Produced by Graham Broadbent and Damian Jones. Produced by Graham
Broadbent and Damian Jones. Script by Frank Cottrell Boyce (Based on the book
"Natasha's Story" by Michael Nicholson. Directed by Michael Winterbottom.
Running Time: 110 mins. Rated R.
 ________________________________________________________________
  The central focus of Michael Winterbottom's "Welcome to Sarajevo" is
Sarajevo itself, the city under siege, and its different effect on the
characters unfortunate enough to be stuck there. It proves the backdrop for a
stunningly realized story which refreshingly strays from mythic portents (
"Platoon" ), racial tumultuosness ( the risible "The Walking Dead" ) or a
tinge of schmaltziness ( "Schindler's List" ). The two leads, Stephen Dillane
as a reporter and Emira Nusevic as an orphan with a plight few can identify
with, are extremely believable; not one moment with them involved rings false.
 The question is not what went right. The question is what went wrong. For
one, the film fails to provide a political overview of the war as it
progresses ( the Dillane characters reports an American plane departing from
Sarajevo as it departs, and that's about it.). The assortment of high-profile
supporting actors, ranging from Woody Harrelson as a Yankee reporter "into"
liquor and cigarrettes to Marisa Tomei as a huggable children's aid or
somesuch are incapable of rising above the sketchiness of their characters,
albeit they strive.
 The interrupted use of authentic war footage somewhat hampers the rest of the
film, it makes the fictional characters seem powerless by comparison.
 Still, Winterbottom eschews mawkishness  through flashy, frantic editing and
imaginative use of music. And it's a plus, because he doesn't toy with our
emotions with sentimental blandness. He wants us to know that in war, no one
is victorious.
 Starring Ian Holm, Sarah Polley, Bruce Greenwood, Tom McCamus, Gabrielle
Rose, Arsinee Khanjian, Alberta Watson, Maury Chaykin, Caerthan Banks.
Produced by Atom Egoyan and Camelia Frieberg. Script by Atom Egoyan (Based on
the novel by Russell Banks). Directed by Atom Egoyan. Running Time: 110 mins.
Rated R.
 __________________________________________________________
   Atom Egoyan's powerfully meditative "The Sweet Hereafter" is as anything as
haunting and transcendental as I've seen this year.
 It not only explores the aftermaths of a terrible tragedy with magnificent
subtlety , with cold,  and stunning shots of the backdrop of this mistfortune
but also by telegraphing the sense of devastation that has permeated the small
town with an enormous amount of dignity and respect for each and every soul
affected.
 Ian Holm as the somber, lonely lawyer seeking compensation for the
townspeople, has a decency and a restraint uncommon with lawyers, he's a lion
for the wrong reasons: the pain for having lost his daughter ( she's a druggie
who frequently calls him begging for money  ) is reflected on the town. And in
some mesmerizing flashbacks, we witness how she lost her purity. It's one of
the most strikingly breathtaking takes on the loss of innocence I've ever
seen.
 But the most astounding part goes to Sarah Polly, the peaceful, benevolent
girl who, in contrast to the other characters, remains the most mentally
stable during past, present or future. Her ability to convey concealed pain
and unconditional love is the opposite, yet near-revolutionary role that won
Emily Watson an Oscar nomination for "Breaking the Waves". Both women are torn
apart by an extraordinary incident but it is only then that we truly see,
truly feel, their wordless, omnipotent love. 
 "The Sweet Hereafter" though, is Atom Egoyan's movie and as of now, he is
emerging as the definite face of independent cinema. After surging to
worldwide recognition with 1994's "Exotica", "The Sweet Hereafter" makes him
something few people in this industry can call themselves: an artist. He
interweaves time with a delicacy and sees a soul with a purity that is just
not common.

Title
Review for Spawn (1997)
  While the summer movie season approached its long awaited cessation,  we had
yet another shoddy, subordinate disposable celluloid superhero movie brought
on by the inexorable hasten from the major studios to please kids with
everything they think kids will go for to disburse their seven bucks. And,
once again, we have one of the worst films of the year.
 The trend of the moment-- and bear in mind it's a trend not a movie - is
SPAWN, and if you've seen the animated series on HBO you'll recall it embodies
the lost life of a disfigured man, an individual who has transpired the
ultimate punishment: He's been sent to hell. Todd McFarlane, the creator of
the SPAWN comic book, must have had a tough time sitting through SPAWN, for
his creativity and themes about resurrection and loss of identity were all
being jettisoned in favor of reliable special effects, style over substance,
ambience over anything else. 
 Not only does SPAWN rely entirely on special effects, the story, about a
bewildered individual who must take on a group of *bad guys* and *find
himself* in the process is realized in such a sordid, incapable manner, it
becomes indigestible after a while. Every character in this film is lifeless,
vacuous and seemingly written by a depressed college student. 
 The story begins, like in every superhero movie in this age, with a man
living an idyllic life. Al Simmons (Michael Jai White), a government
agent/assassin shares the love of his wife, Wanda (Theresa Russell ) and
daughter, has a tongue-in-cheek, wiseass partner, Terry (D.B Sweeney) and is
content with the job his boss, Jason Wynn (Martin Sheen), provides him.
The next element in the film is the part when things go awry. And as expected,
everyone turns the tables on poor Al. 
 As the two are investigating their latest mission at some sort of biological
weapons plant, Al is befriended by Jason, and dies in a gory and truly
sickening scene. Inevitably, it leads everyone to the conclusion that he has
passed away. Hence, Jason's mischievous master-mind plan, to ` conquer the
world" is just commencing its initial stages, when Al makes a pact with Satan
himself, agreeing to command the Devil's army to take over the world and he
gets to see his family again.
 So, our pal Al has been uplifted to hell, and while his transformation from
normal guy to Spawn takes place, his ol' partner Terry forms a relationship
with his wife. Time passes. And now Spawn is present in the grotesque inner
city, the ghetto where Cog (Nicol Williamson ) teaches Spawn how to utilize
his neat artifacts, his motorbike, armor, etc... This character is merely a
poor man's Obi Wan Kenobi without all the mythological hoopla. 
 Now the stage is set Spawn, the new `enemy of evil' Vs Evil. And evil takes
the cake, doubtlessly. John Leguizamo's deliciously heinous performance as the
injurious clown working for Wynn is the film's relief point. All this anguish,
pain, half-baked themes and putrid action scenes are invisible to Leguizamo,
who steals the show and derives joy from his character, which is basically a
compilation of so-so one liners. 
 And then there's Martin Sheen. Whichever way you look you will find carving
boards near his pitying and downright appalling last two years. His selections
calls for an immediate firing of his agent. As the megalomaniac boss, his
caricature plays like a bad dream out of a B-movie, scrambled, and left in the
shelf to rot. This is the man that starred in films such as APOCALYPSE NOW and
WALL STREET. I'd never thought I'd be saying this, but at this juncture,
Charlie Sheen's career is in better shape.
 SPAWN is a movie in which realism, or even an attempt to draw a parallel
between the problems of the hero and real life is identifiable. For most of
the film the vapid Michael Jai White consumes his time ogling, jumping through
roofs, and performing all kinds of acrobatic exercises which even BATMAN AND
ROBIN accomplished better. It constantly reminded us we were watching a
superhero movie-- a very bad superhero movie. Continually the film kept on
depending on special effects, and sadly, this is how pictures are being made.
Perhaps no other movie better than SPAWN illustrates the deterioration of
cinema through computer wizardry. The filmmakers seem to have forgotten every
human element possible. The quality of this film is abysmal and insulting.
 It is perceptible that director Mark Dippe, attempted to touch the
psychological chord that Tim Burton's BATMAN DID touch, the desperation of a
man whose life has all but evaporated in one spontaneous act. But Bruce Wayne
had human elements to him. He was pensive, resourceful and had relationships,
which made our perspective on him equally human. The character of Al Simmons
seems to be LONGING for a drastic change, as if he's fatigued about being
normal. And as all superheroes, Batman, Superman, The Phantom, they must
possess an element of normal civilians to make us think they are
extraordinary. None of this is present
in  SPAWN.
 The fighting sequences are weakly executed, the dialogue is penny-dreadful
and the art direction an odious duplicate of BLADE RUNNER'S. As an example of
this film's vastly creative imagination the writers of SPAWN decided to
include a poor orphan boy who is abandoned and beaten, and then rescued by
Spawn, so our emotions tend to be a little more sympathetic. Admittedly, I did
laugh once in the film ,and that's when Todd McFarlane showed up in an
unexpected cameo as a bum. 
 It is no wonder why so American children grow up with no engrossment for art
or literature. Besides blaming a large portion of it on the laughable school
system, I condemn the other part to garbage like SPAWN. Movies that present no
admiration, no captivation, no richness and vague interest in what children
are being subjected to. And kids will continue to see films like SPAWN, simply
because they are unable to differentiate what makes an imaginative, wondrous
film from an insipid and wasteful one. Children are not muppets. And SPAWN
unapologetically targets children. 

Title
Review for Anaconda (1997)
  A human has just been gulped by a 40 foot serpent. The reptilian then
proceeds to chase someone else and when it's ready to consume it's latest
prey, it suddenly spits out the person it has just swallowed. Not only that
but the man, mangled and deformed as in a cocoon, winks and then falls flat
down on the floor. Laughter overflowed my astonishment, as if the filmmakers
were in on the joke from the get-go.
   That is the basic premise for ANACONDA, an unrestrained, sometimes raunchy,
hilarious suspenser replete with inconceivable situations, and even more
unthinkable, cheesy B-movie momentoes that work more effectively as mass
entertainment than, say, THE SAINT. Pinpointing the better instances would
ruin the experience of laughing out loud while simultaneously finding yourself
rooting for the nebulous characters.
   As every chiller nowadays, ANACONDA  begins with an irrelevant scene whose
purpose is to demonstrate the raw power of the lizard. A man is calling for
help to some sort of station, since `something` is lurking towards him ( we
can tell because the camera rotates left and right). As the poor sap gets
frantically paranoid, the snake destroys half the boat, and there is no other
solution but for the man to climb all the way to the top and take his life
with a revolver.
   Okay, so the prologue has been instituted, now the movie can officially
start. The soon hunter Dr. Steven Cale ( Eric Stoltz ), an aesthete in finding
lost tribes who leads an expedition into the sweltering, damp Amazon jungle
where USC student director Terri Flores ( Jennifer Lopez, in her third film of
the year ) is shooting a documentary about the tribal experience. Among the
ciphers included in the crew is the cool, hip cameraman Danny Rich (Ice Cube),
the misplaced Brit narrator Warren Westridge (Jonathan Hyde), who practices
golf strokes and listens to classical music, and production manager Denise and
sound mixer Gary (who are also a couple in which the Anaconda catches at the
worst possible time) respectively played by Kari Wuhrer and Owen Wilson.
    For the initial fifteen minutes or so, the movie is a bad case of terribly
unimaginative and slow paced execution with artificial dialogue and inane
altercations, but this all changes when the crew rescue Paul Sarone (a droll
Jon Voight), an idiosyncratic and quite creepy Paraguayan snake hunter who
uses the boat as his personal chase to recuperate the viper alive for big
bucks, but the crew doesn't realize this yet. He does give malignant stares
and assumes a certain amount of distrust in his over-the-top Paraguayan
accent. 
   Voight's performance is what gives ANACONDA the much-needed jolt to elevate
the material into truly satisfying escapism. His cryptic, enigmatic looks and
bad, bad intentions make him an outstanding figure in these formulaic
thrillers, not since Andrei Konchalovsky's RUNAWAY TRAIN has he had a juicier
role and displayed it with a substantial amount of energy and durability. 
 Aside from Voight, ANACONDA is a fatuous, prosaic exercise in delivering 
cheap thrills in a usually slow moviegoing period of a year. There are the
washed up 
circumstances, the recycled `plot` twists and desperately desperate one
liners. ( The notable one is Ice Cube's remark: ` Man, I'm gettin' the hell
back to L.A ` ). Yet, accusing  ANACONDA from its obvious problems would be
like snatching a five year-old's toy. In movies like ANACONDA logistics are
eschewed to assure incredulous flexibility.
   The real star is the 40ft snake, a swaying, hand made creature which loses
its visceral charge when it attacks its victims, then it becomes a case of
visibly unripe animatronics. In the history of Hollywood snakes, I don't
recall a more colossal one than this one, commanded by director Luis Llosa
with the common sense of a Roger Corman OUTER LIMITS episode. When the camera
starts moving slowly and Randy Edelman's inviting score kicks in, it is as
inviting as pie, the snake wants to snack again. No spontaneous attacks here. 
   Scriptwriters Hans Bauer, Jim Cash and Jack Epps, Jr. are actually
interested in rendering the rituals the anaconda practices right before
eating. ` You get the privilege of having your bones break before the power of
their embrace causes your veins to explode, ` Sarone says at one point. There
is even a gruesome shot in which we're inserted into the thing's esophagus, as
his latest victim is filling it up. 
   And of course, we are subjected to a lonely eyeball, plenty of dead bodies,
explosions, chases, and totally unfounded scenes. (Sarone spills a gallon or
so of monkey blood over two of the crew members ). 
  The adequate manner to classify ANACONDA is not classifying it at all. I'd
call it an ecologically violent, bone-crunching, heart pounding, nail biting,
half-witted , JAWS-in-the-jungle rip-off. It's musty, alright, but not
flavorless. (1:30)
