Authors
Ryan McGinnis
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Contact (1997)
  After seeing the Contact sneek preview bundled with Batman and Robin, I
can honestly say that I've never had such a wonderfully bittersweet night
at the movies.  
  First off, Contact; this is a movie that I'm sure quite a few of you are
wondering about.  My abridged impression?  It's the first intelligent,
nonpandering -- hell, it's the BEST SciFi to come out in a long long time.
I always say that good SciFi is a SciFi that presents things in an exciting
fashion that one has never seen before.  Well, Contact most certainly did
that.
  The intro was incredible; in fact, had the movie kept the feel and pace
of the intro, it could have been another 2001 all over again.  However, the
movie went and did it's own thing -- which isn't a bad thing, as it did it
well.
  Funny I should mention 2001.  This movie would, I think, appeal to the
same people who are fans of 2001.  It doesn't pander, it expexts you to
simply get lost in the film.
  After the intro, there is a lul period of about 20 minutes where you
think "Damn, this movie is pretty so-so"... and then it takes off, and
never slows down until the end.  I'm not talking about senseless action or
cheesy plot devices (remember, Batman and Robin comes later), I'm talking
about an incredibly engrossing story, wonderfully magestic and powerfull
visuals, and cinematography/lighting/feel that at times _takes your breath
away_.  The whole movie feels _real_, not like a reencation.  There isn't
much suspension of disbelief, because there isn't much disbelief to suspend
-- everything occurs so naturally, that you wouldn't be surprised to see it
happening on CNN tommorow.  You literally get lost in the movie's universe,
something I haven't felt since Aliens.
  Oddly enough, there enough newsperson cameos in the film to make you
wonder how they arranged it; it seems the entire CNN crew was in it at one
point or another.
  However, the movie needs some serious editing.  It's sad, but true; even
though they didn't get all of the story into Contact (the ending leaves off
before the books ending; less things are explained), the movie is too long
at over 2 1/2 hours.  Of course, for the last hour and a half it's nothing
but building -- so (if you're a sci-fi fan) you won't be bored.  The ending
also needs to change (though I know it won't), as it seemed to be very,
very unconclusive and a sort of.. well, how do you put it.. you realize
that the movie could have ended 25 minutes earlier without any real
signifigant loss.  The film _needs_ editing.
  Still, don't get me wrong -- this film has a few bumps, but there is
still time for some last minute editing; _and_ even if nothing is changed,
it's still very, very, very much worth seeing.  But _only_ if you like
serious scifi -- if you're looking for Independance Day or Men in Black..
then this film isn't for you.  :)  It's not escapism.
  On that note, let me say that the CGI and effects in Contact were WITHOUT
A DOUBT the best I've *EVER* seen.  That's no joke -- some of it was eerie.
At no point could one tell that a CGI effect was a CGI effect.  There were
some parts of the film where I simply sank back into my chair and kinda
went "Oh my god.."; it was that good, it was that real.  It all was
seamlessley blended in; and the greatest part?  No effect was squandered.
Nothing was there simply to be there -- everything served a purpose in
advancing the plot or conveying a feeling.  It was the best integration,
and the best CGI I've ever had the pleasure of seeing.  :)  I noticed
(among other companies) that ILM was listed in the credits.. all I can say
is that if this is how far CGI has come, I'm very excited about the future.
:)
  Contact -- wow.  :)  If they can just shorten it a bit, and fix the
ending..   :)
  Honestly, I haven't seen a film this bad in.. well, years.  It's really,
really, really bad.  It's not even good escapism.  It's not even
entertaining.  Yeesh, if this was what I wanted to see, I've popped in a
Power Rangers tape.  Talk about raping a comic book icon.  :P  
  Effects were bad, plot was horrible, dialouge seemed to comprise of "Did
we get 'em!" and "FREEEZE, AhahAHAHAHAHA, FREEEEEZE!"  When we were
introduced to a bunch of hockeyplaying baddies in the first 2 minutes of
the film, I knew it'd be bad.  But honest to god, I never would have stayed
around to see B&R if I knew it was going to be that bad -- even though it
was a freebie.  
  I almost spit up my Coke when, in a scene where Robin was supposed to be
struggling for air as a plant pulled him underwater, the camera simply
tracked him coming up, looking around, and then _backed up_ (yes,
physically rewound) to make it appear he was being pulled back down.  It
wasn't even that way for style, it was just a shotcut.  :P
  It was nice to see a Kubrick homage in there (I noticed a few people
dressed up in the exact same clothes as Alex and the Droogs, complete with
cane), but it's almost an insult.
  George Clooney as Batman?  I can think of some _extras_ that would have
done a better job.  Shumacher should be tied to the ceiling and pelted with
mortar shells.  
  I can't really emphasize how bad this film was.  :P  I'd sooner gouge my
eyes out with hot flaming pokers than go and sit through that again.  I'd
sooner rip my arm off and beat myself into submission.  I bet Burton is
loading up his semi-auto as we speak.  The ghost of Ed Wood is rising from
his grave to personally give Shumacher hell for "wasting so much damned
money."  By the end I would have personally killed Alfred with a spork if
it would have just ended the damned film.  
