Authors
Sean Eric Fagan
Number of Reviews
4

Title
Review for Innocent Blood (1992)
     INNOCENT BLOOD started out poorly, in my opinion, with the leading
lady parading around her apartment in the nude (usually an inauspicious
beginning for a movie.)
     But it ended up being better than I originally thought it was going
to be (from the advertisements), and better than the beginning lead me
to believe it was going to be.
     Oh, it has lots of faults.  There are some inconsistencies in it,
which really annoy me (a couple of them could have been fixed by simply
removing a couple of scenes that didn't add much to the movie at all),
but there were not enough to make me decide I didn't like the film.  The
other really cheesey thing about it was the glowing eyes; the
commercials which had those made me think it was going to be a *really*
stupid movie.
     Well, it wasn't.  It wasn't a *great* movie, but I did manage to
enjoy it.  It could easily have been better, if, for example, the lead's
conflicts with her needs and her ethics had been dealt with more.  And
the ending leaves a lot unsaid (there are going to me *lots* of problems
about a week after the movie's ending, but isn't that always the case?
8-)).

Title
Review for Hero (1992)
     As I was watching HERO, I kept classifying the themes to myself,
and came up with: appearances, people's expectations, both of
themselves and others, and the truths behind those.
     That's not a bad description of what happens in the movie, although
there's a bit more, of course.  The first appearance, and expectation,
is that of Gale Gayley (Geena Davis), who appears to be a cool,
professional reporter.  But she lets her guard down while receiving an
award, to show that she is tired of uncovering the half-truths and
deceptions of supposedly "good" people to find the dirt beneath, or even
of finding that the "dirt" is, itself, a deception.
     The second appearance, and expectation, is that of Bernie Laplante,
who is a fence, convicted and awaiting sentencing.  The appearance he
presents to the world is that of a cold, self-centered, uncaring,
unkempt low-life.  The world, his ex-wife and kid, and himself have all
accepted him as this, and he doesn't want to break out of it.
     But, of course, if he didn't, it wouldn't be much of a movie.  So,
fate conspires to make a hero out of Bernie Laplante, much to his
dismay.  And while he is being a hero, the world, who expects so little
from him, never gives him a chance to explain.
     Enter the third, and most obvious, charade: John Bubber (Andy
Garcia), a man living in his car, who picks up Bernie after Bernie's car
breaks down the night after making himself an unknown hero.
     Bubber takes advantage of a situation, and becomes the hero
everyone is looking for.  And, surprisingly enough, he *is* a hero, in
all but deed.  He cares about other people, he is humble, he does his
best to use his fame and fortune for others.  Then, it turns out that he
was even an unrecognized hero in Vietnam, and he gets a medal.
     Bubber *is* a good man, whom fate has conspired to keep hidden.  He
takes advantage of fate's conspiracy with Bernie, and the public eats it
up.  And as the public grows to admire their fake hero, he grows into
the role, and continues to be a seemingly-honest and noble person.  (In
fact, the only thing he is *not* honest and noble about is taking credit
for Bernie in the first place.)
     The movie takes about one third of its length to set that all up,
and does a good job of it.  Hoffman is a convincing antiprotagonist,
just as Garcia is a convincing antiantigonist.
     In the end, of course, the truth is uncovered -- sort of.  But not
before Bubber becomes a hero, again, in both name and deed, and not
before Bernie also becomes another (unknown) hero -- again.
     I enjoyed this movie, although it was not enough to grab my entire
attention (otherwise, I would not have been able to keep thinking about
classifying the themes throughout the movie!).  I do recommend it,
however.  I suppose if I were going to rate it, I would give it a +3 on
a -5 to +5 scale.

Title
Review for Bicentennial Man (1999)
Directed by Chris Columbus.
Cast: Robin Williams, Embeth Davidtz, Sam Neill, Wendy Crewson, Oliver Platt, 
Hallie Kate Eisenberg, Lindz Letherman, Stephen Root, Kiersten Warren, Lynne 
Thigpen, Bradley Whitford, John Michael Higgins, George D. Wallace.
1999 - 131 minutes
Rated PG (for mild profanity and sexual dialogue).
I hadn't intended to post a review of this movie, but after seeing all of the
praise in rec.arts.sf.reviews, I decided I just had to.  Fair warning, though:
this commentary is full of spoilers, and I make no attempt to hide them.
Folks, this was a _bad_ movie.  It failed on every level it tried, with the
possible exception of some eye candy.  Were I still rating movies on the
IMMLSoMFtPF (Infamous Modified Mark Leeper Scale of -5 to +5), I would give
this movie a -2.
The story is allegedly based on Asimov's novella of the same name, as I am
sure everyone knows by now.  However, it's not very much based on it.  It
starts out with some of the same names and characters, but that's about where
it ends.
One of the first divergences is how the family reacts to Andrew.  Not accepted
by half of the family, and treated as a novelty by the father, we aren't given
any reason for anyone other than "Little Miss" to care so much about Andrew.
We also aren't given any reason to feel anything when he asks to buy himself.
One of the early poignant moments in the novella, I have always felt, was when
Andrew attempted to wear clothes -- they did not fit, and yet he wore them
anyway, as he attempted to "be human" we realize later in the story.  Yet this
is not the case in the movie -- he first puts on clothes for a wedding, and
just decides to keep wearing them.  Why?  No reason is ever shown, or implied
by the actions or dialogue of the characters.
Similarly, part of Andrew's greatness in the novella is his artistic bent.
Although the movie starts out along that path, it quickly drops it, and he
becomes a clockmaker.  There is no examination into his woodcarving talent, or
why it moves people so -- in fact, in the movie, Andrew makes clocks because
that is what Sir does.
Similarly, Andrew's attempts to turn himself into a cyborg are treated
differently:  instead of Andrew being the inventor, he is an experimental
subject, maybe an artistic designer, maybe, at most, an assistant, and the
real genius is provided by a human.
And the worst offense, I thought, was the introduction of a romance, between
Sir's great-granddaughter and Andrew.
Now, I have only talked about differences between the novella and the movie;
those, by themselves, would not have caused me to dislike the movie.  No, I
disliked the movie because it _failed_.
As a comedy, most of the humour was simply not funny; in one early scene with
Andrew telling jokes, the laughter of the family seemed very strained; the
audience I was in laughed a bit, but not as much as we should have, given that
this was a Robin Williams movie.
The movie also tried to be a drama, and failed there as well.  A hugely
dramatic point in the story is when Sir dies, and Andrew is there at his side.
Yet by deviating from the novella so much, and not coming up with equivalent
material, we are not shown any real friendship between Sir and Andrew.
_Some_, yes, but not enough to touch the soul as it should have.
Next, of course, is the romance.  Which I truly wish had not been there, but
_still_ could have resulted in a touching story of what it means to be human,
and would have given Andrew a reason to be.  But that would have required more
effort and talent than the writers and directors of this movie were either
willing or able to give.  And instead of a traumatic scene when Andrew is
first denied his humanity (and, again:  _why_ does he want it so much?  By
what right is he able to present his petition to the "World Congress"
directly?), we have a scene filled with some regrets, but not much else.  And
that, of course, means that the scene where he _is_ given his humanity also
fails.
The last aspect of this movie, and its failure, bugs me the most:  as a
speculative fiction story, this movie is simply not all that speculative.
There are robots:  fine.  What is the status of them?  How have they affected
society?  The robots are now allowed to harm a human being, or, through
inaction, allow a human to be harmed -- a robot in a domestic situation is
going to be quite challenged, I should think, and yet they barely touch that.
(A _single_ line, where Andrew says he cannot say who ordered him to jump out
of a window, as it would cause family strife, was all they dared do.)  These,
and others, are themes that Asimov (and others) looked into, and, really, any
movie based on an Asimov robot story should at least _acknowledge_ these
possibilities.
And the end of the movie has two more failures.  First is that Andrew dies
before he hears the proclamation.  While this could have worked, it managed
not to, and is one of the few times in this movie where going with the cliche
would have worked better.  And the last is that a character, who is then
revealed to be a robot, violates one of the three Laws of Robotics -- and no
comment is made on this, I am guessing simply because it was forgotten.
------- End of forwarded message -------

Title
Review for Crow, The (1994)
     This is the third time I've tried to write a review of THE CROW,
which I saw early this afternoon.  My first review consisted, solely,
of "Wow."  The second one I gave up on because it was too chaotic.
     So let's get down to the nitty-gritty:  THE CROW is a fine film.
I think it's going to make Tim Burton *really* jealous.  It has a
darkness and realism that BATMAN should have had, but didn't.
     I won't talk too much about the story, because I don't want to
give it away.  It is, however, fairly typical (and the fact that I can
say that places me in a minority of strange people, but readers of
these groups do fit into the same minority) of its genre.
     Some of the advertisements say, "Believe in Angels."  That is a
good summation of part of the movie.  It could also be said to deal
with magic, and has some strong, classical symbols (All Hallow's Eve,
crows [who'd've guessed? 8-)], a specific time span, etc.).
     Our hero is superhuman.  Or maybe transhuman.  Played by Brandon
Lee (who, in case there is somebody who doesn't know, died just before
filming finished for the movie), he manages to portray, at the
beginning of the movie, a surprising amount of pain, confusion, and
rage.  All without saying a word, and mostly through *motion*, not
facial expressions.  Shortly thereafter, he puts on makeup, which
reminded me of Johnny Depp in EDWARD SCISSORHANDS.  (But this is not
*bad*.  As I said earlier, there is a starkness that is reminiscent of
some Tim Burton movies, but which seems *real*, not contrived.  And one
of my first thoughts after Lee put on his makeup was that Depp could
*never* have done this part.  And Depp impressed me greatly in EDWARD
SCISSORHANDS!)
     Our hero is ... a captivating part of the movie.  The character
itself, and Lee's portrayal, were, to me, transfixing.  And oh so
intense!  For the first fifteen or twenty minutes of the movie, all I
could think was "Wow!"
     It did not, however, continue that level of intensity.  Which is,
in some ways, a pity, but probably necessary.  I can't really picture
myself watching 100 or more minutes like that.
     That first part of the movie is the cause for all the praise I
reap on it.  The rest of the movie is, unfortunately, more traditional,
probably meeting some formula somewhere in Hollywood.  But that doesn't
mean it is *bad*.  Or even not good.  As a whole, it is an excellent
fantasy story (I probably wouldn't classify it as horror, myself, but
the distributors have).
     I highly recommend this movie.  I'd give it a +4.5 on a -5 to +5
scale.  I also highly recommend seeing it at a *GOOD* theatre, with
large screen, excellent sound, etc.  I can't imagine enjoying it the
same way on a small screen (such as video).
