Authors
MR JONATHAN RICHARDS
Number of Reviews
4

Title
Review for Mystery Men (1999)
     "Mystery Men" is high-concept satire with low-concept execution,
a spoof of superhero conventions that finds itself unable to leap low
comedy at a single bound.  It's full of smart lines and ideas, and yet
its sophomoric leaden-footedness renders it as bankrupt of comic
superpowers as the inept title characters.
Champion City, home to the superstar superhero Captain Amazing
(Greg Kinnear), has hit a crime drought.  Thanks to his crime-busting
talents, the few remaining crooks are pathetic gangs up only to such
criminal enterprises as crashing a dance at a nursing home and
stealing wigs and dentures.
A trio of superhero wannabes -- Mr. Furious (Ben Stiller), who
gets furious and rides a Harley compatible; The Blue Rajah (Hank
Azaria), who speaks with an affected British accent and throws forks;
and The Shoveler (William H. Macy), a decent family man who hits
people with a shovel -- tries to foil the nursing home caper, but even
at this they have to be bailed out by Amazing, an effective but
preening and commercialized crime-fighter whose face appears on
billboards all over the city, and whose uniform is plastered with
advertising logos. But Amazing, faced with the Alexandrine dilemma of
no new worlds to conquer, arranges to spring his former arch enemy,
the evil genius Cassanova Frankenstein (Geoffrey Rush), from the
nuthouse.  When Frankenstein turns the tables and captures Amazing,
the hapless trio springs into action to save him and Champion City.
To recruit some backup they hold superhero auditions which
produce aspirants even more hopless than the core trio.  Out of this
pool they select Invisible Boy (Kel Mitchell), who can only be
invisible when nobody's looking; The Spleen (Paul Reubens), who farts
spectacularly; The Bowler (Janeane Garofalo), who flings a transparent
bowling ball with her mafioso father's skull inside it; and The Sphinx
(Wes Studi), who utters deeply inane nuggets of wisdom.
There are moments of wit, and Macy does his best to lend comic
dignity to the production.  Garofalo utters her one-liners with
spirit, and Kinnear makes a nicely pompous hero when the inanity of
his dialogue doesn't hog-tie him tighter than his nemesis ever could.
It sounds so much better than it plays.  When a movie gets some
of its biggest laughs from flatulence, it is probably fair to conclude
that it stinks.

Title
Review for Runaway Bride (1999)
     Like a pair of former lovers trying to stir up the embers of a
dead affair, Richard Gere and Julia Roberts are together again, but
the magic that lit the screen in Garry Marshall's surprise 1990 hit
"Pretty Woman" is dead, and there's no bringing it back to life.
"Runaway Bride" is a calculated, empty shakedown of audiences
yearning for another round of the fairytale charm that made a
superstar of Roberts a decade ago.  The original notion was to do
"Pretty Woman II", but the parties involved couldn't agree on a
formula, so they had to settle for a new story.  This time Gere's a
misogynistic journalist who hears a tale in a bar about a Maryland
woman (Roberts) who keeps leaving grooms at the altar.  Without
checking a single fact he writes an error-riddled, actionable diatribe
in his USA Today column, naming names.  To the veteran journalist's
amazement, this gets him fired.  His boss (Rita Wilson), who is also
his ex-wife, has to pull his plug, but her husband (Hector Elizondo),
who is also his pal, offers to get him a cover story in GQ if he can
get the skinny on the runaway bride.
He jumps at the offer -- media superstar though he is, he isn't
syndicated, and the USA Today column seems to be his only gig (by the
looks of his penthouse, it must pay well.)  Down he goes to Maryland,
where the townspeople, and even Julia's family , welcome him as if he
were Pat Sajak.  The only person who shows any resistance to his charm
is Roberts herself, but she comes around quicker than you might think.
The screenplay is peppered with comedy cliches, like the coach
who talks only in sports terms, and the horny grandma who says things
like "I like his tight butt," a line with echoes that Gere might have
preferred left alone.  Joan Cusack adds some life with her dependable
comic flair.  But neither Gere nor Roberts get characters written with
any reference to reality, and despite his silver hair and lean jaw,
and her incandescent smile, there's not much they can do with a
relationship so obviously constructed on the page rather than in the
heart.  This isn't chemistry, it's instant coffee.

Title
Review for Dick (1999)
     "Dick" is a very funny 95-cent idea diluted by inflation to a
buck and a half.  There are good jokes and performances, but it's
essentially sketch humor stretched out to fill feature requirements.
The goodwill purchased by the early laughs goes a long way toward
carrying the flat stretches.  Eventually, though, there's no avoiding
the fact that things have run aground.  There's a noticeable gap in
amusement, and it extends beyond the legendary 18-1/2 minutes.
     Despite the fact that the central characters are a couple of
teenage girls, the appeal of "Dick" will be primarily to those old
enough to appreciate the minutia of Watergate trivia; if plumbers,
duct tape, and Rosemary Woods and the 18-1/2 minute gap mean nothing
to you, parts of this movie will be as impenetrable as puns in
Chinese.
     Betsy (Kirsten Dunst) and Arlene (Michelle Williams) are
teenyboppers in Washington DC with a serious thing for Bobby Sherman
(if you're under thirty-five I'm already losing you.)  When they sneak
out of Arlene's Watergate apartment at midnight to post a letter to
the pop idol's fan club, they tape a door to the building's garage for
purposes of re-entry.  At the same time a third-rate burglary is in
progress at the Democratic National Committee offices upstairs.  When
a security guard finds the taped lock he calls the cops, and sets in
motion the irresistible tide of events that will eventually sweep
Richard M.  Nixon from office.
     The girls get separated from their class on a White House tour,
meet the President and his minions, and wind up with a gig as official
dogwalkers for the mutt everyone insists on calling Checkers.  From
this vantage point they have a chance to observe plenty of chicanery
and dirty tricks around the Nixon White House, and even bring in some
specially baked cookies from home that influence world leaders and
events.  They develop a meaningful relationship with Woodward and
Bernstein, and the rest is history, of a sort.
     Dunst and Williams are squealy, girlish fun, but the best of
"Dick" belongs to the man who plays him, Dan Hedaya.  With his hunched
shoulders, bristling eyebrows, and dark jowls he seems born to the
role of Tricky Dick, and he makes Nixon entertaining enough that you
almost want him back again on Watergate's 25th anniversary to kick
around some more.
     "Dick" is uneven satire.  The high points are probably enough to
make the trip worth while, but be prepared for long stretches of
tedium.

Title
Review for Blair Witch Project, The (1999)
THE BLAIR WITCH PROJECT
Written and Directed by Daniel Myrick and Eduardo Sanchez
With Heather Donahue, Michael Williams, Joshua Leonard
 R    87 min
     You've been dining for weeks on haute cuisine with designer
ingredients and frou-frou presentations; suddenly you find yourself
munching a roadhouse cheeseburger, and nothing ever tasted so good.
This, in essence, is the appeal of the indie thriller phenomenon "The
Blair Witch Project".  To a public sated with the billion-dollar
effects of modern cinema tech, there's something irresistible about
this bare-bones little horror story, shot on 16mm and high-8 video,
without any special effects, on a budget you could carry in your
pocket in coins.
     "Blair" is a faux documentary (the hip word is "mockumentary"; I
offer "crockumentary").  It purports to be footage shot by a trio of
student filmmakers (Heather Donahue, Michael Williams, and Joshua
Leonard) that was discovered a year after they disappeared in the
Maryland woods while shooting a documentary about a legendary
child-killing witch.
     Heather, Josh, and Mike start off in high spirits, recording each
other in the car and the motel room.  They interview locals and
explore sites connected to the folklore.  Then they head into the
woods with backpacks, a map, and a compass in search of an old
graveyard.  The seem to have plenty of film and an endless appetite
for shooting it.
     But soon they're hopelessly lost, and this is where the
creepiness creeps in.  Fear comes at them from two angles -- the
growing terror of being lost in the woods, and the encroaching horror
of the witch lore.  They begin to hear things -- real, or hysterical
suggestion?  They begin to find things -- ominous ritualistic-looking
bundles of sticks and piles of stones.  Something's out there...is it
supernatural, or psychotic?  Tempers flare, nerves crack.  Things get
very, very bad.  Then they get worse.
     Point-of-view is the inspiration that makes this movie click.
Everything we see is recorded by the young documentarians on their
16mm b&w production camera and the color camcorder brought by Heather
to document her documentary.  We're there with them -- there's no
omniscient crew, no other reality behind the camera.  It's all
subjective, hand-held, grainy and jerky.  On the upside this provides
immediacy; on the downside, it can make you a little nauseous, and you
welcome moments when the screen goes black and there's only audio from
the DAT recorder.
     "Blair" is a welcome antidote to gore, gadgets, explosions, and
computerized excess.  But despite the internet-orchestrated hype, it's
not the scariest thing you've ever seen.  It lives and dies on
credibility, and having committed themselves to the first-person
camera, the filmmakers find themselves in the awkward position of
having to keep the camera rolling when circumstances make it almost
impossible to believe.
