Authors
Martin Rich
Number of Reviews
11

Title
Review for Cry, the Beloved Country (1995)
     This story of two men from the South African countryside, one
white and one black, and their sons entangled in the same violent
events in Johannesburg, is one of the most famous and memorable
accounts of apartheid.  The novel was written by Alan Paton, a white
South African teacher, just after World War II, and filmed by Zoltan
Korda in 1951.
     So it was perhaps inevitable that, with the demise of apartheid
and the opening up of trade with South Africa, one of the first films
to be released to an international market would be a new version of
CRY, THE BELOVED COUNTRY.  It received its European premiere at
the London Film Festival last weekend and will go on release in the US
in a week's time.
     On the strength of its showing in London, the new film deserves to
succeed.  It works brilliantly at many levels beyond its portrayal of
apartheid.  There is the bewilderment of the black priest at the centre
of the film, when he first sees how his family live in Johannesburg.
There is the subtlety of the issues when a white man is murdered--but
the white man apparently embroiled in a racial dispute is actually a
liberal, and regarded by friends as a faint curiosity, for his
sympathetic treatment of the "natives."  There is the contrast
between collective violence, and bigotry, and racism, and the
acceptance and optimism shown by the individual characters.
     The playwright Ronald Harwood started working with CRY, THE
BELOVED COUNTRY, a few years ago when Johannesburg's Market Theatre
looked into the possibility of a stage version.  This was the idea that
evolved into Harwood's screenplay for the new film.  This is relevant,
partly because it is a reminder that the idea behind the film actually
predates the South African elections, partly because occasionally the
dialogue can appear formal and understated, in a way that suggests the
script's origins for the stage.
     Nevertheless the style of dialogue is appropriate to the story,
and the leading players--James Earl Jones and Richard Harris--invest
their roles with a good deal of humanity which is crucial to the
narrative.  And the whole film looks and sounds great: visually it
makes the most of the beautiful rural surroundings and their contrast
with the teeming city.
     It isn't always comfortable viewing, but its emotional power is
immense.  And its reminder, of quite how complex perceptions of good
and evil actually are, is as important as ever.

Title
Review for Breaking the Waves (1996)
In the 1970s, a closed, puritan, religious community in a remote part of
Scotland is transformed by the arrival of oil-workers from around the
world.  A young local woman falls in love with, and marries, a Norwegian
oil worker against the advice of the elders of the community.
Lars von Trier's film, Breaking the Waves, is the story of what happened
to this marriage - the husband is injured and, at his behest, his wife
searches for other men to have sex with.  Superficially this is a slight
story, but it has been made into an epic and powerful film.  Many of the
images are uncomfortable, especially of the stifling effect of the
closed community, and the ability of the village's elders to hurt a
family by ostracising its members.  If you are prepared for these
images, it is an excellent film which certainly deserves the awards that
it has received.
The styles of the 1970s were characterised by browns and oranges, and
the cinematography in 'Breaking the Waves' gives the scenery an orange
tint that somehow seems appropriate to the era.  Bess, the central
character played by Emily Watson, and Jan the husband played by Stellan
Skarsgaard, appear in the fashions of the 1970s and are in stark
contrast to other villagers whose appearance and lifestyle seem to have
changed little with the centuries.
Between the chapters there are short, beautiful, still shots of the
Scottish scenery, accompanied by music from the 1970s.  Between these
interludes there is little music - conveying the atmosphere of a place
where even the church bells have been removed because they are deemed
unnecessary.
The film is about the effect of an oppressive society, and about the
difficulties of a troubled person in finding a way to live their life. 
These difficulties are most graphically expressed in Bess's curious
dialogues with God, where she speaks both parts and is tortured by
whether her every move is going to earn God's favour.  It isn't
anti-religious, but condemns such a dour expression of religion that can
sentence a woman to silence because she dares to speak in church, and
allows its elders to consign a dead person to hell at their funeral.
Emily Watson's performance is remarkable for her range of emotion, and
her ability to convey the turmoil beneath a troubled exterior.  Also
very fine is the performance by Adrian Rawlins as the English doctor,
unfamiliar with the ways of the community, whose reaction to Bess moves
from professional concern, to support, to pure frustration.
It's rarely comfortable viewing, but an exceptional film nonetheless

Title
Review for Full Monty, The (1997)

Seen within a few minutes of one another last week in London: a series 
of advertisements for computers running the Windows NT system, with the 
slogan 'The Full MoNTy', and a headline in a tabloid newspaper crying 
'Give us the Full Monty, Gordon'.
It's a measure of the film's success that the description 'the full 
Monty', until now more often associated with the English cooked 
breakfast, has become so widely used in recent weeks.  And, given that 
the film is about male strippers, the mind boggles at that tabloid 
headline, which was actually about Britain's reluctance to commit to a 
fiscal union with the rest of Europe.
The plot of the film is very simple - a group of redundant Sheffield 
steelworkers are looking for alternative ways to earn their keep and, 
in desperation, come up with the idea of mounting a strip show.  But 
the effect is in the execution, and in the acting; there are such 
wonderful moments as when a redundant foreman, played by Tom Wilkinson, 
has a visit from the bailiffs, or when the slightly tubby steelworker 
played by Mark Addy attempts a very novel approach to losing weight.
Starting with an archive film from the 1970s, about Sheffield's then 
thriving industry, 'The Full Monty' actually tells us a great deal 
about the collapse of a society based on heavy industry.  Light-hearted 
as it is, it addresses a very important question: when the traditional 
sources of livelihood in places like Sheffield disappear, what needs to 
replace them?
It's good fun, and good-natured fun as well because the characters are 
invariably both fallible and likeable.  Despite being set among such 
economic desolation, a genuine feel-good film.

Title
Review for Xich lo (1995)
Vietnam, in the context of films, is usually associated with the 
proliferation of Vietnam war films.  But 'Cyclo', and the same director's 
earlier 'The Scent of Green Papaya', portray a very different view of 
Vietnam.  Tran Anh Hung's films concentrate on everyday life in Vietnam, 
before (in the case of 'Papaya'), and since (in the case of 'Cyclo') the 
war.
Both films share the same acute observation of the dynamics of a family. 
Both share the same slow, deliberate, development of their themes.  Where 
'Papaya' was a gentle chronicle of the development of a family, 'Cyclo' 
shows an altogether les pleasant side of life.  Its central character is 
the driver of a rickshaw taxi, who is innocent and well-meaning but is 
gradually drawn into petty crime and corruption.  In tha background, the 
contrasts between the affluent, the poor, and the sleazy in present-day 
Vietnam are brutally portrayed.  The sound of the motorcycle engine that 
powers the rickshaw, runs in the background almost continuously, and 
helps to convey the noisy, dusty, feel of a city in the far East.
Despite the film's gentle pace, its message is planted firmly in the 
viewers' minds.  There is some violence, but, more powerful than the 
violence, there are scenes where characters look on impassively, at the 
most cold-blooded treatment of others.  It doesn't make comfortable 
watching, but does record how easily people can be brutalised.  Vietnam 
is developing now as a destination for tourism, and a country on the edge 
of the affluent Pacific Rim.  Far as 'Cyclo' is from the stuff of 
mainstream cinema, it is a salutary reminder that Vietnam remains a 
troubled land.

Title
Review for Secrets & Lies (1996)
'Secrets and Lies', the latest film from Mike Leigh, is a complex story 
built around a simple theme.  It asks how effectively we can live behind 
secrets, and looks at how little we might actually know about others in 
our own family.  Its message, if it has one, is that openness helps - 
even if it's painful, and that even when the truth is ugly we're better 
for knowing it.
It centres around three households in very different parts of London: a 
young, black, single woman working as an optometrist, an upwardly mobile 
photographer and his wife, and a mother and her road-sweeper daughter 
living in a tiny, run-down, terraced house.  All are connected, though to 
say why would be to give away too much of the film.
Like all Mike Leigh's films, this one was built up using improvisation.  
But its plot has a direction and a coherence which belie the method used 
to create it.  There are points where Mike Leigh plays tricks on the 
audience, sometimes by involving us in the deceit that's at the centre of 
the film, sometimes by presenting us with scenes which may, or may not, 
be significant in the rest of the narrative.
Interestingly, the strongest dynamics in the film are between the women; 
even though the photographer is an important part, he acts as a foil to 
the other characters' arguments, most effectively while serving the meat 
from a barbecue.  All the performances and characterisations are good - 
and the actors have resisted the temptation to develop into caricatures. 
 Marianne Jean-Baptiste, as Hortense, the optometrist with the incredibly 
mobile face, and Brenda Blethyn as Cynthia, the nervous single mother 
both excel, but Timothy Spall as the photographer, and Phyllis Logan as 
his prim, obsessive, wife are also good.
Throughout the film there are incidents which touch on the themes of 
truth and honesty, moments where you wonder whether characters are 
telling the truth or not.  What about the photographer's client who 
ascribes her facial injuries to the seat belt breaking in a car accident 
(she needs the picture to claim compensation)?  And do we believe 
Hortense's friend who brags in the kitchen about her sexual exploits?
'Secrets and Lies' opens this week in the UK, and the interest that it 
generated at Cannes should ensure a reasonable international release.  At 
a preview this weekend, the audience broke into a spontaneous round of 
applause as the credits rolled, applause which was well deserved.

Title
Review for English Patient, The (1996)
So much has been written about 'The English Patient' - about its twelve 
Oscar nominations and about the interest that it has generated in 
America and about its relationship with Michael Ondaatje's novel, that 
it's hard to see it without huge expectations.  It is a film on a grand 
scale: its length, and the music, and the huge desert landscapes remind 
us of that, and the principal performances which are grand in their own 
right.
More importantly, the story is strong enough to support such a grand 
interpretation.  There are two intertwined stories, one in Italy during 
the second world war and one in North Africa a few years earlier.  They 
are linked by the English patient - Ralph Fiennes - who in the later 
story has suffered horrific injuries and apparently total amnesia.
In fact the patient isn't English at all - and we much later discover 
that he has every reason to feel bitterness at the English.  But this 
blurring of national identities is important to the film.  Both he and 
the French-Canadian nurse - Juliette Binoche - who cares for him in the 
wartime scenes, are individuals, nomadic and stateless, and are somehow 
united by their individuality.  It's a powerful portrayal of people who 
don't fit into conventional categories, and the characters in the film 
are stronger for their individuality.
The pre-war scenes centre around an affair between the patient and a 
young, recently-married, British woman - Kristin Scott Thomas.  There 
is a poignant remark about leaving different nations behind and trying 
to build something finer - just as the impending war makes this 
impossible.  In some ways that remark seems like a metaphor for 
twentieth century history.  Certainly the film has a lot to say about 
how the characters' patterns of friendship and trust shift as history 
passes.
Exceptional performances include both the principal actresses: Juliette 
Binoche conveys the most extraordinary range of emotions, and Kristin 
Scott Thomas shifts perfectly from the colonial wife to the flirtatious 
mistress.  But Naveen Andrews' performance as the Sikh bomb disposal 
expert, Kip, also deserves mention, especially in a particularly tense 
scene where he tries to defuse a bomb just as tanks are about to pass 
to celebrate the allied victory.
This is cinema for grown-ups, cinema which really works because it 
leaves points for the audience to interpret, and because it works at 
many levels.  Superficially it is an old-fashioned film, with much 
flying in biplanes and many heroic deeds by dashing men in uniform.  
But this is really a mere allusion to such films, and the way that 'The 
English Patient' addresses colonialism is very contemporary.
Look on it purely as a romance and you might be disappointed.  But look 
more deeply at the portrayal of the people, and their dependence on one 
another, and of the cruelty that's sometimes inflicted in the cause of 
patriotism, and this is one of the most memorable and moving films that 
I have seen.
-- 
Martin Rich  Phone(0171) 477 8627  Fax(0171) 477 8628
Lecturer in Information Management, City University Business School     
Frobisher Crescent, Barbican Centre, London EC2Y 8HB, UK  M.G.Rich@city.ac.uk
http://www.city.ac.uk/martin

Title
Review for Smoke (1995)
In 1990 the novelist Paul Auster was stuck with a creative block.  The 
piece which broke that block was a brief Christmas story, about the 
proprietor of a tobacco shop in Brooklyn.  Now that story has spawned two 
films, 'Smoke', and its rather different follow-up 'Blue in the Face'.  
'Smoke', though dated 1994 in the credits, opened in the UK in mid-April 
this year.  Both films are credited to Auster and to the director Wayne 
Wang.
'Smoke' is built from a series of carefully thought out, intricately 
intertwined, stories.  The stories document a series of coincidences, and 
some intertwined lives, based around the people who pass through that 
tobacco shop.  Interestingly, the film is specifically set in 1990, the 
year when the Christmas story was published.
How autobiographical is it?  How much does the film play tricks on our 
imagination, by showing a writer and his character in conversation?  
Where Harvey Keitel's tobacconist tells William Hurt's author a story, is 
it a metaphor for the writer's creative process?  Does Paul Auster create 
his characters first, and then think about what might happen in their 
lives?
One, compelling, theme is the depth that can exist in everyday life.  
This is best illustrated by the series of photographs taken every 
morning: at first sight each street scene is the same, but a closer look 
reveals all sorts of differences from day to day.  The same is true of 
the stories in the film - all of them repay more than a cursory glance.  
Harold Perrineau Jr's Rashid (at least he's called Rashid in the credits) 
personifies this uncertainty, changing his name, his personality, how he 
fills his days according to whose company he is in.
But the greatest achievement of 'Smoke' is that it manages to be a warm, 
upbeat film without straying into blandness.  And its characters are 
optimistic and likeable without being part of any fictional, idealised, 
happy family; in fact there is deception and dishonesty galore.  It's 
well worth seeing.
One word of warning: don't leave the second that the first credits 
appear, because a significant part of the story is told over the first 
few credits.

Title
Review for Keep the Aspidistra Flying (1997)
To George Orwell, an aspidistra was a sign of a bourgeois household.  
In this film derived from Orwell's (partly autobiographicl) novel, when 
George Comstock, played by Richard E Grant, is handed an aspidistra by 
his landlady in a seedy shared house in London, he knows that he has 
not left his bourgeois roots behind.
Orwell's novel forms the basis for this likeable romantic comedy.  It 
traces the fortunes of an advertising copywriter who, attracted by the 
idea of life as an impoverished artist, gives up his job in the hope of 
becoming a poet.  The film looks wonderful, and takes its 1930s look 
from the magnificent art deco office where the central character is 
employed at the start.  And the dialogue moves at a good pace, even if 
the social satire is neither as relevant nor as pointed as it would 
have been in Orwell's time.
Richard E Grant plays opposite Helena Bonham Carter, as his girlfriend 
Rosemary - who also works within the same advertising business.  The 
dynamic between the two principal characters is well portrayed - though 
at times one wonders why they bothered to stay in contact at all...  
The transition between affluent London and the slums of Lambeth also 
comes across well.  And while to contemporary Londoners such a contrast 
looks implausible, in the 1930s there was little gentrification around 
areas such as Lambeth.
'Keep the Aspidistra Flying' was criticised, as an opening film for the 
London Film Festival, for being insuffuciently bold an innovative.  But 
it remains an enjoyable and well-made and fine-looking film.

Title
Review for It's a Wonderful Life (1946)
Two events - the fiftieth anniversary of the film being made and the 
death of Jimmy Stewart during 1997 - prompted the re-release, in a new 
print, of 'It's a Wonderful Life'.
This seasonal fable by Frank Capra, set in a snow-covered American 
small town, has become a staple of Christmas television in the US.  It 
isn't quite as familiar in Britain, but it's a good enough film to 
repay seeing in a cinema.
Jimmy Stewart plays George Bailey, the local hero of the small town of 
Bedford Falls.  He rejects offers of foreign travel and an exotic 
future to run the family business, a philanthropic savings bank, and to 
preserve it from the attentions of Potter, a callous millionaire played 
by Lionel Barrymore in a truly evil manner.  All goes well until one 
Christmas, when Bailey's world starts to collapse around him, and 
divine intervention is called for in the way that only a film can 
portray.
Of course it's dated in places: in particular the assumption that the 
worst fate that could have befallen Donna Reed's character, had she 
never met her husband, would have been to become an unmarried 
librarian, looks very strange in 1997.  The division between the heroes 
in the small-town, caring, bank and the villains looks quaint and 
over-simple today.  And if somebody as virtuous as George Bailey, who 
had saved his brother as a child, and built up the family business 
against the odds, only deserved a second class guardian angel, what 
hope is there for the rest of us?
But some of the film's strength is actually in its sense of period.  
Straight after the second world war, it didn't just satisfy a need for 
a feel-good movie, but it also mirrored a society intent on 
reconstruction, and one where each community's war hero was feted.  
It also resists the temptation to show its hero as perfect.  George 
Bailey doesn't just contemplate suicide (never the easiest topic to 
deal with), but he arrives home irritable when his children are 
preparing for Christmas, he gets into fights, and he even makes life 
difficult for the angel who is trying to help him.  Drama this good is 
always worth watching - even fifty years after it was filmed.

Title
Review for Richard III (1995)
Shakespeare's plays contain some of the most graphic descriptions of 
inhumanity ever.  We tend to overlook these, perhaps because we are used 
to quite decorous productions of Shakespeare, but this adaptation of 
Richard III for the cinema proves that Shakespeare is still well able to 
shock.
There is, in fact, blood and gore a-plenty.  We have children being 
suffocated, a man stabbed while having sex tied to a bedpost, one of the 
King's brothers attacked in his bath, and a hospital of the most 
extraordinary grimness.  I wonder through what quirk of literary 
sensibility the film came to be classified as a '15' in Britain.
But, if you can stomach the violence, you will see a fine portrayal of an 
empire weighed down by decadence, and by lack of respect for human life. 
Ian McKellen is Richard, and also collaborated on distilling the 
screenplay from Shakespeare's original work.  As a callous, embittered, 
hunchback he is frightening - the more so because he is so cool and 
embittered.  The cast is tremendous - especially Annette Bening and 
Maggie Smith as two of the women caught in Richard's machinations.  
Shakespeare's text has been cut to little more than half its original 
length, but preserving much of the original wording and ensuring that the 
story moves on at an impressive pace.
Thanks to carefully designed sets, costumes (details such as the watch 
that Richard wears), music, and some terrific locations, the film has a 
fine and accurate period feel.  But it isn't Richard III's period, nor is 
it Shakespeare's.  This production is set in a mythical 1930s London, 
torn by civil war, and lest we doubt the sort of monarch that Richard 
was, his supporters wave red and white banners which owe a lot to Nazi 
imagery.
Setting Shakespeare out of his own time will always be controversial.  
But some of the best stage productions have been in twentieth century 
dress: during the 1980s the Royal Shakepeare Company transplanted the 
Merry Wives of Windsor to the 1950s, an age of 'new Elizabethans', and 
more recently the Royal Court staged King Lear in the early 20th century. 
In the same way, this adaptation uses its new context to advantage.  
Richard's fascist tendencies, and his predecessor's glamorous American 
wife, both have echoes of Edward VIII.  And Shakespeare's 
characterisation is timeless; he didn't write plays to be performed as 
period pieces, and it's appropriate that we don't see them as period 
pieces either.
Those locations deserve a few further remarks.  The 'tower' is actually 
Battersea Power Station.  For the final battle it is pictured overlooking 
a vast open space - Bosworth Field - in defiance of both history and 
geography, but to great effect.  The film owes a lot to the Gilbert Scott 
family of architects, as St Pancras Station also appears on several 
occasions.  And there is Brighton Pavilion, its fanciful architecture and 
its associations with yet another generation of royalty making it into a 
symbol of royal decadence.  Shell-Mex House is the King's urban base.
If you're prepared to see Shakespeare in a new light, see this film.
-- 
Martin Rich                               (0171) 477 8627
Lecturer in Information Management  Fax(0171) 477 8628
City University Business School,    M.G.Rich@city.ac.uk
Frobisher Crescent,         http://www.city.ac.uk/~sf309/home.html
Barbican Centre, London EC2Y 8HB, UK

Title
Review for Robinson in Space (1997)
'Robinson in Space' is an off-beat, literary, view of England - with a 
very brief excursion into France and Belgium - through the eyes of two 
men taking part in a curious, enigmatic, survey.  It's hardly 
mainstream cinema, but is a very perceptive account of England's 
changing landscape, or what might be termed a post-industrial economy.
Its director Patrick Keiller established the style with the film 
'London' three years ago.  As with 'London' the two characters are the 
explorer, Robinson, and an un-named narrator, and as before we see 
neither of them and only hear the voice of the narrator, played by Paul 
Schofield.  Robinson, formerly an art lecturer, is now teaching in 
Reading; we are never quite told the reasons but his first survey 
apparently made him enough enemies to drive him out of London.  
Robinson is preoccupied by literary references - especially those to 
Daniel Defoe: presumably the name Robinson is derived from Robinson 
Crusoe.  Early in the film, the references to writers comme thick and 
fast - along with a few other topics such as world-war 2 aicraft, and 
the substance Buckminster-Fullerine.
Robinson has a keen eye for the surreal, and for signs of a country no 
longer the industrial power that it once was.  Early in the film we see 
customers waiting outside a record shop to meet Adam Ant.  Later, the 
Queen is opening a new plant - built by the Korean company Samsung.  
Coal, once such an important natural resource, is now imported from 
South Africa.
True, there are times when the narrator appears too preoccupied with 
the facts and figures of Britain's industrial decline - and some more 
literary allusions would lighten the tone.  But it's a 
thought-provoking and very individual film - essentially a documentary 
but one which gently draws us into its own view of life.
But maybe it's not as literary as it seems, and maybe the name isn't 
really taken from Daniel Defoe.  Robinson and Keiller (the director's 
name) are both makes of marmalade.  Surely this is no coincidence...
-- 
Martin Rich  Phone(0171) 477 8627  Fax(0171) 477 8628
Lecturer in Information Management, City University Business School     
Frobisher Crescent, Barbican Centre, London EC2Y 8HB, UK  M.G.Rich@city.ac.uk
http://www.city.ac.uk/martin
