Authors
David Gardiner
Number of Reviews
5

Title
Review for Blue Velvet (1986)
I don't think anybody has ever come away from a viewing of David Lynch's
Blue Velvet feeling neutral towards the film. You are either incensed or
revolted or fascinated or shocked into a dazed silence. It takes your
emotions and screws them up into a ball and wrings them out like a wet
tea-towel. It is a film that "gets to you", no matter who you are, no matter
how hard you fight against it. It is truly, deeply, inescapably unsettling.
Where does its power to unsettle come from? It isn't just violence or foul
language or cruelty or sexual perversion (although it has all these in
abundance). It's a film that actually gets in and messes with your mind.
Blue Velvet, like the most powerful and enduring folk tales, is a huge
allegory, ripe with symbolism and suggestion, full of archetypes and
universals drawn from our group unconscious, the place where our deepest
fears and loathings and our secret desires and guilty passions and
obsessions have been carefully hidden away. It puts forward a view of the
individual, and by extension of human society, to the effect that what you
see is not what you get.
Lumberton, in the film's opening scenes, is presented as idyllic Middle
America; fine, friendly hard-working people, white picket fences bright in
the sunlight, flowers blooming in the well-tended gardens, their saturated
colours almost dazzling to behold, a vision of small-town normality and
wholesomeness. A smiling fireman on the running-board of a gleaming red
fire-engine waves cheerily as he goes by. Then, misfortune intrudes: the man
hosing his garden has a seizure or stroke of some kind, symbolised by the
kink in the hose that stops the flow of water, but it is a natural,
biological event without moral significance. However, as he lies in his
helpless agony, tended only by the dog and the little toddler, the camera
zooms down to the grass, and to what is going on beneath the grass,  in a
shot that I think provides the key to the entire film: for just below the
surface sickening and unspeakable things are happening  -  ugly and sinister
bugs are tearing one another apart. There are violent and repellent things
going on just out of sight, things we will never know about unless we seek
them out, unless we dig. It is an image, I think, that we are meant to apply
to ourselves as much as to Lumberton, or any other version of a human
society. It is the film's overarching metaphor.
The development of the story involves the finding of  a severed human ear by
the central character Jeffrey (Kyle MacLachlan) and his attempts, with the
help of High School student Sandy (Laura Dern) to unravel the mystery behind
its amputation. This quest turns into something closely resembling an
archetypal fairy-tale, in which he finds the beautiful woman Dorothy
(Isabella Rossellini) being held prisoner in a grim and forbidding tower
(apartment block) by the ogre-like incarnation of pure evil Frank (Dennis
Hopper) who is involved in drugs, kidnapping, prostitution and almost
certainly murder, and who is subjecting her to the most bizarre acts of
torture and sexual humiliation. Dorothy is eventually released from her
nightmare existence, though not directly by Jeffrey, and not without
suffering an almost total breakdown which leaves her wandering naked through
the town's darkened streets. So we might want to say that this is no
straightforward fairy-tale, but rather it is one that turns sour, becomes
corrupted and debased. It is a fairy tale whose "happy ending" still leaves
us with a sickly feeling in the pit of our stomach.
To rescue the damsel in distress the hero in the fairy-tale of old usually
had to go through some pretty extreme tests and adventures, and Jeffrey's
lot is no different. His decision to become the "bug man" (literally as well
as metaphorically) and to root-out the horrific evil that is holding Dorothy
in its grip takes him to the very depths of the hell that is Frank's
universe. It would be difficult to imagine anyone more evil than Frank, or
events more spine-chilling than the goings-on at the brothel where he is
holding Dorothy's son and her husband prisoner. Once or twice the limits of
credibility seem to be stretched beyond breaking point, as when the
policeman in the yellow jacket, although dead, remains standing until
Jeffrey brushes against him, but overall the film manages to maintain a
delicate ambiguity with regard to objective reality. We never quite know
whether to believe in Jeffrey's Odyssey or not, whether to view it as
literal narrative or as a dream-sequence, or as some kind of grotesque
daydream / fantasy in which Jeffrey has cast himself in the role of hero but
of which he slowly loses control as the wanderings of his mind become more
and more fevered, forcing him to acknowledge aspects of his own personality
that he would rather have left unexamined. For of course Jeffrey finds in
himself the seed of Frank's sadism: most clearly when Dorothy (whose
personality has also been twisted by her exposure to Frank) asks him to hit
her and he obeys, and, we suspect, at some level enjoys doing it. Jeffrey's
shining armour dulls considerably in the course of his journey through the
underworld: his self-image undergoes what we take to be a permanent change.
We are probably mistaken if we accept very much of David Lynch's material at
face value. There are certain shots which he seems to use in a very peculiar
way, as markers, or even quotation marks, to plant clues as to where we
should adjust our perceptions. The whole quasi-dream-sequence involving
Frank and Dorothy is contained between two near-identical zoom shots into
and out of a human ear. These must signal something special about this part
of the narrative, but what exactly the "specialness" is Lynch is happy to
leave to our individual interpretation. In a parallel way he uses the same
shot of the waving man on the fire-engine both at the beginning and the end
of the film, like book-ends to the entire work. Is he trying to suggest that
perhaps no time has passed but we have simply taken a diversion into an
alternate reality and returned to where we started, or even that this
apple-pie-America world is a sham like the one inhabited by Jim Carrey in
The Truman Show fourteen years later, or perhaps that it is just as much a
conceptual make-believe as the one in which Frank mimes to the Sandman and
enjoys his drug of choice through a face-mask while he sexually assaults his
victims. I personally favour this latter theory. Lynch is saying to us:
"Don't kid yourself, none of this is real. We see the world the way we want
to see it, the way we expect to see it. You wouldn't want to know what it's
really like".
It's worth remembering that the Surrealists, whom Lynch acknowledges as his
influences, regarded what they were doing not as an exercise in shocking or
surprising their audience or in the random juxtaposition of incongruous
elements for the sake of effect, but as a species of realism, an attempt to
depict a superior or "super-reality" to which we can not  normally have
access, either because of the layers of socialisation , acquired experience
and learned responses through which we see the world or because of the
nature of the human personality itself, which Freud and others had
represented as being like an iceberg, with its greater part hidden and
inaccessible to conscious thought. If we look at Blue Velvet with this kind
of model in mind I think we realise that Lynch is drawing our attention to
things about ourselves that we might not want to examine too closely: that
we are not the mild, reasonable, kind-hearted individuals that we believe
ourselves to be, but rather we are barely-contained seething bundles of
primitive drives and bestial urges of all kinds. That you don't have to dig
very deep to get to the ugly black bugs with bloody claws and gaping jaws
tearing apart and consuming everything that comes within their grasp. I
think it is this unpleasant and disconcerting view of the human condition
that causes many people to shy away from the film and perhaps to reject it,
but what you have to grant Lynch in my opinion is that whether you like what
he says or not he says it with masterly skill and style. This is one of
film's true masterpieces  -  love it or hate it, I defy you to ignore it.

Title
Review for East Is East (1999)
In Damien O'Donnell's "East is East", a screen version of Ayub Khan-Din's
stage play, Linda Bassett plays the white English wife of a Pakistani
immigrant (Om Puri) to 1970's Salford. Written by an Asian, it is
essentially a situation comedy dealing with the cultural "no-man's-land" in
which the children of immigrants find themselves, and the strains inside the
family produced when the younger generation begins to feel the pull of the
host culture.
The plot is perfunctory, and I won't take up your time with it here. I was
enticed to see it by a number of inexplicably positive reviews in the London
press. I thought it was cheap, offensive, unimaginative and peopled entirely
by racial and class stereotypes of the most crass kind. It portrays a Muslim
father who is totally indifferent to the happiness or wellbeing of his
children, fanatically devoted to the ritual and trivial aspects of his
religion, spouting obscenities at all around him, taking out his frustration
in violence on both his wife and his children when he is unable to get his
own way, physically ugly and unpleasant in his personal habits.... the list
seems endless. The realism and brutality of the father's violence sits
particularly uneasily in something that does not even aspire to
tragi-comedy. There is hardly a racial stereotype that this cardboard
cut-out central figure does not embody. His family too seem like ciphers
introduced to embody clichés of  "the younger generation" stuck between two
cultures: we have the gay brother, the religious brother, the terrified
younger brother (whom Puri has no hesitation in subjecting to a late
circumcision in order to keep up appearances when he finds that it was
overlooked at the correct time), the rebellious daughter. Only the white
English second wife seems  noble and long-suffering, and even capable of
some degree of common affection. The other Asian family that we meet is
similarly monstrous, the father bullying and overbearing, the wife cold and
critical and obsessively ambitious for her offspring, the two daughters ugly
and seemingly mindless.
The comic elements are hackneyed and heavy-handed, descending to slapstick
more than once, as when a "sculpture" looking like a section cut out of an
inflatable rubber "adult doll" is thrown on to the lap of the surly visiting
mother, or when the children try to hide the bacon and sausages they have
been eating when they hear their father's approach. This stuff is sub-Alf
Garnett ( a British TV sitcom working-class Fascist and racist bigot par
excellence, for those of you who don't watch British TV). In fact a real Alf
(and I know he is not a rarity) would be delighted with the whole ethos of
this film. It could be hired for British Movement coffee evenings. There is
not a shred of understanding of or respect for the Islamic way of life in
this film. What it seems to say is "Everything you've ever heard about the
Pakkies (or whatever derisory word you want to insert) is true". Presumably
it is supposed to be excused by the fact that it was written by an Asian.
This argument doesn't cut very much ice with me. I am not saying that a
writer or a director has any kind of duty to present "PC" depictions of a
particular race or group, but merely to pick up on a dominant racist
carricature and reinforce it uncritically like this seems to me inexcusable,
and frankly lazy. I think it betrays the same degree of internalised racism
as the outcry of one of the brothers in the film: "I don't want to marry a
Pakkie!".
Compare (if this isn't too much of a stretch of the imagination) Puri's
brutal patriarch in "East is East" with Topol's character in "Fiddler on the
Roof". Like Puri, he was a man brought up in traditional religious and
social values to which his children would not adhere, but his reaction was
sadness and apprehension for their future happiness, as he wrestled to
understand the new and unfamiliar world that they were growing up into. But
far more importantly, in Topol's case, we could see the value of the
traditions that he clung to, how they had served the Jewish people and how
they could produce happy and loving families and a context in which a good
life could be lived. Traditional Judaism was treated with respect. That
film/play was three dimensional, its ideas could be looked-at from different
angles. Yet it was only a comedy as well - a musical comedy at that. What a
pity "East is East" couldn't have had a touch more of the big-heartedness of
"Fiddler". What a lost opportunity!

Title
Review for It Happened Here (1966)
It's 1940 on the western seaboard of the continent of Europe. The retreating
British army is driven back to the sea on the beaches of Dunkirk, and makes
good its escape back to England carried by a makeshift fleet of sea-going
pleasurecraft and small boats that previously carried parties of
holidaymakers up and down the Thames or over and back to the Isle of Wight.
But his time the advancing German army does not stop at the coast.....
The premise of this most unusual war film is that Britain was invaded and
occupied after the Dunkirk retreat, and in a mixture of documentary and
narrative styles it sets out to tell the story of the occupation that the
country narrowly (some would say, unaccountably) escaped, up to and
including the 'liberation', orchestrated by the efforts of local partisans
with American assistance, in the war's closing year.
This is a low-key, reflective war drama, which follows its central
character, an Irish-born district nurse working in a village near Salisbury,
through the horrors of a partisan ambush that goes wrong, to a chilling
Nazi-dominated vision of London, where she finds herself assimilated into
the highly political "Immediate Action Organization" and receives her
"political re-education", on to a rural medical centre specialising in
euthenasia for "undesirables", through to the final chilling irony of
"liberation" and the wholesale slaughter of "collaborators".
It is hard to believe that this film began its life as the spare-time
project of 18-year-old Kevin Brownlow, a film enthusiast working in the
cutting-room of a small London production company, and his 16-year-old
schoolboy friend Andrew Mollo, who had a passion for military history and a
collection of old German uniforms and regalia. Starting without a budget,
using a borrowed 16 mm camera, the two doggedly pursued their dream of
completing the project for almost eight years, finding actors, actresses,
sets and backing as they went along. The incredible story of the film's
birth is told in Kevin Brownlow's 1968 book "How It Happened Here"
(Doubleday & Co., New York), now unfortunately out of print.
The most famous sequence in the work is a six-minute scene in which genuine
Neo-Nazis expound their ideas. When the film was first previewed at various
British film festivals, it was this scene that incurred the wrath of a
number of Jewish organizations, who mantained that the film lacked balance
in that no substantial counter-argument was presented to the opinions
expressed by these monsters. Early performances were greeted by jeers,
chants of "shame" and mass walk-outs from film theatres.
Kevin Brownlow maintained throughout that the Neo-Nazis condemned themselves
out of their own mouths for anyone with an ounce of intelligence, but the
topic was too hot to handle and in order to get the film accepted for
distribution by United Artists the Directors had to agree to the removal of
the sequence, which was not allowed back into the British release version
until the distribution rights were taken over by Connoisseur in 1993. The
Connoisseur video version of that date is a full, uncut transcription.
As well as the Jews, many others were offended by the film, and it was
widely criticized on political grounds, as being deeply unpatriotic. The
British public had been flattered by Churchillian rhetoric into believing
itself exempt from the flaws of other national groups. A people who had
become accustomed to declairing: "Thank you, Lord, that I am not as other
men!" was being tapped in the shoulder and told: "Sorry, my friend, you are
no different".  There could be no more subversive artistic act than an
attack on this smug self-image.
Every individual and every group that the film portrays is tainted in some
way with moral compromise. We are presented with an England peopled by cowed
and unthinking conformists who just want to "get the country back on its
feet"; fanatical resistance fighters who have no concern for the fate of
ordinary people caught in the cross-fire; German soldiers who casually
murder unarmed civilians, smile sheepishly, and continue on their way;
American "forces of liberation" who do the same to groups of so-called
collaborators as they carry out a scorched-earth de-Natzification policy of
the newly "liberated" territory; mild-mannered old country doctors in
genteel rural hospitals who calmly dispatch their patients with lethal
injections before making their way downstairs for supper. Every incident
portrayed is based on well-documented events that took place in other
occupied countries.
Nobody is spared in Brownlow's profoundly pacifist analysis of the military
mind-set. War and military occupation are presented as pits of horror and
despair that are without bottom. Ordinary, well-meaning people like Pauline
Murray are swept along by forces far beyond their control into dark
political whirkpools from which there is no escape. This is a chilling
nightmare of a film that demands of every viewer that they ask themselves
the question: What would I have done?
The ideas put forward in "It Happened Here" are so riveting even for a
modern audience that it tends to be discussed mainly as a socio-political
treatise and neglected as a film. And looked-at as a film, it undoubtedly
has its faults. The acting, as one would expect from a group of amateurs, is
uneven. Pauline Murray (who is very cleverly allowed to retain her own name
in the film) was the wife of a doctor friend of the two Directors: she had
never acted before. We  see her technique develop as the story progresses
(it was filmed more or less in sequence) and it is a process which, no doubt
unintentionally, actually adds to the strength of the film. The story seems
to emerge out of a naive daydream into something increasingly realistic and
dreadful.
The film's mixture of documentary and narrative style, somewhat reminiscent
of Citizen Kane, was an ambitious and thoroughly appropriate format,
surperbly well-realized with the help of such genuine news-reel voice-over
artists as Alvar Liddell and John Snagge (who gave their services free). The
staged "archive footage" of the Flanders Field Christmas Day football match
would do credit to any professional production company, as would the use of
rousing military music to establish and maintain atmosphere. Brownlow's
skill in carrying us along with his appalling fantasy is rooted in his
commitment to the project: we see German tanks everywhere when we know in
our heart of hearts that Kevin was only able to get hold of one, because
this is the world that we have agreed to enter into. There is no real
interest in looking for the seams and the improvisations. We are involved in
the realization of a nightmare. It is the spirit and the atmosphere of the
piece that seize hold of us, not the limitations of the production budget.
I found this film disturbing, unsettling, unfogettable. The scale of the
achievement involved in the creation of a work of this quality from such
humble beginnings can hardly be overstated. I sincerely hope that you may
get the opportunity to see it, because it is, I know, something of a rarity.

Title
Review for Last Picture Show, The (1971)
Anarene, Texas, population 1131, is a no-account, dying township near
Wichita Falls. The truck drivers don't slow down as they pass through
it. A few old-timers live there, a few well-off employees of an oil
company, a few wayward kids
who've left home and gone into lodgings to get away from their folks, a
few schoolteachers and their families, a young boy with a mental
handicap  -  in short, the same kind of people who live everywhere else.
This is Hicksville, Texas, and the
year is 1951. It is solidly located in time and space, so real that we
can almost smell it, feel the chill wind that sandblasts the buildings
as it rips across the flat featureless West Texas plains, but the time
and place don't matter because what the 
lm deals with applies to all times and to all places.
Sonny Crawford (Timothy Bottoms) is Everyman. He wants to be a good
person, to be able to like himself, but he is weak, corruptible, easily
deflected onto what he knows is the lower path. When we first meet him
he has an enormous amount
still to learn. He has to learn that actions have consequences, that
other people have feelings and that when you trample on them they (and
ultimately you) get hurt, that relationships create expectations and
responsibilities, that the demands of
kindness outweigh those of immediate sexual gratification: in short,
what it is to be human. As the film unfolds, we see him grow into a
decent, considerate human being despite all the forces pulling him in
other directions. The triumph of the
film's ending is that he doesn't run away from the things that he has
done, he turns the pick-up truck around and goes back to face Ruth
(Cloris Leachman), and more importantly himself. The heart-rending,
inarticulate confrontation between
Sonny and Ruth that ends the film is one of the all-time high-points of
American cinema. This is how a film that seems at times unrelentingly
downbeat and pessimistic can actually uplift and send you from the
theatre believing that better is
possible of human beings, that all is not hopelessness.
This is a shocking film: not because of nudity, or anything to do with
sexuality or violence, but because of honesty. Instead of glossing-over
those parts of all our lives that we would prefer to deny and/or forget,
"The Last Picture Show" selects
them out as its subject matter and places them before us without
compromise, without moralising, without means of escape.
Some commentators have been inclined to blame the town itself and the
crushing boredom of existence there for the moral shortcomings of its
citizens, to over-stress the importance of a particular way of life and
a particular moment in the
history of the United States, as if people would behave better if there
was more to do, more to aspire to, a greater variety of potential
partners. Personally I think that this misses the point. The details of
people's "lives of quiet desperation"
would of course be different in another situatiuon, but whether in
Anarene or Beverley Hills, Barcelona or Bangkok people have much the
same choices to make as to how they are going to treat one another, much
the same needs and wants and
much the same opportunities to behave decently and achieve self-respect
or to behave wretchedly and forfeit it. The town simply supplies a stage
for the unfolding of completely universal aspects of human behaviour. It
is the universality of
the material that gives it its bite, that makes it at times downright
uncomfortable. Which one of us has not, at some time or another, acted
shamefully and tried to cover it up afterwards? Which of us has not
experienced the mind-numbing
clumsiness and embarrassment of early sexual encounters and lied about
them?
It would be time-consuming to summarise all of the plots and sub-plots
of "The Last Picture Show" and really they are not crucial to the film:
the two central aspects are character and atmosphere.
We are introduced to Sam the Lion (Ben Johnson), the grizzled old cowboy
who has settled down in Anarene and lives a lot in his own romantic
version of the past, while providing a father-figure and role-model for
some of the town's rootless
teenagers; Ruth Popper, the neglected and near-suicidal wife of the High
School football coach, who longs for some kind of affection and
adventure in her empty life before she grows too old to enjoy it; Jacey
Farrow (Cybill Shepherd) the
pretty, self-centred, manipulative and spiteful teenager who comes from
a family where this is the norm; Duane Jackson (Jeff Bridges) the
aspiring High School football hero desperate to prove his manhood, full
of pent-up violence and
resentment which eventually find an outlet in signing-up to fight in
Korea; and many, many more, each one of them a fully-rounded, believable
human being without an ounce of carricature or exaggeration to mar their
plausibility. Just look at
the way the characters interact asnd spark off one another. Look at the
relationship between Jasey and her mother, or between Sonny and his
first lacklustre girlfriend Charlene Duggs (Sharon Taggart). Peter
Bogdanovich must have made a pact
with the Devil to extract performances of this level from all (yes,
absolutely all) of his cast.
As well as the human actors and actresses the town itself is a major
player in the drama. Bleak, windswept, tatty and dying it seems to stand
for the emotional void in the characters' lives, and also for the end of
an age of youth and innocence
that has been outgrown, both in the individual lives of the protagonists
and in America itself. The Royal Cinema presents flickering escapist
fantasies, like "Father of the Bride" (the 1950 version) based on a
sentimental and tacky representation
of family life that bears no resemblance to anything in the real
experience of the people watching it; and "Red River", a 1948 Howard
Hawks cowboy movie in which John Wayne stands in for Sam the Lion in his
particular fantasy of what Texas
used to be. It is all myth and fairytale, it has nothing to do with what
life is really like, and in the end it too is taken away  -  the cinema
closes down: the time has come to stand on one's own two feet, the
picture show is over.
If it is ever for a moment suggested that film is an inferior art-form
to the novel or the play, "The Last Picture Show" provides all the
counter-argument that one could possibly require.
I would recommend that you see this film first when you are about
seventeen years old, again at about twenty-five, and then at intervals
of about a decade for the rest of your life. On each occasion you will
see a different film, an even better one
than you saw the time before.

Title
Review for Winstanley (1975)
You poor take courage, you rich take care,
This Earth was made a Common Treasury for everyone to share,
All things in common, all people one.
"But everyone shall put their hands to till the earth and bring up cattle,
and the blessing of the earth shall be common to all; when a man hath need
of any corn or cattle, take from the next store-house he meets with. There
shall be no buying and selling, no fairs or markets, but the whole earth
shall be the common Treasury for every man"
We don't really live in an age of idealism any more. There is a cycle to the
comings and goings of such things. But many of us are old enough to remember
the posters of Che Guevera that bedecked the wall of every student bedsit
through the late 60s and early 70s, and the passionate all-night student
arguments, with stained and chipped mugs filled with black coffee on the
floor beside us and Bob Dylan wailing softly in the background, when we
worked-out all those definitive blueprints for human society:  characterised
typically in terms of what society would not contain, such as governments,
armies, money, possessive sexual relationships, private property, national
boundaries, social classes, privilege, end of term exams, nagging
parents........   One thing we knew for certain: when our turn came, we
would not be the same.  We would not participate in and recreate the world
into which we had been born.  Sometimes I still wonder where it all went
wrong.
We were not the first generation to feel these things and to dream these
dreams. Very far from it. Since the days of Plato and Socrates and long
before people have looked at the way their societies worked and dreamed of
fundamental changes. And of course it didn't always stop at theory. Most of
the present-day nations of the West and many of those of the Third World and
the East have emerged from social revolutions and civil wars: America,
Russia, China, France, Viet Nam, South Africa and Ireland to name but a few.
It might surprise a lot of educated British people to be told that our
nation too belongs on this list, but such is the case. In the middle of the
17th Century we executed our king and fought a bloody civil war to determine
what kind of a society our children were going to live in.  Not only
soldiers and gather-up armies battled against one another, ideas did too.
It was an age of great and largely forgotten visionaries: men and women who
believed that they could see a way forward to a new and better form of
social organisation, some principle whereby we could share the wealth of the
earth more equitably and live our lives in peace without hurting one
another, some way to smash the "mind-forged manacles" that held all the
different strata of society equally in bondage.
One of the foremost of these visionaries was Gerrard Winstanley. He argued
that the ordinary people of Britain had been enslaved ever since the Norman
invasion, by the control of the land, the most fundamental of all "means of
production", by the Lords of Manors, and he suggested in the most peaceful
possible terms,  how the earth, our common Treasury, might be shared out
again.
In April 1649 a band of about 40 Diggers, inspired by Gerrard Winstanley and
William Everard began to dig uncultivated common land on Saint George's Hill
in Cobham, Surrey, building simple houses in which to live, sharing all
their goods and produce in common. As word spread, and the privileged woke
up to the implications of this tiny token action, the authorities turned
hostile. The commune was dispersed by government troops, Everard and
Winstanley arrested, tried, and heavily fined. Each new attempt to get the
community started was crushed, by violence, harassment and intimidation.
Nevertheless, despite all government opposition to the experiment, the
Cobham colony lasted until 1651. The Diggers inspired other colonies in
other parts of England also, but ultimately none of them could stand up to
the forces mobilized against them. Winstanley's dream was a wonderful,
humanitarian vision of a gentler, more just and happy world; a dream that
came again to other people in succeeding centuries, but for whose
realization we are still waiting.
The film "Winstanley" attempts to paint a portrait of this extraordinary
man, his personality and motivations and the times in which he lived. There
are no compromises. It was created by the same team who, twelve years
earlier, produced "It Happened Here", a chilling fantasy of a wartime
England under German occupation. Andrew Mollo, the Artistic Director and
Co-Director on both projects, is simply incapable of compromise where
historical accuracy is concerned. From the agricultural tools that the
people use, to the breeds of pigs and chickens that they tend, to the willow
from which the walls of the poor peoples' houses are woven, to the stitching
in their tunics  -  wherever you look, everything is simply right. This is
the closest to 17th Century England that you are going to get, short of
time-travel. The film deserves to be seen for that alone.
But in addition to the sheer treat of the perfection of the costumes and
sets, the film also contains some of the most harrowing emotional content of
any historical drama of which I am aware. There are no crude "good guys" or
"bad guys" in "Winstanley", nobody is demonized or trivialized or
one-dimensional. It is a story almost entirely of well-intentioned people
who are either inspired by or profoundly threatened by the idea of a whole
new human order, and who react accordingly. This could not be further
removed from a simple-minded political tract. It is a serious attempt to
understand the social and individual psychology of idealism. More simply, it
is an examination of the way people hurt one another without wanting to in
the pursuit of  what they genuinely believe to be the best. Idealists are
never easy to cope with, never comfortable people to know.
Winstanley himself is played by a teacher and amateur actor, Miles
Halliwell, who played the Nazi lecturer in "It Happened Here". He is a very
fine choice for the role, having enormous screen presence, a compelling
single-mindedness and total integrity about his personality, and exactly the
right quality of being "a man apart". He is just as convincing as Winstanley
as he was when he played the smooth apologist for Fascism in the earlier
film: an arresting thought in itself! The only professional actor in the
cast is Jerome Willis, who gives a powerful but never aloof performance as
General Fairfax, radiating the confidence of noble birth in every scene in
which he appears. He epitomizes the system of  social class and privilege in
the face of which the Diggers seem puny adversaries indeed.
The film, like the novel on which it is based, is shot through with a sense
of inevitable tragedy. From its opening scene on a windswept hillside where
Parson Platt (David Bramley) and Winstanley try vainly to communicate with
one another, their voices almost drowned-out by the roaring gale, to the
heart-rending close-up of Winstanley's  face in his final despair, seen
through the pouring rain in the film's closing moments, we know that this
bright socialist vision is not to be. At least not yet. And this is the
thought with which the film leaves us, stated like all of the narration, in
Winstanley's own words. Social visions do not in fact die with their
creators, they are merely set down like burdens carried a certain distance
along the roadway, to be taken up by other fresh young travelers and carried
a little further on another day.
There are not many books, or films, to which one can  honestly attach a
description like "inspirational". This is one of them.
(Note on availability:  The video of `Winstanley', which includes Eric
Mival's documentary of the making of  both this and the earlier
Brownlow/Mollo film, can be obtained from the BFI  at 10a Stephen Mews,
London W1P 0AX.  Their website is at http://www.bfi.org.uk/home.htm >.  It
is rumored that Milestone Films in New York will be re-releasing both of the
Brownlow/Mollo films for limited theatre runs early in 1999.)
