Authors
Mark Shneyder
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Mr. Saturday Night (1992)
     I attended the press screening (courtesy of a friend who works for
a local radio station) for MR. SATURDAY NIGHT last night.
     First of all, don't go by the zillion of ads on TV that boast
quotes from all the different movie critics proclaiming this picture as
a guaranteed Oscar biggie.  It's not an Oscar movie but Billy Crystal
does deserve a lot of recognition for telling the story of thousands of
stand-up comics, unlike Billy Crystal himself, who never make it big or
who never make it period.  It is also a story about what a cruel thing
show business could be and how a person can be consumed by it and forget
about a thing called life.
     Buddy Young, Jr. (played by Crystal) is shown through four decades
as a very bitter, selfish, career-driven comic who forgets about the
people that are closest to him--his wife, his kids, and his brother
who manages him for some fifty years.  You really wonder why his wife
never left him because there is just nothing affectionate or warm about
the guy, and why his brother never walked out on him after being Buddy's
constant target of sarcastic abuse filled with meanness for all these
years.
     Second, Billy Crystal is not able to carry this movie.  I'm the
biggest Crystal fan but this wasn't an Oscar performance by any means.
There are only two scenes that were really powerful--Buddy visiting his
91-year-old mom at a nursing home and his eulogy at her memorial
service.  Otherwise, after a hilarious opening scene in a family living
room, the movie just drags (I looked at my watch 3 times :-)).
     This is a not a happy funny movie.  This is a movie about an
unhappy guy who tried to be funny.  There are few good funny bits such
as when Buddy meets a Hollywood producer (played by Ron Silver) to get a
part in a movie.  (The imitation of a reporter in a basketball locker
room was a riot!)  But overall, no belly-ache laughs and not a single
joke that made people laugh for too long....
