Authors
Mark Kosten
Number of Reviews
2

Title
Review for Nikita (1990)
Director: Luc Besson
Producer: Jerome Chalou
Music by: Eric Serra
Starring: Anne Parillaud, Jean-Hugues Anglade, Tcheky Karyo, Jeanne Moreau
A French-Italian co-production. 1990.
French with English subtitles.
     France's Luc Besson is well known for his films LE DERNIER COMBAT
(THE LAST BATTLE), SUBWAY, and THE BIG BLUE, which are stylish and
somewhat surreal.  However, along with some other directors of similar
stylish films, such as Ridley Scott, Kathryn Bigelow, David Lynch and
Michael Mann, he sometimes has a problem with scripts that let down the
images.  There tends to be a lack of substance, which is illuminated by
the contrast with the production values and attention to detail and
imagery.  Does this film close the gap?
     Besson's wife, Anne Parillaud, plays a teenage street punk called
Nikita, who is spaced out on drugs and in with a group that are equally
spaced out and very violent.  They break into a chemist [drugstore for
Americans] and are surprised in the act of stealing drugs by the owner
and the police.   Basically everyone dies in a hail of bullets except
Nikita, who is dragged off to jail.  She is shown to be extremely
violent and irrational, which gets her life imprisonment.  The French
secret service (who knows which group it is supposed to be, perhaps La
Securite?) recruit her by staging her death then offering her either
life as an assassin for France or a real death to fill the empty grave
her family grieved over.  You can guess which she takes.
     The rest of the story revolves around her training, acceptance of
her situation, and finally, after three years, release into the world as
a government-sanctioned killer.  She "comes out" as a smart, beautiful,
deadly woman, who knows little of living in the real world.
Nevertheless, with the aid of what has become her surrogate father (her
boss in the secret service) and a man she eventually becomes engaged to,
she slowly fills in the gaps of compassion, feeling and love.  However,
as she carries out her "hits," each mission gets more and more
difficult, messy and violent.
     Without wanting to spoil the story or ending, I must say the whole
thing is a bit far-fetched in detail and the ending even more so.  
There is no real resolution, and the denouement, such as it is, is
particularly weak.  Indeed, the story is light on the Pygmalion-like
personal changes Nikita goes through and her relationship with her
boyfriend is rather unbelievable, although it is touching.  The idea of
her being an assassin has a curious veracity, and France has been shown
to use women in hazardous missions -- witness the Rainbow Warrior
bombing in New Zealand, so fortunately we are left only with a taste of
silliness.
     Besson uses some of his "mafia," such as electronic composer Eric
Serra and actor Jean Reno as a "cleaner", a very black comedic role.  
They and the other cast and production people perform well, with not a
step wrong.  Technically Hollywood couldn't do better.
     France has made some excellent thrillers over the years.  DIVA
comes to mind, made by Besson's compatriot Beineix, but let's not forget
Clouzot's WAGES OF FEAR or LA BALANCE by America's expatriot Bob Swaim
and many others.  This film compares favourably, but is not quite
intricate or involving enough to quite make it to the top few.  
Nevertheless, it stands out from much of the dross today, and I
recommend a look, as you will at least enjoy the ride, if not the
mulling over afterwards.
Mark Kosten,           phone: +61 3 479-1500
Computer Centre,       AARNet (internet): ccmk@lure.latrobe.edu.au
La Trobe University,   X.25 (PSI): 05052347300000::ccmk
Bundoora, 3083
Australia

Title
Review for Green Card (1990)
     Peter Weir (last seen directing DEAD POETS SOCIETY) brings
together Gerard Depardieu (probably the most popular actor in France)
and Andie MacDowell (from SEX, LIES AND VIDEOTAPE) in this
Australian/French co-production.  It is set in New York and is
essentially a love story.   Depardieu plays George, who manages to stay
legally in the U.S. and obtain a green card by a convenience marriage
to Bronte (MacDowell).  They part after the marriage but some time later
have to spend some days together to learn about each other because the
INS (Immigration and Naturalization Service) is checking up on them.
Naturally they start off disliking each other because they are so
different.  The rest is fairly obvious, and, despite the predictable and
unoriginal story, a delight to watch.
     The film has a light and relaxed touch, aided immeasurably by
Depardieu's lightness of acting, especially body language, despite his
bulk.  You find yourself being carried along with a smile on your face
as the two principal characters argue, reveal their pasts and foibles
and begin to fall in love.  The music is terrific, which is a mixture of
classical, particularly the well-suited Mozart, and modern
electronic/new age.  At one point, when George and Bronte are in their
separate beds, but thinking of each other, the original music (by Hans
Zimmer) is almost entirely responsible for the emotional charge of the
scene.  Indeed, music plays an important role in the story, culminating
in George's dilemma at showing off non-existent composing skills at a
party, which is brilliantly solved.
     The dialogue is okay and minor characters are underwritten, both
typical Weir problems.  The scenes with Bronte's father and George in
particular seem unfinished.
     Overall, a very enjoyable film.  I strongly recommend GREEN CARD.
Dr Mark Kosten,        phone: +61 3 479-2767
Computer Centre,       AARNet (internet): ccmk@lure.latrobe.edu.au
La Trobe University,   X.25 (PSI): 05052347300000::ccmk
Bundoora, 3083
Australia
