Authors
Paul Foley
Number of Reviews
3

Title
Review for Astronaut's Wife, The (1999)
Here `Rosemary's Baby' meets `The Right Stuff,' or, more
accurately, the wrong stuff.  A near total lack of
characterization torpedoes this lackluster film, and Theron's
somnolent acting doesn't help.
It has been said that science fiction is about ideas, not
character.  Bad science fiction certainly is, and `The
Astronaut's Wife' qualifies as bad sci-fi.  While Theron's
character, Jillian, is front and center throughout the movie, I
left the theater without a clue as to who this woman is.  Or her
husband Spencer (Depp) either, for that matter.  Depp at least
has an excuse for looking blank and empty inside: he's been
reprogrammed by space aliens and is a pod person.  In
Theron's case, it's just bad acting.
Really bad acting.  She can't even manage a convincing
American accent.  In scene after scene, things happen to her--
mostly bad things--and she looks like she simply doesn't know
how she should be reacting, and would be incapable of
conveying the emotion even if she did know.  She's hopelessly
vague, except for a couple of scenes where she overacts.
Admittedly, the material is not very good.  But Theron does
absolutely nothing with it.  Jillian is pregnant; there's
something wrong with her husband, he's changed, and she
becomes gradually convinced that he's possessed.  There may
be something wrong with the twins inside her.  Nobody will
believe her of course: to complicate matters, she has a history
of mental illness.  At first she loves her husband (or so we're
told), then she suspects him, finally she's afraid of him;
throughout, she reacts with the same stony indifference.
Depp's character is a confused mess too.  Is he a good ol' 
boy who drinks Budweiser from the bottle or a corporate shark
who sips Scotch?  His hair style and accent give him an
uncanny resemblance to an Elvis impersonator, which doesn't
help his credibility as the film's heavy.  He does at least
manage to come across as creepy at times.  He keeps appearing
unexpectedly behind Jillian; it had me thinking maybe she
should hang a bell around his neck, like a miscreant cat.
Both Depp and Theron are way too pretty to be believable in
these roles.  He looks like he stepped off the cover of GQ, she
from Vogue.  One moment she's uneasy about uprooting from
their Florida home; in the very next scene she's mixing with
New York society, wearing expensive clothes well. Theron
should have stuck to modeling; she's always striking poses in
the film.  I half expected there to be a man just offscreen with a
Nikon calling out, `Pouty, pouty ... work it!'  Jillian and
Spencer's cavernous NY apartment is straight out of
Architectural Digest, too.  It just isn't a believable transition
from Cocoa Beach. Even NASA offices look fabulous in this
absurd film.  There are lots of extravagant camera angles and
unnecessary camera movement too, in order to jazz up the
visuals.  This movie is all surface.
There are some clever bits, including one where creepy
Spencer caresses Jillian and lets his fingers pause to feel the
pulse points in her neck and wrist.  This lets the audience know
there's something odd about this guy.  (It also had me
wondering why Jillian didn't notice.)  There's another clever
scene where Jillian turns Spencer's radio on and is so relived
that it's not tuned to interstation static (he receives messages
from his pals the aliens that way) that she starts doing a little
dance to the music.  It's the closest Jillian ever comes to being
charming and real in this movie, plus there's a nice shock
when the ever-lurking Spence pops up and scares the bejezus
out of her.  Never mind that we've already seen this gag done
on a 30-second hair color commercial....

Title
Review for Better Than Chocolate (1999)
`Better Than Chocolate' is a sweet and sexy comedy; 
sparkling dialogue and a range of delightful characters
highlight this Canadian independent. Plus, it includes a
finger-painting scene that makes the potter's wheel scene in
`Ghost' look as tame as a church social.  
Set in the Vancouver, BC lesbian community, it's your basic
girl meets girl, girl loses girl, girl gets girl story.  Maggie's
(Karyn Dwyer) life suddenly becomes very complicated when
her mother (Crewson) telephones to announce she's getting a
divorce and needs to come stay with her.  Maggie has yet to tell
her mother that she's dropped out of University, is a lesbian,
and is currently living in the back of the bookshop where she
works.  She finds a loft to sublet in the nick of time, but she
also finds herself involved with Kim (Cox), a free spirited,
nomadic artist.  When the van Kim lives in is towed away and
impounded (with both women inside--passion will not wait),
Kim moves in with her.
The straight mother is hilariously oblivious.  She thinks Ten
Percent Books, the name of the bookstore where her daughter
works, means it's a discount shop.  Maggie makes a last
minute search of the loft, owned by a safe-sex activist,
frantically hiding dildoes; a sweep that is of course not one
hundred percent effective.  No more successful is Maggie and
Kim's attempt to make love quietly in the large but necessarily
open living space they're sharing with her mother and teenage
brother.  Kim, who makes no secret of her sexual orientation,
finds Maggie's desperate efforts to conceal hers ridiculous. 
Then irritating and offensive.  Finally, it leads to a break
between the two.
Meanwhile, the bookstore is under siege by Customs, who has
been seizing its shipments of books as pornographic, as well as
by local skinheads, whose methods are more direct and a good
deal more dangerous.  Frances, the beleaguered shop owner, is
wound as tight as a violin string.  This spells bad news for
Judy, the transvestite man who's in love with her.  All of these
story threads are woven neatly together into one fast-paced
plot.
Although the threats to this tightly knit community are very
real, the film never becomes sanctimonious and even enjoys a
bit of self-mockery.  Maggie, though she's in the process of
liberating herself, becomes acutely uncomfortable when her
mother talks about her own sex life (or rather lack of one). 
Judy is attacked by a lesbian for using the women's restroom
instead of the men's, proving no one has a monopoly on
intolerance.
On the whole, though, the tone is kept light.  Gradually,
everyone either finds, or is restored to, her proper partner. 
There's a sense that if love may not conquer all, it certainly
makes everything easier to cope with.  This makes the ending a
bit facile.  But, hey, this is a comedy after all.
`Better Than Chocolate' is better than most.

Title
Review for Six Days Seven Nights (1998)
Retrospective: Six Days, Seven Nights
In Movieland, when a man and a woman who hate each other
get stranded together, they must inevitably fall in love.  This
charming and nonsensical idea is the heart of this eminently
likable film directed by comic mastermind Ivan Reitman.
Like Bogart and Hepburn in The African Queen, Harrison Ford
and Anne Heche are an unlikely pair who are thrown together
by circumstance.  Instead of a steam launch, their vehicle is a
single-engine airplane, and instead of Africa, the setting is the
South Pacific.  But the story is every bit as delightful and
improbable as the John Huston classic.  To make this kind of
thing work, the dialogue has to sparkle and the two stars have
to have chemistry.  Six Days scores on both counts.
Harrison Ford's Quinn is a superannuated adolescent who
chucked it all and moved to Tahiti.  He runs a charter business
that consists of one airplane, but he is mostly just a
beachcomber.  Anne Heche's Robin is an editor for a fashion
magazine,  vacationing in the islands with her fiance.  Anne
and Harrison are off on the wrong foot right from the start,
when she makes fun of the little single-engine tail dragger, his
pride and joy,  that he intends to take them up in.  `Where's its
mommy?' she asks.  Sarcasm is her stock in trade; she's had a
lot of practice, and she's very good at it.  Harrison neatly sums
up her character when, having been shot down by another of
her verbal barrages, he simply says, `you're from New York,
aren't you?'
Unexpectedly having to fly back to fly back to Tahiti for a
fashion shoot, the pair run into bad weather and crash land on a
deserted island, where they can go about the business of hating
one another full-time.  With mutual recriminations mixed in to
spice things up.  He still insists that he's the best damn pilot
she's ever flown with; she points out that she's flown with him
twice and he's crashed half the time.  She begins to mellow
however when she discovers he's handy to have around when
there are snakes.  And scorpions.  She's pretty capable herself,
and saves both of their lives at one point.  In short, they need
one another.  It's not long before they want one another, too.
Harrison Ford, his age notwithstanding, can still pull off boyish
charm.  Amazing.  Anne Heche more than holds up her end,
and she has a real gift for comedy.  The plot of this movie is
tried-and-true Hollywood formula.  No surprises there.  In
order for it to work, the two principles have to deliver the
goods.  And they do.  It's sexy and it's funny ... who could
want more?
But there is more.  These characters actually have some depth.
Quinn is a guy who has pulled back into his shell, who makes a
pretty convincing case that he really is satisfied with
diminished expectations.  Robin is the kind of person who
can't rest until she has gotten him to open up.  So she prods
him until finally, over a dinner of barbecued peacock (!) he
begins to tell her his life story, the `better way of life' he has
found, simple, uncomplicated, unambitious, `the life every
man dreams of.'  `Yeah,' she responds, `until they're twelve.'
Her wit is a little too quick, her tongue a little too sharp.  She's
immediately sorry, but the damage has been done.  It's an
oddly touching moment, and it raises a theme that is returned
to later in the movie, when the two are returned to civilization.
(I'm probably not spoiling any great surprise when I reveal that
they don't leave their bleached bones on that desert island.)
The question is, what do this incompatible couple do then?
Him, who wants his life uncomplicated, and her, who craves
complication?  Or as Quinn puts it, `I'm not going to New
York to become your secretary, and you're not going to stay
out here and become my copilot, so where does that leave us?'
Writing satisfying, believable endings is hard.  This movie has
one, and I'm not going to spoil it by telling.  Rent this movie.
You won't be disappointed.
