Authors
Jane Taylor
Number of Reviews
3

Title
Review for Jane Eyre (1996)
this review is also posted at 
http://moviereviews.com/janesreviews/janeeyre.html
I'm sure that at some point in my educational career, I read Jane
Eyre.  But I was glad not to remember much about the plot.  Like
any good romance, especially one where the situation looks
hopeless, I enjoy it more if I'm able to be surprised.  And boy,
did I enjoy this.
Not that surprise is the only good thing about the movie.  It's
just consistent with the rest of what there is to enjoy.  The
acting was wonderful and the characters were very, very human. 
In particular, William Hurt as the tormented Mr. Rochester,
though he stayed true to the formality and precision of speech
of the 1830s, was the kind of man that I would take great
pleasure knowing and verbally jousting with in 1996.  I cared
about what he was going through, which made the climactic fire
scene and the resulting shift in his relationship with Jane an
agonizing  and suspenseful journey on which to travel.
Charlotte Gainsburg as the homely but ethereal Jane was also a
joy to watch unfold.  Her transformation from mistreated
schoolteacher to beloved governess was wary, gradual and
authentic.  With one brief smile from her somber face, she
conveys the transformative joy of a child taking her first
steps.  Her severe gray dresses, tight bun and pale, crooked
lips allowed Hollywood to redefine the term plain, but it
allowed her expressions to shine through that much more clearly
and be her crowning adornment.  I must admit, though, I couldn't
help but think "Hey, you're not poor anymore, babe - get a
makeover!"
Anna Pacquin, the luminous child from "The Piano" plays Jane as
a pre-teen.  Not a kid you'd want to try and match wits with. 
Pacquin carries herself with a grace and dignity that is
queenly, formidable and adult, and with very few words, rips the
pretensions of her elders to shreds.  I'll be looking for her,
in about 10 or 15 years, starring as Hester Prynne in a remake
of "The Scarlet Letter."
My only criticism of "Jane Eyre" is its mid-April release date. 
This is the movie for a rainy, dreary Saturday afternoon, not
for a glorious spring day.  Catch it soon and appreciate its
gentleness, before the sensuality of budding flowers and the
testosterone rush of the summer blockbusters takes hold.

Title
Review for Executive Decision (1996)
this review is also posted at 
http://moviereviews.com/janesreviews/executivedecision.html
I could pick this movie apart for a lot of movie critic type
reasons, but the fact is, I was on the edge of my seat for two
hours and twenty minutes.  Wholly unbelievable situations and
hokey, ride-off-into-the-sunset-with-the-girl-Pentagon-be-damned
endings are no match on the ratings scale for fingernails bitten
down to the quick.
Kurt Russell plays a U.S. Government intelligence expert who's
spent years on the tail of a member of the Chechan mafia.  Does
it seem to anyone else that the Sicilian mafia is passe' in
favor of other more exotic third world crime organizations? 
It's as if the darn Gottis and Gambinos are very 80s and
slightly tacky, like vacationing on the French Riviera, as
opposed to the rain forests of Costa Rica.
Anyway, this pesky Muslim zealot engineers the abduction and
delivery into American hands of a middle eastern terrorist so
that he and his men can hijack a plane and demand the
terrorist's release, giving them an excuse to fly into the
airspace over Washington DC and blow up the plane (and
themselves, and a substantial portion of the Eastern Seaboard)
in the name of Allah.
Got that?  Me neither.   That's okay, because the details of the
plot are really secondary to the nifty details of getting a U.S.
Army commando squad on board this plane, undetected, while it's
inflight and watching them outsmart the hijackers.  Oh, and did
I mention that during the transfer from the stealth plane to the
commercial 747, they manage to lose most of their sophisticated
surveillance gear (and their commander, Steven Segal, in the
shortest role of his career) and have to resort to paper clips
and chewing gum and good old American ingenuity?
You'll gasp at the high wire acrobatics over the passenger
cabin!  You'll hold your breath as the plucky flight attendant
(the beautiful and totally wasted Halle Berry and her even more
superfluous companion, Marla Maples Trump) hides Russell's
presence in the galley elevator from the terrorists.  And you'll
cheer and howl at the old fashioned way that this high tech
squad of commandos finds to notify the Pentagon that they are on
board and that they have matters in hand.
What a great way to spend a Sunday afternoon!

Title
Review for Flirting with Disaster (1996)
This review is also posted at 
http://moviereviews.com/janesreviews/disaster.html
When the cast of a movie includes names like George Segal, Mary
Tyler Moore, Alan Alda and Lily Tomlin, I get the uncomfortable
feeling that I'm headed out for a trip on The Love Boat.  But,
when it also includes the edgy Tea Leoni, Patricia Arquette and
especially the chameleon-like Ben Stiller, I'll give it a
shot.
This time I'm very glad I did.   "Flirting With
Disaster" was a hoot from the beginning video montage all
the way through it's just right 86 minutes.
Stiller plays a young man, adopted as a baby and now in search
of his biological parents.  Leoni is the social worker from the
adoption agency, who tries hard to help him, but manages to
misuse her computer and send him in a couple of very wrong
directions.  He gamely goes along with her, determined to not
only find his parents, but to bond with them, no matter what
kind of gene pools they swim in. 
I laughed myself into a headache when attempt number two turns
up a low life truck driver in Battle Creek, Michigan and the New
York Jewish entomologist Stiller eagerly embraces the chance to
learn to drive a semi.  He's so eager to please this macho new
father figure that you're surprised when his feet actually touch
the pedals.
I've now made the decision that I'll see anything that Ben
Stiller is in.  My last experience with him was as the
dreadlocked artist Bwick in "If Lucy Fell", which he
carried off with authentic, childlike innocence.  In
"Flirting With Disaster", his character is an earnest,
angst ridden equally sincere yuppie scientist.  He's a handsome
man, but one who's not afraid to use his body to great physical
comedy effect.  He knows how to hike up the waist of his pants
and look just as schleppish as his famous father, Jerry Stiller
(George Costanza's father on "Seinfeld").
Leoni is wonderful as the social worker, miserably coming out of
a divorce and hilariously trying to make up her mind whether to
seduce Stiller or go on and have a life of her own.
Arquette adds just the right touch of sanity as Stiller's earth
mother wife.  In scenes where she seduces her reluctant husband,
she refreshingly shows the body of a woman who hasn't entirely
regained her pre-pregnancy figure.   There's a touching
vulnerability in her voluptuousness and the wistfulness that
she's lost the part of her that made men take a second look. 
Mary Tyler Moore is a stitch as his neurotic adopted mother, in
a role as manipulative, unpleasant and un-Laura-Petrie-like as
you could imagine her playing.  Rounding out the supporting
cast, Segal, Alda and Tomlin are a bit wasted.  But there are
gems to be found among the non-star talent, especially the
unnamed actor who plays the Michigan truck driver and two other
anonymous guys as the bi-sexual couple of FBI agents who bust
him, then decide to go on vacation and follow the Stiller
entourage to New Mexico.  
Dorothy was right - there is no place like home.  But
"Flirting With Disaster" is a side trip worth taking, on
the way to figuring out why you can't just be happy with what
you have.
