Authors
Neil Sarver
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Fight Club (1999)
Yeah, there's spoilers... Stay back.
I have to admit, I have mixed feelings on this one.
First off, I have to admire the filmmakers for getting such a genuinely
subversive movie without even seriously undercutting their own subversion.
That almost never happens in Hollywood films... or, at least, in movies
with a subversive text, the occasional subversive subtext slips by, but
that's a story for another day.
Secondly, the film is very well done. It's an entertaining, hilarious
two and a half hour trip. The acting is dead on.  The pace is quick and
sharp. The score moved the story along and kept the mood.
So, what could possibly be my problem?
My problem is the film never made up its mind on a position. It
presented two very extreme positions, for purpose of satire, so in
clearly judging the one - the yuppie lifestyle - it should by process of
elimination pick the other - violent revolution. But instead of
advocating that position forcefully, it tries instead to look
unjudgingly atthat position without showing any middle ground positions.
Not that the middle ground positions should have won out, as that would
clearly have undercut the films subversion. However in not presenting
them, when they should seem reasonably obvious to the average person, it
can't agrue against them. This leaves its argument wanting.
It also spends a great deal of time exploring the beauty of the "Fight
Club" in its original form of basement groups of guys fistfighting. I
understood how they were living then rather than merely existing as they
had before.  The film very effectively conveyed that sense of
reinvigorated male passion... and raised my testosterone levels and I
was there with the film, baby...
.... but then it never addresses how becoming a uniform Brown Shirt in
Tyler's little army is anything like living. It seems like the same kind
of half-existance in slavery that they were supposedly trying to get
away from. A point that it, again, seemed remarkably unaware of. It
tried to draw attention away from that by making the narrator's point of
view be against the destruction and death and arguing both sides of
that.
I know people are going to call these things the delightful and thought
provoking ambiguities of the film, but I think they are actually glaring
examples of not thinking the whole thing through.
Most of all, I'm disappointed that when someone finally manages a chance
to make a film this subversive, it didn't make its argument better.
