Authors
Martin Thomas
Number of Reviews
7

Title
Review for Bulworth (1998)

   It's one of those stories where you're out late walking through a bad
neighborhood, back alley, empty parking garage or seedy bar, etc.,you
know you shouldn't have been in in the first place...
    At one point or another almost all of my friends have related their
own personal ‘wrong place/wrong time' adventure(s) to me. Less than half
but more than a couple of these stories have a similar plot thread: The
highest point of anxiety was when the person was approached by a big
black guy.  Now, what you can't pick up from reading this is the
intonation used on the words "big BLACK guy". It's almost a verbal wink
which suggests that the extra fear is so universal that even I, being
black myself, should understand and sympathize.
    *Sigh*
    I don't blame my friends or even bother to get annoyed by this
anymore. These are intelligent, liberal-minded people who are as
susceptible as the rest of us to the negative images bombarding us
everyday. Not so much from anything as blatant as the news but from many
more ‘harmless' forms of entertainment that access our subconscious
regularly.
    Take for example the much beloved sitcom CHEERS. It was certainly MY
favorite show when it was on. During it's eleven year run CHEERS managed
to have only one black character...for all of two episodes. He was
Louis:  a BIG, black, lazy and incompetent mailman (oxymoron?) with a
deep voice and a violent streak. The two episodes (which were both very
funny) centered around Cliff running around scared that Louis was going
to beat him up for getting him fired. Now, I don't think that CHEERS is
evil or that there's anything inherently wrong with ‘Louis', except for
the ratio. In eleven years(!!) on America's most popular tv show there
was not one other black person  to contrast him with,  thus he added to
the already growing stereotype.
    I could site hundreds of more examples but what would be the point,
really? Neither of us wants me to suit up and fight every dragon out
there. I  mostly try to stay out of it...Still, sometimes a man's gotta
do what a man's gotta do...
 ...BULWORTH is the story of conservative Democratic senator, J.
Bulworth (Warren Beatty), who suffers a nervous breakdown and begins
publically telling the bitter ugly truth about what goes on behind the
scenes in American politics, much to the chagrin of his staff and the
establishment...he's also taken out a $10 million policy with the
insurance lobby, put out a contract on himself and yadda, yadda,
yadda..."hilarity ensues".
   The political moments of BULWORTH are inspired and biting in their
candor. What's more shocking than what Warren Beatty says is that he's
allowed to say it. For example, when addressing the congregation of a
black church J.Bulworth is asked why he hasn't fulfilled his promises to
minority voters and his response is "Well, you haven't contributed any
money to my campaign, have you?". He goes on to explain that the
insurance and tobacco lobbies DO finance the very expensive campaign he
needs to stay in office which puts him pretty much in their pocket. In
fact, he implicates Clinton, Bush and all politicians as being caught up
in the standard S.O.B. corruption of the machine. Okay, so if you listen
to NPR or Pacifica News everyday the movie just confirms what you've
already pieced together.
   BULWORTH spares almost no one and some of these moments are genius
(if you consider telling the truth ‘genius'). In one scene Halle Berry's
character gives a valid explanation as to why there are no definitive
black leaders these days...Unfortunately, she spews it as if she were
auditioning for a MicroMachines commercial...AND it's the only
intelligent dialogue to come out of a black characters mouth in the
entire movie.
     The film is most successful when J.Bulworth is ‘kicking the
knowledge', but the other 80% is banal and insulting- and not in the way
you might think.  J.Bulworth is no more offensive than Melvin Udall (AS
GOOD AS IT GETS) or Archie Bunker, both who I loved. BULWORTH is
extremely insulting in it's portrayal of black people. It's as if
everything Warren Beatty (who also wrote and directed this) knows about
black people he learned from repeated viewings of HIGH SCHOOL HIGH and
the WB Network sitcoms. When J.Bulworth has his breakdown he becomes
infatuated with Nina (Halle Berry) and spends alot of time in the ‘hood.
There's ALOT of black people in this movie, yet none of them speak or
act realistically like anyone I've ever met. More to the point, they're
all idiots. They made ME want to cut social programs.
    But not everybody's gonna feel the way I do, you may not care about
anything I've said so far. Maybe watching the WB and UPN networks is as
multicultural as you want to get. Say you just picked up a new frame for
your NRA certificate and a signed, limited edition, hardcover copy of
The Bell Curve and you're feeling pretty stoked that the Nazi party is
starting to reform in Germany...Guess, what: The movie still stinks!
    BULWORTH forgets more of its inane plot lines than it remembers. The
humor is all slapstick and ‘fish out of water' setups (Okay, "the rich
white guy is hangin' with the homeys." We get it!). It's and endless
string of "White men can't rap" jokes played to the hilt. So much so
that they start to ruin some of the good scenes. Even if you can't get
enough of that, it has an ending that I guarantee no one- I repeat, NO
ONE will like.
     I really wanted to like BULWORTH, too. I think it had the potential
to be a very important film, but alas, it is a celluloid train wreck.
The shoddiness would be understandable if it'd been made by a first-time
or music video director, but this is Warren-freaking-Beatty we're
talking about here!  He's been making movies since 1961 and won a Oscar
for REDS, which he also wrote and directed.  For every brilliant scene
in BULWORTH that makes me want everybody to see this movie there are
four or five that make me blanche at the idea that anybody will ever see
it...
...And you don't want to see a black man blanche.
  It's scarier than having him ask you for directions on a dark street.

Title
Review for Armageddon (1998)
"Those who cannot remember the past are doomed to repeat it"- Santyana
...Blah, blah, blah. Man, I don't know about you, but I am truly tired
of hearing that quote. Not that it isn't true, mind you, but it's
invoked way too often and usually in conjunction with denouncing the
horrors of the Holocaust, slavery or the South during post-Civil
War Reconstruction.  What bummers!   Personally, I believe the quote's
validity can proven with a more contemporary and less
grandiose atrocity ...say for instance, Bruce Willis.
  Today's history lesson takes us back to 1988- A time when the
'one-man-army' action movie genre looked to be on it's last leg. It
seemed that Stallone's and Schwarzenegger's best work was behind them
and their movies were vying with each other to see which
could most resemble a Tex Avery cartoon. Then, out of nowhere came a
little movie named DIE HARD.
    What set DIE HARD apart from the others wasn't so much how smart the
script was,  it was the clever twist of the main
character: not an ex- Green Beret, ex-mercenary, ex-CIA agent, but just
a NY City cop. A regular Joe. One of us.  No longer could a
building full of hostages only be rescued by  an Austrian Superman. It
could just as well be an average guy who used his brain and had
a rudimentary knowledge of firearms. "Hell, it could've been me!"
    What made it all even more of a 'goof' was that it was Bruce Willis
in the role of John McClane.  Balding and not 'matinee idol'
handsome but charming in his own simian sort of way. Not really out of
shape but not a person who'd choose a protein shake over a
beer. In fact, he was already famous for hawking wine coolers and being
MOONLIGHTING's David Addison: smart mouthed,
blitzed-out party guy. A slacker. A screw up. "Hell, if Bruce could do
it I KNOW I could do it!"   It was a 'goof' on top of a 'goof'.
    So what happened? While we all high-fived and celebrated how funny
the punchline was we somehow forgot the joke it was
attached to. During this bout of amnesia Reality folded in on itself and
Bruce Willis became known as a legitimate action hero. He was
invited to become a partner in Planet Hollywood and was parodied
alongside Schwarzenegger and Stallone on such tv shows as
ANIMANIACS and DUCKMAN. Our forgetfulness yielded a condemnation that
was quick and severe and in the form of THE LAST
BOY SCOUT, LAST MAN STANDING, THE JACKAL, MERCURY RISING and most
recently ARMAGEDDON.
    In the first five minutes of ARMAGEDDON New York is devastated by a
shower of VW-sized meteors. The Powers-That-Be
discover that they are actually the by-product of a giant asteroid
plummeting toward Earth...with an ETA of 18 days!  Since detonating
all of the worlds nuclear bombs on the surface of the asteroid would do
no more damage than a firecracker held in an open palm
(????), the government enlists the aid of Harry Stamper (Bruce Willis),
the greatest oil drilling 'wildcat' in the world. Harry and his
ragtag team of roughnecks blast off into outer space to implant a nuke
in the asteroid and save the world. Between numerous mishaps
and their own hijinx, though, there may not be enough time.
  Double deja vu, huh? Just last year we had two disaster movies about
erupting volcanoes (DANTE'S PEAK, VOLCANO) and this
year we have two movies about the imminent destruction of Earth by
meteors. I figured the obvious thing to do here would be to
compare and contrast DEEP IMPACT (a more realistic and sensitive look at
the last days of Earth, reminiscent of TESTAMENT and
THE DAY AFTER) to ARMAGEDDON (uh...it blows up stuff real good), but
I've decided against it .
    "...OF ALL THE MOVIES THIS SUMMER, ARMAGEDDON IS THE BEST..."
   -raves Martin Thomas of The Reel Deal
 -Hey, rather than let the studio assign a truncated pre-fab quote to me
(like so many other lesser critics who just want to hear their
name on tv), I just saved them the work. Of course, what follows "... "
would be:
 "...AT TYPIFYING EVERYTHING THAT'S GENERALLY INSIPID ABOUT BIG SUMMER
MOVIES!"
    ARMAGEDDON is a brain dead, suspense-free, artless movie with
scribble pad characters, a 'make-it-up-as-we-go' plot, Aerosmith
songs every 15 minutes (did I mention that it also stars Liv Tyler), and
has a sense of humor that is of, by, and for middle-aged frat
boys.
    Other than bringing in people who like independent movies, Steve
Buscemi's and Billy Bob Thorton's only purpose seems to be to
share scenes with Bruce Willis and drive home the point of what a rotten
actor he is. There's no sense of urgency and you never feel
that the world is really going to end...and you don't care! The
characters in the movie sure don't seem to. With only two days left to
save the Earth they take a night off to go to a strip club.
     Probably the worst thing about ARMAGEDDON is knowing that it's
gonna make more money than God.
     ARMAGEDDON is a studio exec's wet dream. It's a combination of TRUE
LIES, INDEPENDENCE DAY and CON AIR
synthesized in a lab with everything fun, clever or new already
extracted.  It fits perfectly into it's genealogy of TWISTER-ID4-THE
LOST WORLD-SPEED 2-BATMAN & ROBIN-GODZILLA-***.  Movies that promise the
world then do an insulting bit of 'bait and
switch'.  Movies we'll sometimes like only because we had our hearts so
set on it. It's the history lesson we never seem to learn.
'Santyanna's lament' I call it.
    I suppose compared to an F-5 tornado that only kills two people, an
alien technology that interfaces with a MacIntosh computer, a
T-Rex that drinks water from a chlorinated pool rather than a nearby
ocean, a Bat-credit card, and a lizard that's as tall as a skyscraper
yet small enough to lay eggs in Madison Square Garden, I guess an
asteroid the size of Texas not being detected until eighteen days
before impact is not all that outrageous. Even when you consider that
XF11, the real life mile-wide meteor's brush with Earth has been
pinpointed thirty years in advance (Oct. 16 2028 1:30pm). I guess I'm
just nitpicking now.
"Dude, it was just meant to be a rollercoaster ride movie and there's
something wrong with you if you can't just sit back
and enjoy it! You can't compare it to a 'thinking' movie."
    So, is this what we've come to?  Do I now not compare the cooking of
Paul Prudhomme to that of Wolfgang Puck, but rather the
taste of a corn-fed cow's dung to that of a  slaughterhouse cow?  This
has all made me question my judgement and put me in a self-
reflexive mood.
     It's not like I haven't loved movies that either require you to
check your brain at the door (SPAWN, THE SAINT) or movies where
the lead actor can't hold his accent (THE GHOST & THE DARKNESS, THE
DEVIL'S ADVOCATE) or movies with terrible dialogue
(WILD THINGS, BEYOND THE VALLEY OF THE DOLLS).
    I think the key word is EITHER/ OR, as opposed to AND. I guess I
require that a movie have SOME merit other than lining the
pockets of hack directors and schlock producers (you know who you are).
    Sure, it's possible to "check your brain" and enjoy ARMAGEDDON, but
you may be too embarrassed to ask for it back afterwards.
It might have some questions you don't want to answer.

Title
Review for Truman Show, The (1998)
    If you were to peruse my collection of nearly 300 CDs you'd find
several titles by The Specials, Isaac Hayes, Elvis Costello,
Marvin Gaye , U2 and I imagine the biggest question on your mind would
be: "Do you own EVERYTHING by Prince?"- (nearly)
   If you looked a little further, you'd see that right in between those
were also the greatest hits of The Carpenters, The BeeGees,
Michael Jackson, and Burt Bacharach. I absolutely adore this music, and
not out of a sense of irony, kitsch or trendiness. Before there
was "retro" this was the music that permeated the airwave when I was a
kid and I've never stopped loving it. There is no shame in my
game.
   Now at this point I probably wouldn't let you look too much closer
because you would no doubt stumble upon the CDs I don't beat
my chest over. Discs featuring the song stylings of such luminaries as
Kenny G, Yanni, Celine Dion and...(ugh) Michael Bolton. All I
can say in my defense is: "They belong to my wife."
   I know, I know, the smart thing would've been to keep our collections
separate but...well, she had this Tony!Toni!Tone! CD I really
wanted to absorb- Oh well.
   I imagine your big question now is: "How could you marry a woman with
such awful taste in music?"
    I guess I just...waitaminnit! Is that REALLY you're next question?
Man, you guys are shallow!
    For your information, ‘Oh cynical one', a marriage is based on
mutual trust and having much more in common than something so
trivial as musical tastes. For instance, my wife and I feel the exact
same way about... ...uuuhh...um...uh...Jim Carrey!!
    Yeah, Jim Carrey, hah!
   I was a big fan of Jim Carrey's back before he was on tv in THE DUCK
FACTORY. He was doing stand up comedy which featured
some decent jokes but what was amazing were his impressions- one in
particular. He'd start by tapping his foot and without using his
voice he'd perfectly imitate the cast of MY THREE SONS. Ernie, Chip,
Uncle Charlie and even Fred MacMurray all by unhinging his
jaw and contorting the muscles of his face.
   Nobody was more excited than me when turned up in the cast of IN
LIVING COLOR. Finally, he was given a large enough venue
to show the world how talented he was. And week after week he did. It
eventually led to a hugely successful movie...Ah yes, the
movies.
    When Jim Carrey's film career began he and I had to "part ways".
Though his movies made truckloads of money I found them to
be too broad for my taste- and by ‘broad' I mean: Pretty damn stupid!
(with sugar on it).
   THE MASK was originally a bitingly witty comic book series with a
completely different tone than the flaccid movie adaption. I was
unable to watch anymore than 20 minutes of DUMB & DUMBER. In an
interview Carrey admitted , as I suspected, that ACE
VENTURA 2 had no script. Everyday he'd arrive on the set and say to
himself, "They're paying me$20 million. The cameras are
rolling. Think of something funny! Think of something funny!"
   The only one I was able get any enjoyment out of was BATMAN FOREVER
(in which he stole the show) and that couldn't really be
considered ‘HIS' movie.
    Enter THE CABLE GUY.
    THE CABLE GUY featured a plot with twists, a good script, a message
(despite itself) and some good gags that didn't solely rely on
his unfilled Ridlin prescription. Best of all, Carrey's chaotic energy
was focused into playing a demented character with enough
dimension to remind me of several people I knew in high school. Just as
I'd declared the art of making good comedies dead, THE
CABLE GUY served me up a hot crow sandwich (followed by dessert ala THE
NUTTY PROFESSOR). Me and the missus liked it
even better the second time. It also managed to bring lovers of dark
comedies everywhere over to the Jim Carrey bandwagon. In
short, THE CABLE GUY was successful in every way...except one,
financially.
    Carrey's salary was $20 million while the movie only made $12
million. I'm not strong in math but I think that means it was a flop.
According to entertainment reporters and media analysts, "The fans
thought the movie was too dark! Carrey should forget drama and
return to his old comedy!"   Huh, imagine that. A ‘mandate' that a
performer stick to schtick rather than expand himself as an artist.
Go figger.
    I  researched why this turn of events happened and was able to reach
only one logical conclusion. As it turns out there are two
phylum of Jim Carrey fan: 1) Those who liked THE CABLE GUY and (2)
Morons ... Sorry. Let's say ‘mentally challenged'- and the
ratio was nearly 6 to 1.  Fortunately, Jim Carrey's next movie was
LIAR!LAIAR!. That movie was both ‘stupid' and ‘smart' in the best
possible way. It won back all of his old fans and held on to his new
ones. His career was ‘saved'.
   So, what does any of this have to do with THE TRUMAN SHOW? I'll
explain that in a minute.
   There's no need for me to tell you that THE TRUMAN SHOW is good,
you've already heard that at least twenty times or more.
You've probably also heard it compared to FORREST GUMP and that Jim
Carrey does some Oscar-caliber dramatic acting.
    Hmmn...I would definitely say it's a GREAT movie but the other
two?...I don't know.  Rather than FORREST GUMP, the movies I
would shelve it next to would be ROBOCOP, MAN BITES DOG and BRAZIL-
three of the best written, well constructed, disturbing
and nauseatingly cynical movies I've ever seen.
    THE TRUMAN SHOW is the story of Truman Burbank, who at age 30 has
not realized that his entire life has been broadcasted as a
tv show. His entire environment is a city-sized, dome- shaped tv studio
and all of his friends and loved ones are actors- who stop ever
so often to hawk the sponsors products.
    While this all handled light-heartedly at first, as the story
continues you find out more things that don't sit so well;  Like the
fact that
Truman was actually adopted by a corporation from an unwed mother. They
used intense trauma and manipulation to keep him from
wanting to leave his ‘hometown'. Truman doesn't catch on that his world
is artificial because, frankly, he's never had anything to
compare it to. The worst thing about all of this is that the citizenry
approve of it, not because it's a tv show...but because IT'S THE
MOST POPULAR TV SHOW IN AMERICA!!
    Like the three movies I mentioned earlier, I couldn't help but
respect THE TRUMAN SHOW, despite feeling ill from the cynical
distopia it presented.  After the denial wore off I had to accept that
it WAS our world, and closer than you think. I would refer you to
the new trend in websites: A camera continously broadcasts the actions,
no matter how mundane, of the site's host. Better still, look to
Fox's POLICE SCARIEST CAR CHASES or the highly rated JERRY SPRINGER,
especially before it became faux-fight night. Our
voyeurism is out of the closet and is successfully integrating itself to
our desire to be entertained.
    Exiting the movie I was reminded of how I felt the first time I saw
Chuck Heston come upon the half buried Statue of Liberty in
PLANET OF THE APES or discover that SOYLENT GREEN was made of people.
    Just as lightning struck and knocked a rack of chemicals onto police
scientist Barry Allen and transformed him into the fastest man
alive, The Flash!, in a similar phenomenon, DEAD POETS SOCIETY director
Peter Weir turned hyperactive, gonzo comedian
Robin Williams into an Oscar nominated (eventually winning) dramatic
actor.
    I'm sure you also know that a few months later, an identical
accident turned Barry's nephew Wally into Kid Flash, with the same
powers.  THE TRUMAN SHOW is also directed by Peter Weir and it's star,
hyperactive, gonzo comedian is...well, not quite Kid Flash.
    Carrey's acting is definitely good, but he plays Truman as something
of a 1950's goofball. It fits the story well and is very effective
at keeping you off balance but it doesn't define his dramatic range at
all. For that the best barometer still is DOING TIME ON MAPLE
DRIVE.
   If you've been paying attention you should have several questions on
your mind right now: "What's gonna happen when the old fans
and parents take their kids to see this movie?"  "Dramatic and dark?
Didn't they learn from THE CABLE GUY?"  "How can this
movie succeed?"....Thank you. Now, these are good questions.
   Consider this: The movies I review I usually see 3 days to 2 weeks
before their release date. THE TRUMAN SHOW I saw 2
MONTHS AGO and I'd been reading reviews a whole month before...alot of
reviews!
    This studio isn't stupid. They've learned from the past and are
insuring that there's enough good word of mouth to make the
populace ‘like' the picture before they even see it. Maybe the method
isn't as crass or over-inflated as those used to hype GODZILLA,
but  it's still pure marketing and manipulation and I, for one,  refuse
to be a part of it...
....Well, okay, maybe this once...
....I honestly do think it's a Must-See movie...
....It's possibly the best movie you'll see this summer...and I realize
that ain't saying much, but THE TRUMAN SHOW does...
...It speaks volumes

Title
Review for Mulan (1998)
The test goes a little something like this-
   Go up to a female friend, wife, sister, etc. and say (if you are
female pretend I'm saying this to you):  "I was watching a movie on
cable last night...Man, that Sharon Stone is so hot! Don't you think
so?"...then turn your head and brace for your test subject's
reply. The most polite response she's likely to give is a grimace while
audibly rolling her eyes. I'd wager that most of you (feamle)
bristled from just reading the test statement.
    One might hastily conclude from this test that all women are catty
and incapable of paying each other a compliment. You would be
incorrect. If you were to repeat the test statement and in place of
"Sharon Stone" use "Julianna Margulies" or "Emma Thompson"
you'll find you get an almost opposite reaction. You may even be
applauded and perceived as a higher thinker.
   It's not that women don't compliment other women...just certain
women.  Julianna and Emma happen to fall on the ‘sanctioned'
A-list. These are women who present themselves as smart, heroic, demure
and...well, nonthreatening. Sure, Sharon Stone (as well as
Demi Moore) has made great strides in getting higher salaries for women
in Hollywood and she was lauded by critics for her
performances in CASINO and LAST DANCE...still, there's that threatening/
nonthreatening thing. See, a common thread of the A-list
women is that while men may find most of them attractive none of them
are really considered to be "HOT".
    This has been a sneak preview of my next career venture. Along with
being a multimedia artist and movie critic I'm going to tour
the country on the seminar circuit. Following in the footsteps of Dr.
John Gray I'm going to further polarize the sexes by pontificating
on the differences between men and woman, however, my focus will be a
little different.
    From talking to alot of women I've come to realize that they can't
or don't see the reality of what men, ALL MEN,  truly are. This
"dampening" effect, I believe, is biological and no different than the
function that erases the memory of the pain of childbirth. My
teachings are not aimed at demonizing male behavior but pointing out
that it's perceived crudeness is the result of biological
hardwiring, which is centered around sex and killing stuff. It is a
constant struggle between instinct and the prime directive: The
continuation of a society and propagation of the species.
    Of course, I'll also cover "Why your man couldn't care less about
meeting your friends" and other long kept secrets- but for that
and the rest you'll have to come hear me speak in the Ranchero room of
your local Marriott or Red Lion and buy a $99 set of tapes.
    Well, anyway, I got to thinking about all of this while watching the
reaction of MULAN when  she enters the Chinese army training
camp and discovers the true behavior of men when comfortably immersed in
their natural element.
    Since the marketing blitz has only been half that of HERCULES, you
may not know that MULAN is the newest animated featured
offered by Disney. It is the story of a young woman, Mulan (Ming Na
Wen), who is too much of a tomboy and free spirit to marry
off, thus bringing honor to her long-suffering family. When the Huns
invade China the emperor calls for a male from every household
to join the army. To spare her crippled father Mulan steals his armor,
disguises herself as a man and joins the Chinese army- knowing
that if she is found out she will be executed.
    By now we're all familiar with the clocksetting  formula Disney uses
for it's movies so I think I can anticipate most of your
questions.  Let me start out by saying that nothing in MULAN is
extraordinary or even amazing, but there is alot that's very good.
    One of the best things about MULAN is how understated it is. While
HERCULES was as boisterous and boastful as Herakles
himself, MULAN is much quieter and asks you to expect no more than it's
willing to deliver. Have you noticed the absence of Happy
Meal toys and the lack of commercials for it? The tone of MULAN is
softer right down to its watercolor-like palette. The art is
reminiscent of Chinese prints without being daring enough to let you
forget that it's a Disney cartoon.
    Another thing in its favor is that unlike HERCULES, HUNCHBACK OF
NOTRE DAME, POCAHONTAS, or even ALADDIN it is an
original story with no literary or historical base to "piss" all over.
    If there's anything in MULAN that comes close to being amazing it's
how well they handled the characters. Especially the
supporting and background characters which are the best since ALADDIN.
They are all distinctive and ,except for Yao (who is
basically REN & STIMPY's George Liquor with a beard) very Chinese
without being racially insulting- In other words, no Jerry Lewis
clones here.
    The obligatory ,annoying, comic-relief characters are kept to a
minimum. Namely, Mushu the
Dragon, as voiced by Eddie Murphy. Murphy does an excellent job and
Mushu is a pretty good character, but he's on the set of the
wrong movie. Even though the anachronistic humor has a much lower
profile than in most Disney movies, MULAN is so deep in
ancient Chinese culture that it wasn't until halfway through the picture
that I got used to Mushu.
    The character I was probably most impressed with was the General's
son, Li-Shang. Whereas Hercules was about as Greek as a
McGyro, Li-Shang is the most ethnic looking stud/ love interest Disney
has ever done. It was good to see a character that was
handsome, proud, and every bit Chinese...except for his singing voice.
   Li-Shang is voiced by B.D.Wong, until a very important scene when he
opens his mouth to sing and the most Anglo voice
imaginable comes out of it.  The voice belongs to Donnie Osmond- and I'm
not speaking metaphorically, it really is DONNIE "whiter
than an albino mime" OSMOND!  It's very jarring and doesn't help that
the song is not all that good either.
       Well, you knew you couldn't escape one of these without suffering
through a few psuedo- show tunes. Replacing the usual
composer "Broadway" Tim Rice is "one-hit-wonder" Matthew Wilder. If that
name sounds familiar to you turn on your radio to
K-LITE and you're likely to hear him belting out: "Ain't nuthin' gonna
break-a my stride...".  The songs in MULAN leave you
wondering, not "where did he disappear to?" but "who thought it was a
good idea to find him?".  On the positive side,  MULAN has the
fewest songs of any of the others (maybe 4) and the score is nice.
     As for the story, it's very simple and predictable, yet enjoyment.
Though it centers around the gender conflicts and honor, it is
mostly a story of empowerment. A must-see for little girls and a
should-see for little boys. I couldn't help but make comparisons to
G.I. JANE. Unfortunately, it also borrowed the one thing from G.I. JANE
that I didn't like.
    As both movies seem to be settling into very low key but poignant
endings, they tack on a poorly-conceived action sequence. It's as
if the investors had a meeting and decided that their targeted audience
wouldn't be happy without it. In the case of MULAN it may
have also been a matter of trying to stretch out the time. Oh well, it
is a kid's movie.
    And YES, it IS a kid's movie! For all of you parents who felt burned
by THE HUNCHBACK OF NOTRE DAME, you can go back
into the water.  I assure you that MULAN is safe. About the most
uncomfortable question you'll have to answer is, "Do the Chinese
really such a low threshold for embarrassment?"
BTW- There is a male counterpart to that test question
 Casually say to your brother, friend, male co-worker, etc.: "I think
George Michael is sooo hot! I can't believe people think he's gay."

Title
Review for Bulworth (1998)
   It's one of those stories where you're out late walking through a bad
neighborhood, back alley, empty parking garage or seedy bar,
etc.,you know you shouldn't have been in in the first place...
    At one point or another almost all of my friends have related their
own personal ‘wrong place/wrong time' adventure(s) to me. Less
than half but more than a couple of these stories have a similar plot
thread: The highest point of anxiety was when the person was
approached by a big black guy.  Now, what you can't pick up from reading
this is the intonation used on the words "big BLACK
guy". It's almost a verbal wink which suggests that the extra fear is so
universal that even I, being black myself, should understand
and sympathize.
    *Sigh*
    I don't blame my friends or even bother to get annoyed by this
anymore. These are intelligent, liberal-minded people who are as
susceptible as the rest of us to the negative images bombarding us
everyday. Not so much from anything as blatant as the news but
from many more ‘harmless' forms of entertainment that access our
subconscious regularly.
    Take for example the much beloved sitcom CHEERS. It was certainly MY
favorite show when it was on. During it's eleven year
run CHEERS managed to have only one black character...for all of two
episodes. He was Louis:  a BIG, black, lazy and incompetent
mailman (oxymoron?) with a deep voice and a violent streak. The two
episodes (which were both very funny) centered around Cliff
running around scared that Louis was going to beat him up for getting
him fired. Now, I don't think that CHEERS is evil or that there's
anything inherently wrong with ‘Louis', except for the ratio. In eleven
years(!!) on America's most popular tv show there was not one
other black person  to contrast him with,  thus he added to the already
growing stereotype.
    I could site hundreds of more examples but what would be the point,
really? Neither of us wants me to suit up and fight every
dragon out there. I  mostly try to stay out of it...Still, sometimes a
man's gotta do what a man's gotta do...
 ...BULWORTH is the story of conservative Democratic senator, J.
Bulworth (Warren Beatty), who suffers a nervous breakdown and
begins publically telling the bitter ugly truth about what goes on
behind the scenes in American politics, much to the chagrin of his
staff and the establishment...he's also taken out a $10 million policy
with the insurance lobby, put out a contract on himself and yadda,
yadda, yadda..."hilarity ensues".
   The political moments of BULWORTH are inspired and biting in their
candor. What's more shocking than what Warren Beatty says
is that he's allowed to say it. For example, when addressing the
congregation of a black church J.Bulworth is asked why he hasn't
fulfilled his promises to minority voters and his response is "Well, you
haven't contributed any money to my campaign, have you?". He
goes on to explain that the insurance and tobacco lobbies DO finance the
very expensive campaign he needs to stay in office which
puts him pretty much in their pocket. In fact, he implicates Clinton,
Bush and all politicians as being caught up in the standard S.O.B.
corruption of the machine. Okay, so if you listen to NPR or Pacifica
News everyday the movie just confirms what you've already
pieced together.
   BULWORTH spares almost no one and some of these moments are genius
(if you consider telling the truth ‘genius'). In one scene
Halle Berry's character gives a valid explanation as to why there are no
definitive black leaders these days...Unfortunately, she spews it
as if she were auditioning for a MicroMachines commercial...AND it's the
only intelligent dialogue to come out of a black characters
mouth in the entire movie.
     The film is most successful when J.Bulworth is ‘kicking the
knowledge', but the other 80% is banal and insulting- and not in the
way you might think.  J.Bulworth is no more offensive than Melvin Udall
(AS GOOD AS IT GETS) or Archie Bunker, both who I
loved. BULWORTH is extremely insulting in it's portrayal of black
people. It's as if everything Warren Beatty (who also wrote and
directed this) knows about black people he learned from repeated
viewings of HIGH SCHOOL HIGH and the WB Network sitcoms.
When J.Bulworth has his breakdown he becomes infatuated with Nina (Halle
Berry) and spends alot of time in the ‘hood. There's
ALOT of black people in this movie, yet none of them speak or act
realistically like anyone I've ever met. More to the point, they're all
idiots. They made ME want to cut social programs.
    But not everybody's gonna feel the way I do, you may not care about
anything I've said so far. Maybe watching the WB and UPN
networks is as multicultural as you want to get. Say you just picked up
a new frame for your NRA certificate and a signed, limited
edition, hardcover copy of The Bell Curve and you're feeling pretty
stoked that the Nazi party is starting to reform in
Germany...Guess, what: The movie still stinks!
    BULWORTH forgets more of its inane plot lines than it remembers. The
humor is all slapstick and ‘fish out of water' setups (Okay,
"the rich white guy is hangin' with the homeys." We get it!). It's and
endless string of "White men can't rap" jokes played to the hilt.
So much so that they start to ruin some of the good scenes. Even if you
can't get enough of that, it has an ending that I guarantee no
one- I repeat, NO ONE will like.
     I really wanted to like BULWORTH, too. I think it had the potential
to be a very important film, but alas, it is a celluloid train
wreck. The shoddiness would be understandable if it'd been made by a
first-time or music video director, but this is
Warren-freaking-Beatty we're talking about here!  He's been making
movies since 1961 and won a Oscar for REDS, which he also
wrote and directed.  For every brilliant scene in BULWORTH that makes me
want everybody to see this movie there are four or five
that make me blanche at the idea that anybody will ever see it...
...And you don't want to see a black man blanche.
  It's scarier than having him ask you for directions on a dark street.

Title
Review for X Files, The (1998)
    There's this Sci-Fi tv show my roommate and I used to scramble to
watch every weekend and I can't remember the name of it.
The leads were a man and a woman, and I remember that their relationship
was platonic. The woman was a sexy redhead and the guy
was more normal looking than your average lantern-jawed action hero. The
premise of the show was that every week they would go
and investigate a new paranormal phenomenon. Yeah, that was it! And the
name of the show was...uh...uh...
...Aw, damn.
I'm not leaving here until I remember.
   THE X-FILES movie picks up where the highly popular tv show leaves
off with the continuing adventures of FBI agents
Mulder (David Duchovny) and Scully (Gillian Anderson). This time they're
on the trail of a conspiracy to cover up the existence of a
prehistoric virus that's connected to aliens. Being that the show is
heavily centered around secrets I won't reveal any more of the plot,
other than to say it asks as many questions as it answers.
   Like the movie STAR TREK: FIRST CONTACT, the story is the conclusion
to a season finale. One big concern has been that
non-viewers may get confused, but let assuage that fear right now. You
don't need to be a regular viewer to understand THE X-FILES
movie...you just need to be a regular viewer to enjoy THE X-FILES movie.
    The two movies I would probably most compare it to would be
CONSPIRACY THEORY and THE ARRIVAL, but it wouldn't be a
fair or favorable comparison. Despite how you may feel about either of
those movies, in terms of plot, pacing, dialogue and character
development they are out of THE X-FILES' league.
    The X-FILES is not so much a ‘movie' as it is the latest of the new
genre of Movie/ Current TV Show hybrids (see also BEAVIS
&BUTTHEAD DO AMERICA; STAR TREK: GENERATIONS ). Like the others X- FILES
comes off as more of a two hour episode
with better production values and slower pacing.  While it does have the
look of a ‘real' movie, its inexperience shows.
   The action sequences are shot at such close proximity that all you
can make out are indistinguishable flashes. It's lazy in its
characterizations, relying on the fact that you already know them well
enough from watching the show. Often I knew that phrases or
characters meant something important only by  how long the camera stayed
on them, the  audience's reaction or how dramatic the
music was.
     There's nothing clever or unique about the dialogue and, except for
an action scene near the end that takes place in the arctic, it's
very low on a main ingredient that even the worst summer movies have:
Cool parts!  Even the obligatory appearance of ‘The Lone
Gunmen' is meaningless and gimmicky.
       Originally, I felt that I should exempt myself from reviewing THE
show...and believe me I've tried. I desperately want to like it. So many
of my friends, whose opinions I respect, love the show. I
don't know about you, but to me the only thing better than watching a
good show is talking about it the next day with friends.
   And don't mistake me for one of those people who don't like something
just because it's popular. Please! To me those people are
worse than  bandwagon-hoppers because they live under the delusion that
they're hipper and less manipulated.
    No, I've watched The X-Files about 12 times (how many chances would
you give a show you don't like?) and I've liked only 3
episodes...and from what I hear those episodes were anomalies. I think
that to like the show you maybe have to be open to a few
concepts such as:
David Duchovny as a good or charismatic actor-  With the notable
exceptions of his turns on THE LARRY SANDERS SHOW and
TWIN PEAKS, I've always found David Duchovny to be something of an
Eckerd's brand Richard Gere...and let's face it, even a ‘top
shelf' Richard Gere is not always desirable. On a more personal note:
Duchovny physically reminds me of an ex- boss.  My only
enjoyment from the show used to be watching him get dissed and beat up
by the other agents.
Conspiracies! Conspiracies! Conspiracies!-  I'm probably one of the
least paranoid people you'll ever meet. I do, however, believe
that all professional sports are ‘fixed' to one degree or another. I
also think our government is guilty of every corrupt thing they've
been accused of...EXCEPT covering up the existence of aliens.
Extraterrestrial beings inhabiting the Earth- We all look to the skies
for the answers we can't find here. Some find religion and
some, well...   Without putting you through a session in the Total
Perspective Vortex let me throw a few facts at you:   We are 500
light-seconds from the sun. The next nearest star to earth is 4.3
light-years away- something like 23,000
billion miles away!  Even traveling at one million miles an hour, it
would take more than 2,500 years to get
there. Despite the probability of  intelligent life on other planets,
any signal from any planet in the universe
broadcast in any direction is unlikely to be in the path of another
inhabited planet. Waiting for a signal
might require a wait longer than any life on any planet might last. If
we were to get a signal, the waves
carrying that signal left hundreds or thousands of years earlier and by
the time we tracked its source down,
the sending planet may no longer be habitable or even exist.
   An extraterrestrial would have better odds winning Lotto three times
in a row than finding Earth.
     If you think I don't see the absurdity of religiously watching
XENA: WARRIOR PRINCESS but not ‘buying' THE X-FILES, you're
wrong. But shows like XENA, and even HIGHLANDER, aren't ashamed of their
cheesiness. They cut right to what's adventurous and
fun, and don't exert so much energy trying to convince everyone how
‘serious' they are.
   Don't tell me about X-FILES being ‘tongue-in-cheek'. I know that some
of them are (like the 3 that I liked) but the majority are not.
After all, we are talking a bout a show that's won awards for Best Drama
as well as Actor(??) & Actress (okay,I admit she's pretty
damn good).
  I didn't say all of this to try to convince you to not like the show.
Being that it is a Sci-Fi genre movie, no critic can accurately
predict how you'll feel about it. THE X-FILES means something different
to each person. My goal was to give you an idea of the filter
you should use on my comments. If it helps to know, the theater I saw it
in was packed with ‘X-fans', and they all seemed to dig it.
     Hey, "The truth is out there"...
    ...I'm just not sure you should pay $7 for what you see every week
for free.
 OH!! I just remembered the name of that tv show I was thinking of! It
was FRI--- What? Who said X-FILES?...No, no, it was
FRIDAY THE 13th: The TV Series!.

Title
Review for Lost in Space (1998)
To quote the great philosopher and poet, Gil Scott-Heron:
"...the fact is, this country wants nostalgia. They want to go back as
far as they can . . . even if it's only as far as last week! Not to face
now or tomorrow but to face backwards."
   This was his criticism of America's and the Reagan administration's
preoccupation with returning to the 1950's. Glorious days of
unambiguous morals, two parent families, innocent chaste virtue, and
whites-only drinking fountains.
     I'd say that in the Clinton years our stalker-like obsession with
nostalgia has ebbed somewhat. Don't believe me?  Just look at how
fewer movies produced today are based on old tv shows as opposed to
before. Huh? Huh? ...
....Of course, um  . . .  that's also likely to be because the vein's
been pretty well tapped. I mean.  You can't deny the barrel's being
pretty well scraped when the latest two projects are Mr.Magoo and LOST
IN SPACE.
    Don't give me that face, you and I both know that Lost In Space was
not a good show. Oh, it was certainly likeable, entertaining,
and definitely a lot of fun. Like the 60's Batman show, I didn't
appreciate its humor until I was older, and I admire that it predates
Star
Trek, but I'm still not gonna say it was "good."
   Let's face it, Lost In Space was the science fiction equivalent of
Gilligan's Island-
1) Every week the cast struggled to get back home.
2) Every week their plan was monkey-wrenched by the same member that got
them in their fix in the first place.
3) Every week you were left with the question: Not "Will they ever get
home?", but "Why don't they just kill Gilligan/ Dr.Smith?!"
    Of course, the obvious answer was that without Dr.Smith there was no
reason to watch the show.  Jonathan Harris (the actor)
turned a character that was originally supposed to be killed off in the
third episode into one of the great cowardly, comedic, effeminate
villain archetypes of all time . . . Possibly inspiring the character
that got BRAVEHEART picketed.
   BUT ENOUGH of my esoteric rambling, you want to know about LOST IN
SPACE the movie:
    The first thing you probably want to know is whether it's campy like
the tv show or not. Well, as you probably gathered from the
trailers it is serious . . . but before you exhale let me say, that's
not always a good thing. In fact, the movie is filled with many such
dichotomies and double-edged swords. For instance, the conceptual
artists did a fantastic job of designing everything and updating the
characters. A good 40% of the movie IS computer graphics which are all
Bee-Yoo-Tee-ful! ...Unfortunately, they look unrealistic, to
the point of distraction. Similar to looking at the panoramic shots in
TITANIC or a poorly done breast augmentation.
    It's the year 2058 and the Robinson Family blast off in the Jupiter
2 for Alpha Centauri in search of an inhabitable world, preferably
in less than twenty years when the earth will no longer be liveable. The
ship is secretly sabotaged by the traitorous Dr. Zachary Smith
who doesn't make it off before lift off. He's unable to abort his plan
and the ship is thrown way off course. The crew is lost in space.
Just like in the show.
   This first half does a nice job of fleshing out these concepts. The
script isn't great but it shows lots of potential, like so many
Hollywood movies do . . . until the third act, where most of them fall
apart. Simultaneously, as the Jupiter2 is attacked so does the
story find it's structural integrity compromised.
    The true "hull breach" comes at 55 minutes into the movie when the
crew discovers and adopts a very "cute"ewok/ snarf /abu-like
alien and are attacked by a swarm of unconvincing computer-generated
spiders. The plot then turns into more of a comic book- and
for those of you who actually read comics and know how good some of them
can be, I meant that in the way the general public
thinks of "comic books." Think $.25 bins, circa 1978.
   We're treated to such pseudoscience as equipment made of adamnatium
(a metal which I assure you only exists in Marvel comics)
and flying through the sun at warp speed making you travel forward in
time . . . Don't get me started on the time travel issues. There's
more than enough other plot holes to go around. I guarantee that if you
go see this before the end of the film you'll notice everyone in
the theater turn to each other looking puzzled.
   Had the movie not gone the serious route some of these things
might've worked. Alas . . .
    But really, who cares about the story? It's the characters that made
Lost In Space! What about the characters?
...Hmmn . . .
...Really, most of the dialog was too bad for the actors to transcend
the material and they leave you with no lasting impression,
including the robot.
    Gary Oldman does a decent enough Dr.Smith. After years of stinking
up other movies (THE PROFESSIONAL, THE FIFTH
ELEMENT, AIR FORCE ONE) with his one-note, over-the-top portrayal of
villains, here he's given the perfect venue. Amazingly, he
shows a restraint which makes his Dr.Smith more potent, almost scary. As
the movie's second hour spins out of control he slips in
more of the classic "Smith-isms" but by this time it's too little too
late. Jonathan Harris retains his title.
    The only performances that really stuck out we're those of Matt
LeBlanc and William Hurt, who I now have a new respect for. He
breathed alot of life into the character of John Robinson, making him
more like Reed Richards. I completely felt him as a
work-obsessed father/husband/ scientific genius who had his life on the
back burner for the last three years while he worked on a
project to try to save the earth. Next to the artists he's the best
thing in the movie. I respect him even more for not wearing a
hairpiece.
    On the flip side there's Matt LeBlanc as Maj. Don West . . . and his
performance stood out for the exact opposite reason.
     From the old show Don West was my favorite character (next to
Dr.Smith, of course). I'm sure to most of you he was just the
studly guy who was Judy's (the oldest daughter) boyfriend. To me he was
cool because he was the only one who wasn't fooled by or
tolerant of Dr.Smith. I lived for those moments when he'd get fed up,
grab Smith by the collar and beg John to let him go out back
and work him over. Surrounded by big brains he was the only one with
common sense. It's a damn shame that Matt was so cringingly
bad.
    Matt's character on FRIENDS is my favorite character on the show,
but he proves that his range extends no farther than that 30
minutes. His portrayal of Don West consists of nothing more than holding
his arms out to his sides, talking in a deep voice and reciting
his lines as if he was filling in for a sick friend. It doesn't help
that he has the worst dialog in the movie (especially in the scenes he
shares with Heather Graham) but I never got the impression he could do
more if it'd been better.
   The only other character of note is "Blarp" the aforementioned cutesy
comic-relief alien. He's the kind of character that's annoying to
everybody except kids too young to be admitted into the movie in the
first place. He was most likely put in as a harkening back to
Debbie The Bloop ( a chimp with fake long ears) from the original
series.  If you don't remember "Debbie" it's because she was
discreetly yanked after two episodes... with good reason.
    Adding insult to injury, Blarp's completely computer generated and
resembles a cross between a muppet and the HoneyCombs
cereal's mascot. He's only slightly less annoying than Lacey Chabert's
voice- which sounds EXACTLY like she snorted helium
between each take (How is anyone able to sit through an entire episode
of PARTY OF FIVE?).
‘"Oh, the pain!!"
