Authors
Sue Roberts
Number of Reviews
12

Title
Review for Four Weddings and a Funeral (1994)
Features: Hugh Grant, Andie MacDowell, Kristin Scott Thomas, 
          Simon Callow, David Bower, Corin Redgrave, James Fleet, 
          John Hannah, Charlotte Coleman and Rowan Atkinson.
     I feel the formula for British weddings is fundamentally bizarre
(archaic tradition meets nouveau riche aspiration) and as this movie
sets out to show, the comic possibilities are endless!  The real joy of
Richard Curtis' script, however, is the accuracy with which the events
are portrayed.  It starts off with something simple, the "howling up
the motorway in an unsuitable vehicle and changing when you arrive"
gag.  Well, I ask you, who hasn't?  Judging by the way the 2000 or so
audience present fell about, and the exact nature of their shrieking
laughter as events unfolded, a lot of the audience were seeing their
past life flash before them.  On a more serious note the wonderful
timing and the somewhat bemused delivery, reminded one of Buster
Keyton.
     The director, Mike Newell, has managed to bring out the and
flavour of this script beautifully by ensuring all of the balancing
acts within it are given room to breathe.  The counterweight to the
gloss of all those weddings being the devastating loss of a friend
loved by everyone.  A reminder that one may enter this world with
nothing, but may leave with rather more.  Simon Callow's dancing was
particularly memorable!
     The more subtle dichotomy between the American (Andie McDowell)
who marries for money expecting it to be the key to eternal happiness,
and the wealthy aristocrat who would settle for anyone and is eternally
rebuffed evokes the gap between British and American ideas.
     To shed some light on the character of Charles (Hugh Grant).  Once
upon a time in England, cricket was played by gentlemen who turned up
on the day of the match, tossed on a set of flannels, strolled
nonchalantly onto the green and scored a century.  Blood might have
been sweat, but the critical thing was to make it appear effortless,
and imply that it was, of course, a fluke!
     The director was both clever and fortunate to pick a team of
actors who worked so well together to make this film into an
outrageously funny piece of entertainment.

Title
Review for Clerks (1994)
Directed by Kevin Smith.
Starring Brian O'Halloran, Jeff Anderson, Mary Ghigliotti.
Wicked, amusing and possibly the most outrageous thing you will hear
in a long time.
It opens a door on the life of  Dante and shows a hell of a day. The 
boss has gone to Connecticut and the poor guy finds it anything but 
convenient that he's been left him to mind the shop. 
The customers are a truly bizarre assortment of folk. However its not 
hard for him to appear competent compared to Randal from the store next 
door!
A hockey game was planned, but things don't turn out the way he 
intended.The funeral was unexpected, and when a lady from the past turns 
up, it causes him to ask where his life is headed!.
Like all good comedy it leans on the boundaries of taste, but has a ring
of truth underlying some of the jokes. The conversation stretches over 
life, the universe and everything. Is it any wonder with this assortment 
of characters dropping in? 
Orson Welles made "F for Fake" about how the camera can be used 
to confuse the viewer's perception of what is fact, or fabrication, in 
art and in life. But Smith goes further down the road towards Ken 
Loach's "Raining Stones" in his choice of social realism for a backdrop. 
The grain of the black and white filmstock gives this film the ambience 
of a documentary and I think it is the presentation of fiction in this  
format which makes "Clerks" astonishingly powerful. 
He puts his finger neatly on the sense of women that education is 
something to be fought for, but asks some impertinent questions about 
whether they are using their freedom without responsibility. Maybe the 
hockey players are not alone in taking their eye off the ball.
Perhaps most astonishing is the representation of young men with little 
conception of how, or where, they might engage with society.
Such a satire, that dénouement. The mere suggestion that a dealer could 
have more commitment to his work than a bona fide employee, and more 
awareness of what is relevant in life, points to some glaring holes in 
what this world seems to offer the next generation.

Title
Review for Frankenstein (1994)
Starring Robert de Niro, Kenneth Branagh, Helena Bonham-Carter,
         Ian Holm, John Cleese,Tom Hulce, Aidan Quinn, Robert Hardy.
     Magnificently theatrical and exceptionally gung-ho.  Branagh's
direction (and acting) captures the excitement of a swashbuckling
adventure story.
     De Niro's humane performance as the "Creature" allowed the horror
of the ideas behind the film room to breathe.  I loved the inclusion of
John Cleese as a doctor on the edge of a fearsome discovery.  It
rewound the Monty Python "Organ Donor" sketch back to it's origins.
     After THE SECRET GARDEN, Ford Coppola seems to have hit his
stride, portraying revolting antiquated medical techniques.
     The action was played out on vast operatic sets and this is one of
those rare films where everything comes together to create a cohesive
whole (and I don't just mean the monster).
     The screenplay is a clever synthesis of the Monster's tale within
Mary Shelley's book, and the early experiments with electricity which
so fascinated her husband.  The tale as written is fairly circumspect.
Much of the horror portrayed hints at biographical details in the
authors own life.
     Branagh's performance is of a student obsessed with science for
the benefit of mankind.  He sets out with the best of intentions, never
considering the practical consequences, should he succeed!
     What makes this tale of 1816 contemporary is that his relief at
not being discovered makes him keep silent.
     Central to the whole piece though, is the discussion of ethics.
Should portions of one human be used for another? Whether it is
Frankenstein, as the handler of raw materials, is responsible, or those
who cannot accept deformity.  The father of a son who is violent, and
beyond his control.
     I was really shocked that this film has a "15" certificate.  If
you are not a vegetarian when you go in, you may be by the time you
come out.  The Hollywood competition is perhaps measured in pints of
red ink, but the lighting on the creature's attempts to stand almost
hint at God wrestling with his conscience.  Shall he allow this
ambitious young man to feel the burden of creation with all it's
triumphs and it's terrors?
     "I bid my hideous progeny go forth and prosper," was Mary
Shelley's comment on her work....

Title
Review for Tank Girl (1995)
Directed by Rachel Talalay
Starring Lori Petty, Naomi Watts, Ice T, Malcolm McDowell, Don Harvey.
     How can one comment seriously on a movie with origins in a joke?
Well, I loved all the animation.  This is the first movie I can recall
with the guts to put cartoon sequences in the frame to function as an
oddball narration.  It's also a really neat move, as no matter how vulgar
Tank Girl attempts to be; she cannot possibly be as crass as her
creators intended.
     So why else is this one different from all the other "Wham Bam"
movies of the decade?  Gosh, could it be, heaven help us, a woman's
point of view on the genre?  Now there's a novelty!
     And wow, does Rachel Talalay let the cat out of the bag!  All that
stuff in action movies that women find enjoyable, but incomprehensible
(like plots that defy logic, or men who behave like pack animals) is
sent up with wild abandon.  I especially liked the tank that responds
like "man's best friend."
     However, she goes one step further into the realms of true
comedy.  Lori Petty and Naomi Watts are used to set up all manner of
skittles of subconscious female paranoia, ranging from "Oh no, is my
date going to think they're gay?" to "You need to be really Glam to
feature on a calendar."

Title
Review for Judge Dredd (1995)
     If only Fritz Lang could see this picture.  He would be thrilled
with the modern METROPOLIS.  Exaggerated angles, individual lines of
dialog, (one could almost see the speech bubbles) and a dangerous pace
all conspire to make this the first film to bring the art form of comic
illustration to the screen.  One could feel every line of the drawings
leaping to life.
     Sly Stallone obviously enjoyed working on this one and indulged in
some serious timing on the humour.  It says a lot for his performance
that he competed with the scale of production design and won.
     Cannon certainly kept the pages turning!  I waited ninety minutes
for them to get to the quiet bit and it never came.  At the culmination
I had only one question: "Er, excuse me, is that IT!!!  Well do, you
think we could just run the sequel NOW?"

Title
Review for Backbeat (1993)
Director: Ian Softly
Producers: Finola Dwyer and Stephen Wooley.
Starring Stephen Dorff, Ian Hart, Sheryl Lee, Gary Bakewell. 
     From the UK publicity of this film I anticipated it would be a
music documentary paying homage to early Beatlemania, however the
result was a far more interesting.  The writers (Softley, Ward and
Thomas) examine the embryonic band, and succeeded in showing the
breadth of their influences.  The Beatles ability to absorb not only
musical ideas, but those of painting, photography, Hamburg counter-
culture and Sixties socialism, allowed them to evolve a unique style.
     John (Ian Hart) is shown railing against the merely fashionable in
his search for the truly expressive and avant-garde.
     I was impressed with the performance (by Stephen Dorff) of Stu
Sutcliffe, the introvert, gifted beyond his years, with all the
confusion and angst of youth.  He achieved an intense and exhilarating
portrait of an artist at work.
     One of the things I most liked about this movie was the way it
indicated that, from the start, only John Lennon had a real sense of
destiny for the band.  A key theme of the story is the reaction of the
rest as they realise quite how this is likely to affect their future.
Their competitive desire for Astrid mirrors a similar desire for
quality in their work.
     Some of the characterisations are low key, but this serves to
reinforce the point that together, they were greater than the sum of
individual artists and musicians.
     Within minutes of commencing, this picture betrayed it's homage to
SCANDAL.  With wit and discretion it managed to achieved a UK-15
certificate.  For a teenage audience, an understanding of their
aspirations.  For the rest of us, a reminder of a time before
mortgages,  when we may not have had many of the answers, but at least
we were asking the questions!

Title
Review for Wyatt Earp (1994)
Directed by Lawrence Kasdan
Starring Kevin Costner, Gene Hackman, Dennis Quaid, Michael Madsen
     I knew as little of this man's legend as anyone in Britain.  The
film tells the story of how this famous lawman stood up to the scum of
the Wild West and brought them to heel.  It stretches back into his past
to show that, had his family not stood by him, he might so easily have
gone the way of his opponents.
     Work in which Costner is involved often has an uncanny feel for
the mood of the moment.  ROBIN HOOD, PRINCE OF THIEVES was received with
great delight in the U.K. as ridicule was poured upon the first attempt to
re-introduce a "poll" tax since medieval times.
     The music was lovely and I'll still be humming that hint of D'Oyly
Carte in a week's time.  One beautifully photographed vignette followed
another.  There is not a typical "vigilante" picture.  The historical
perspective of lives caught up in the turmoil of social change reminded
me of a work like ROSA LUXEMBURG by Von Trotta.  The psychology of
the hero unfolds at the pace of THE LEOPARD.  But, Visconti's style
is more "quiet Italian villa."
     I saw the TV show about the immense research involved in the
making of this picture.  And many of its scenes are packed with
people.  I longed to hear the clutter of their voices in the
background, layer upon layer, reading snatches of the biography, the
newspaper reports, the wanted notices, the Old Testament, the creak of
wood under their feet, that distant gunshot when Doc. says
"Tombstone...."
     By any measure of standards, this is a film of quality.  I mean,
compared to BEVERLEY HILLS COP III, where someone attempted to make a
comedy script into a thriller!
     But if the foreign dubs are not yet ready, perhaps there is a
chance to go for a "Director's Soundtrack." I'm sure it would be worth
it.

Title
Review for GoldenEye (1995)
Starring Pierce Brosnan, Izabella Scorupco, Joe Don Baker, Sean Bean,
Judi Dench, Famke Janssen.
The EVIL plot- to steal the "Goldeneye," which controls a space ray 
capable of  knocking out electric's for a thirty mile radius on earth. 
Can Bond find it before they cause terminal damage to all those 
computers? And just how many satellites are there?
Best opening graphics ever- fab. montages! I could have sat through two 
hours of just that. And don't you just love that theme music?
All the glamour and sweeping scale of the best 007 movies is on display.
However Brosnan is an entirely new kind of Bond, who views his opponents
with a hint of boyish amazement, (I mean, how could the cads behave like 
that?) And , of course, he charms the sox off the ladies!
Scorupco is excellent and plays the heroine, Natalya, using wide eyed 
innocence to disguise her intelligence. A beautifully judged parody of 
this role. 
They play the "Brit" card for all its worth. M's upstairs entourage 
stiffly maintain a facade devoid of panic, no matter how serious the 
situation, while downstairs in the gadget department the mask slips and 
we see a more genuine U.K. response to a crisis from Q, in a great cameo 
from David Llewelyn, and his backroom boys. 
The photography is excellent and in the second half we really get the 
benefit with all those great vehicles and effects. Cute helicopter, 
smashing train, and best of all, a car chase which is an absolute 
CLASSIC. "St. Petersburg" looks devastating..Anyway, the movie is worth 
seeing for that alone.
Oh, and I loved the "Post- Stalinist" graveyard. Totally surreal. I felt 
these touches worked best of all and were a nice contrast to the high 
tech. interiors.  
They stick to the formula, but manage to get plenty of variety into 
their locations.
What the heck this is all good Saturday night stuff. And the complexity 
of it! But come on guys- live dangerously! Just remember, we LIKE to be 
blinded by loads of scientific jargon. When you do the video, how about 
running some of that dialogue at 27 frames a second? It'll then match 
the momentum your SFX team have worked so well to create. It looks 
wonderful, but pace was always the hallmark of a Bond.

Title
Review for War, The (1994)
We loved this film. Did we see the same print that was released in the 
U.S.A? It spoke to us. And how refreshing to hear a script with a 
point of view! 
We were really surprised to find the film combined gentle humour round 
a breakfast table and touches of song from the best girlfriends, yet 
could switch to an action sequence and have one unexpectedly on the 
edge of one's seat. The mix of social comment and metaphysical ideas 
was a little like "The Crying Game."  
The film opens on a tree which will be the focus of children's 
attention throughout the summer. However it is the demolition of a 
real house which seals the metaphor of people becoming obsessed with a 
piece of territory. In doing so, they lose sight of the importance of 
people and eventually, that for which they were fighting.
We see Lois, the working woman with her back to the wall, unable to 
supervise her children. On the scrapheap the Lipnicki children, for 
whom no-one cares, so who care for no- one else. Then there are the 
men of both families, who are expected to cope no matter how hard 
their emotional losses, nor how harsh the economic conditions. 
Maybe this is a portrait of the seventies that Americans could not 
relate to, but one has only to open a nineties newspaper in Britain to 
see it is one all too familiar, as our industrial heritage is scrapped 
and miners, steelworkers, and engineers are stamped on by an army of 
accountants.
If this all sounds too politically correct for words, the lightness of 
director John Avnet's touch and the exuberance of the kids makes this 
one of the most enjoyable films in ages.
We were really impressed by the acting, and not just from Costner, who 
puts in an outstandingly sympathetic performance as Stephen, the 
father who returns from Vietnam to a country he is no longer in step 
with.
Elijah Wood, as his son Stu., took over the reins and carried the film 
to its completion without missing a beat. A supporting cast of 
enthusiastic professionals matched with young talent took this text 
and breathed life into it.

Title
Review for Waterworld (1995)
Directed by Kevin Reynolds
Starring Kevin Costner, Dennis Hopper, Tina Majorino, Jeanne Tripplehorn.
     I enjoyed it. It's more than possible you will too!  If you like
action movies in the STAR WARS vein, don't take any notice of the
journalistic hogwash 'cos if you only see it on video you'll be kicking
yourself that you didn't get out and view all those unbelievable
special FX on the widest screen you could find.
     It doesn't take a movie buff to see what so inspired the company
about Reynold's vision that they weren't prepared to quit.  "The
Mutant" doesn't sound like a promising role, but Costner turns it into
one of his best characters. Hopper moves with alacrity to top his
performance as the "baddie" in SPEED.  The kid is great.
     Any message intended? Well it does rather capture how people in
the third world must feel, often on the knife edge of existence.  Kinda
makes you think.

Title
Review for Awfully Big Adventure, An (1995)
Portman/Wolfhound Productions together with British Screen and BBC
Films.
Directed by Mike Newell
Script by Charles Wood from the novel by Beryl Bainbridge
Starring Alan Rickman (O'Hara), Hugh Grant (Meredith),
         and Georgina Cates (Stella.)
     Atmospherically staged against a backdrop of post-war Liverpool,
young Stella gets to experience more than just work behind the scenes.
The film manages to capture her youth, the observer whose innocent
conclusions dissolve into confusion, then gradual understanding of
everyones behaviour.
     The significance of the telephone, like so many of the details
which seem initially inconsequential, turns out to be a clue of
infinite relevance.  As the light dawned one was reminded of the style
of another novelist of the period, Agatha Christie.  The director
manages to convey an atmosphere of  artless simplicity whilst filling
the frame with the artifice of the theatre.  It is not until afterwards
that one realises just how frightfully clever he has been in laying the
trail!
     I loved all the bits where Meredith Potter gets to explain "What
the play is about."  What might he have made of this tale?  Why should
the seduction of a young man seem wrong whilst that of a young girl
appears acceptable? And who can see that people are mistaken to apply
double standards?
     Alan Rickman as O'Hara is utterly charismatic.  In this moving
performance he captures the unwitting carelessness of a man perceived
by all as a realist and yet at odds with reality.  It appears at first
glance to be a relationship of  maturity attracted by young love, but
perhaps  Stella may be the most aware of what she is doing as "Peter
Pan" unfolds....
     And what an array of talent in the supporting cast.  All
exquisitely characterised.  Bunny, (Peter Firth) Geoff-ew-ry, (Alan
Cox) and Prunella Scales (Rose, the theatre manager) to mention only a
few.
     Heaven knows what Liverpool F.C. will make of the soccer match!
However, this is a sensitive and thought provoking piece of cinema.

Title
Review for When Saturday Comes (1996)
Directed by Maria Guise
Starring Sean Bean, Emily Lloyd, Pete Postlethwaite, Craig Kelly.
Written by James Daly and Maria Giese
A fun film about Northern life in general and football in particular. 
Sean Bean,playing Jimmy Muir, turns in a performance that's 100% Blade 
as a local lad gets a chance to try out for his home side of Sheffield 
United.
I love baseball movies, but it made a really nice change to see s film 
about the English national game. A  soccer movie seems such an obvious 
choice of subject that one wonders why there's been so long a gap since 
THE GREAT ESCAPE!
This story is also an escape, of someone from a background with little 
expectation. Jimmy Muir failed as a boy to realise his dream of 
representing his town by playing in their team. He is held back by his 
family environment until a new wages clerk Annie, played by Emily Lloyd, 
starts work at the same place and turns the key to his heart.
The theme of the piece is about getting a second chance at something you 
really want to do. Fascinating to see an American angle on British life. 
However, for anyone who has ever lived north of "Watford Gap", it's a 
memory of home. The kids seemed nervous with accent as the piece opened, 
but in no time at all, whole cast were well into it.
For a tale set against an industrial environment, Maria Guise managed to 
convey the humour and friendship of life in the area. The impression the 
writers put across was not one of lack of opportunity, but rather an 
inability take the things on offer when the pub beckons. The difficulty 
of choosing to be individual when you've always been part of a crowd.
One was amused by the their desire to show the male in his habitat, I'd 
never seen the inside of a betting shop before.
The striking use of vibrant colour in the photography gave the picture 
an upbeat quality even during the most emotional moments.
Such a nice change to see a UK film where the women weren't still 
wearing corsets, (not even the stripper!) Even at its most "over the 
top" this movie felt closer to real life than anything we'd seen in 
ages. Bags of life and atmosphere-Makes you want to rush out and see a 
football match right away!
