Authors
Mikkel Lodahl
Number of Reviews
2

Title
Review for Lolita (1997)
Well, I might as well admit it from the start: I haven't seen Kubrick's
version
of Lolita, so you can take that into account when you read the following. I
am, however, in the process of reading the book as I write this, so I've
decided that I have a more or less adequate frame of reference to review
 this flick fairly. So, without much further ado:
The plot revolves around a Mr. Humbert Humbert. As the film opens, we
are treated to a wailing, 40's-style car, trying to drive in a straight line
down
a country road, but failing miserably to do so. In it, Humbert (Jeremy
Irons)
is in a dazed and confused state of mind, a gun lying on the seat beside
him,
and blood on his clothes. I find myself thinking: "Hey!"
Cue overvoiced monologue. Humbert tells the audience about his first love,
Annabelle, whom he met when he was living with his parents at a hotel
somewhere
in southern Europe (sorry, didn't quite catch the country). At this point he
is fourteen.
Humbert states that: "Whatever happens to a boy on the summer of his
fourteenth year,
can shape him for the rest of his life." The film quickly shows us that
Humbert and Annabelle
has an (at the very least) semi-sexual relationship. And then it kills her
off stating: Typhus.
Humbert, devastated at the loss of his first love, still lives on, and the
movie next joins
him some three decades later as he arrives in America, where he is to live
with a friend,
eventually taking a position as a teacher at a local college. However, his
friend's house is
no more, so instead he goes to live at a friend of his friend, the widow
Charlotte Haze
(Melanie Griffith). Upon arriving at the house, Charlotte puts some rather
un-subtle moves on
Humbert, who dismisses them with British properness. He isn't really
thrilled about the place,
and thinks about excusing himself and finding a hotel instead, but then he
eyes Charlotte's
daughter, Dolores (called Lolita, and played by Dominique Swain), and is
instantly attracted
to her, even though she is only a twelve-year old. He promptly decides to
stay.
During the next month or so, the sexual tension rises between the bubble-gum
blowing Lolita
and Humbert, while Charlotte and Lolita have a host of fights. Humbert
manages to get in a
few sexual advances at Lolita when Charlotte's not looking, and she doesn't
reject him openly.
Humbert's fairy tale ends, though, as Charlotte decides to send Lolita to a
summer camp.
Humbert, not wanting to be suspected, grudgingly keeps silent. Lolita
accuses him of being a traitor,
and he starts feeling sorry.
The day Lo's going to summer camp, Humbert wakes up late, and rushes to the
window.
Lolita is just about to get into the car, when she looks up at the house and
sees Humbert.
She dashes from the car, to the great irritation of Charlotte, and runs up
to Humbert's room,
where she gives him one passionate kiss, then runs down again. Humbert,
astonished, sees the
car drive away. He walks into Lo's room and throws himself into her left
clothes, hoping to catch
an essence of her.
The maid arrives at that point and hands him a letter, which he opens and
reads. It is from
Charlotte, who basically says that if he still is there when she comes home
from driving Lo
to the summer camp, then she takes it as a declaration of love. They are
soon married.
It is not a happy marriage, though. Humbert doesn't want to have sex with
Charlotte, and,
as such, gives her sleeping pills in order to get her off his back, but they
soon prove to not
be enough. He then goes to a doctor and casually asks about what might put a
cow in a
coma. The doctor sympathizes with Humbert, and gives him a new sort of
sleeping pills;
the sort the doctor himself uses on HIS wife.
Humbert returns home, but finds that Charlotte has discovered some entries
from his diary,
which describes her in a very bad tone, and contains some very loving
comments about Lolita.
She yells at him, telling him that he'll never see Lolita again, and that
she'll leave him. He
stammers through a weak explanation about it being an outline for a novel
("I used you and
Lo's names for easy reference!") and says that he'll fix them a drink. He
mixes two drinks, all the
while talking to her from the kitchen, but as he is about to go into the
living room again, a phone rings.
He answers it, and then says to Charlotte: "Honey, there's a man here
claiming you're dead."
He runs to the living room, where Charlotte is nowhere to be seen, then
dashes to the street.
Charlotte has been run over by a car, while going to the mailbox to mail
some letters. Humbert is
shocked, yet he quickly recovers, and decides to go to fetch Lolita, after
burning the letters.
Humbert arrives in the girl summer camp and is rather alarmed when a boy
named Charly is sent
to get Lolita. Lolita is cheerful, though, and the two embark on a trip to a
nearby hotel, Humbert
telling Lo that her mother is sick and in the hospital. Lolita shrugs it
away and moves on to tell
Humbert that she's been unfaithful to him, "not that it matters". Humbert
asks her why it shouldn't matter.
She replies that he doesn't care for her anymore; explaining it with him not
having kissed her yet.
They pull over and they start making out, but are interrupted by a passing
police officer, but
 although they are forced to break off their kissing, the officer doesn't
take any special notice.
The two arrive at the hotel, but a priest convention is taking up a lot of
hotel space, so Humbert and
Lo have to share a room with one bed. Lolita wants to tell Humbert about
something Charly, the only
boy at the summer camp, taught her, but Humbert refuses. Humbert allows for
her to get undressed
and go to bed without him looking on, and he takes a stroll through the
lobby. He is, however, uncomfortable
around the priests, and slips outside. Once outside, a mysterious man
adresses him, claiming to be
"with no-one." The man hints that he knows about Humberts intensions towards
Lolita, but disappears before
Humbert can confront him. Humbert retreats to the bedroom again, where he
lies down beside the now
sleeping Lolita.
The next morning, Humbert wakes up, finding Lolita besides him. She is giddy
and wants to tell him
about what Charly taught her. She whispers it in his ear, and he grins,
saying that he had never done
that. Lolita dares him, then notes: "One's got to show you everything." She
then rolls on top of him,
and they laugh at each other.
Cut to later. They are checking out of the hotel, and driving on. Stopping
at a gas station, Lolita wants
to call her mom at the hospital, but Humbert tells her she's dead. Cut to a
cheap motel that night. Lolita
is sobbing in one room; Humbert staring into the ceiling in another. Lolita
eventually comes running in to
be comforted by Humbert.
Now begins a long journey that ends with Humbert arriving at the city where
he is to teach. Upon arrival,
he applies for a teaching job in prep-school instead, and he gets it. Lolita
begins attending that school, too.
All is well at first, but Lolita begins a rebellion against Humbert, who
doesn't want her to fraternize too much
with her friends at school. Nevertheless, Humbert allows her to be in a
school-play, written by an author
named Quilty (Frank Langella) who bears a striking resemblance to the
mystical man that confronted Humbert
at the hotel.
Eventually Lo and Humbert get into a fight, which ends with Lolita running
out and away. Humbert begins a
search for her, and locates her in an icebar the same evening. There, she
has decided that they ought to go
on another journey. Humbert willingly agrees, and as a voiceover confirms
that he is signing his own death
sentence by agreeing, the journey begins.
Humbert notices that they are being followed, but Lolita thinks nothing of
it. At some point during the journey,
Lolita falls ill, and Humbert takes her to a hospital. Although he wants to
stay, the doctor sends him home,
and when he arrives the next day, Lolita is gone. He goes into a hysterical
frenzy, but manages to control himself
once the police arrive.
Embarking on a search for Lolita, Humbert travels around, but is unable to
find her anywhere, and thus,
returns to his teaching position. Once there, he gets a letter from Lolita.
She writes that she is now married
and pregnant, but that they are missing money. Humbert, obsessed with taking
revenge on his rival goes to
Lolita personally, but discovers that it is not the man she has married that
she betrayed him for. Lolita tells him
that the man she really loved was Quilty, though she left him because he
wanted her to be in an "art movie.
Two boys, two men, and two girls." Humbert gives her the money she needs,
begging her to come and live
with him. Lolita refuses, stating that her husband needs her. Accepting
that, Humbert takes off to
find and murder Quilty.
He eventually tracks Quilty to a big mansion, where he corners him and,
after a bit of cat-and-mouse
playing, shoots him several times. Quilty remains all the time blissfully
unaware that he is about to die,
as he is clearly either influenced by drugs or simply a madman. Humbert
takes off again, and we're back
where we started. He drives to a hill, cops hot on his tail, and looks out
over a small city. He delivers one
final voice-over as we cut to the credits.
First, let me apologize for the rushedness of the last part of my synopsis.
I didn't want to go into as much
detail after Humbert got what he wanted, but on the other hand, I needed to
mention the rest of the plot
after so much detail on the other half.
I found the movie to be quite good. In fact, rather good. In fact, very
good. While there were quite
a few details the movie failed to mention, which has mention in the book, I
don't think it failed a lot there.
It would be hard to cramp all the details in a feature film.
The movie is built up in a way that lays most weight on two characters,
Humbert and Lolita, so the
whole picture more or less falls flat if they fall flat. Fortunately, they
don't. Even though I haven't seen
Jeremy Irons in a lot of other films, I was looking forward to seeing him,
because he's always delivered
sterling performances, but here is an exception. His performance here is not
sterling; it's stellar. He perfectly
conveys Humbert's strangely fascinating obsession with 'nymphettes' (as
Humbert calls them), and I truly
sympathize with him when it all falls through. The voice-overs especially
are extremely well read, and the
final scene, where he confronts his anti-thesis (more on that later) Quilty,
is fantastic.
Dominique Swain came from nowhere as far as I know, but she is perfectly
cast as Lolita, playing her
with just the right mixture of innocence and insidiousness. Plus, she looks
the part. I'll admit that I, while I
mostly confine myself to worshiping Natalie Portman when it comes to young
actresses, was really swayed
over by her performance. There is spectacular talent in the young woman, and
I can only hope that it will be
used in the future.
The rest of the cast delivered for the most part decent performances, but
Melanie Griffith stood out as a rather
nice performance, giving an almost likeable personality to the irritating
housewife she was given.
Frank Langella was okay in his scenes, too, but I had a feeling of routine
acting from his part. Of course,
it might have been him being outshone by Jeremy Irons, so I'm willing to
guess that he did the best he could
with his rather limited material.
The directing was good, although I never really got the surrealistic
nightmare-like scene, which is exactly
why I haven't mentioned it in my synopsis.
Now to the anti-thesis thing. The reason I can sympatize with Humbert, is
that he has a genuinely likeable
personality. He is gentle and compassionate, and actually has very few flaws
(although they are pretty big).
It is that way I like to think of myself too, so that's more or less the
reason I like the guy. Quilty, however,
is not like that. He is the mass-producing artist to Humbert's compassionate
painter. While Humbert might
use a few years on a single painting, Quilty might spare not more than a few
days on each. With painting being
a metaphor for 'nymphette', of course. Quilty is a pedophile; Humbert's a
childlover. The difference may
not be obvious, so let me clarify: Quilty wants sex with children for a
kick - Humbert sees children romantically,
and truly loves them. And, just as a normal man would love a grown-up woman,
he loves a child, taking
all parts of the relationship with it. Including the sex.
In fact, the whole story is, in my eyes, not about sex with children or
anything like that; it is about a man's
obsession with a woman (alright, girl) and how he is taken to the extremes
of his emotions. I think the story
is more of a love story than a lust story. It is the romantical Humbert
Humbert in one corner, and everyone
else in the other. Even Lolita, the girl he loves, goes against him. It is a
tradegy of Shakespearean proportions
in my humble opinion. I suppose I'll take more than a little pounding for
that remark.
Ennio Morricone is mostly known for his western soundtracks, but here he
does a good job too. The music
lies in the background, as well it should do in a movie like this, and helps
set the mood right. Every once in a
while, and old song from the era pops up as Lolita hears it, and they are
quite well chosen. The soundtrack
in itself is not exactly spectacular, but it is okay. Buy it if you really
like 40's music or if you're a fan of
Ennio Morricone, else, hear it first.
I started my rambling with saying that I thought the movie to be very good.
As I've thought a little bit
about it, I've redicided: I think it is excellent. I understand that it
didn't reach theaters in the US, to which
I can only say I am sorry. I would have loved to see this movie on the big
screen, but even here in Denmark,
it only got into certain theaters, and not any in my vicinity. I recommend
this to anyone who loves a good story
about obsessiveness, as well as to people who enjoy great acting (and who
doesn't?).
Best line: "Please concentrate, Mr. Quilty. You are about to die!"
-Humbert

Title
Review for Star Trek: First Contact (1996)
Star Trek: First Contact
Directed by: Jonathan Frakes
Story by: Rick Berman, Brannon Braga and Ronald D. Moore
Screenplay by: Brannon Braga and Ronald D. Moore
Music by: Jerry Goldsmith
The thought that ran through my mind upon completing my viewing of this
flick was: "Thank God that I've seen Star Trek: The Next Generation
[hereafter: ST:TNG] before!" While the movie might be entertaining to the
non-initiated (in fact, if my memory serves me correctly, a friend of mine
thought it very good in spite of his lack of Trek-knowledge), it grows
multiple times
richer when you know some back-story. It doesn't even have to be a lot, but
I'd recommend seeing at least the two-parter "The Best of Both Worlds" from
the ST: TNG series, which I recommend heartily.
Anyhow, the plot revolves around Captain Jean-Luc Picard (Patrick Stewart;
Jeffrey),
who captains the oh-so-legendary starship U.S.S. Enterprise. A, to
non-initiates,
quite confusing prologue to the film tries to explain that Picard was once
part of
an alien cyber-collective named "The Borg", but fails to bring it about in a
totally
clear fashion. No problem, though, as it does validate the use of a
spectacular
matte painting depicting the interior of a Borg ship. "Cool," you think,
"What now?"
The film progresses at an amazingly quick pace, which has us involved in a
space
battle above Earth within the first fifteen minutes of the flick. The Borg
are back with a
vengence, it seems, and they want to assimilate all of Human culture into
their
collective, just as they assimilated Picard. While the quick pace easily
could have
been terribly wrong, it somehow feels right. The filmmakers seems to believe
that
we either know these characters well, and therefore don't need an
introduction,
or that we don't care. And, surprisingly, it works. My fore-amentioned
friend just
jumped on the rollercoaster so to speak, and went along for the ride.
And what a ride? A terrific one! After some nice effects showing how Picard
singlehandedly uses an unorthodox strategy to blow up the Borg ship, a small
contingent of Borg soldiers escape in a ball-like escape pod. They create
some
kind of temporal shift or other, and go back in time to the 21st century.
The Enterprise, protected by their closeness to this temporal thinggummy
sees
the horrible changes inflicted on the future by this: Earth has been
assimilated into
the Borg Collective. Picard decides that they should follow the Borg back to
"repair whatever damage they've done."
It just so happens that the Borg chose to go back to when humankind invented
warp-drive (faster than light travel) and tries to stop the invention. The
Enterprise
readily blows up the Borg Escape Pod, and an away team beams down to Earth
to see what damage the Borg has caused yet. Down there, Picard and company
discover that the Borg bombarded the home of Dr. Zefraim Cochrane
(James Cromwell; L. A. Confidential), the inventor of warp-drive. Meanwhile,
the
Borg have beamed over to the Enterprise and starts to assimilate the whole
ship.
Picard and his android sidekick, Commander Data (Brent Spiner; Independence
Day)
beams back to the Enterprise just before the Borg take control of most of
the systems
onboard, though not of the main computer.
And then the rest of the movie goes along smoothly. While Picard and Data,
aided by
Commander Worf (Michael Dorn; Deep Space 9 series) and a 21st century
"native" who
has been beamed up for medical treatment (Alfre Woodard; Grand Canyon) by
the
on-board Dr. Crusher (Gates McFadden), battle with the Borg, first officer
Commander Riker (Jonathan Frakes), ship's counselor Deanna Troi (Marina
Sirtis),
and chief engineer Geordi LaForge (Levar Burton) tries to talk Cochrane into
cunducting
the warp-flight at the planned date, because else, they'll miss a passing
alien ship that will
contact Earth when it observes warp-speed in use.
The movie is spectacular, and is in my opinion among the best Star Trek has
ever created,
right up there with "The Wrath of Khan" and "The Voyage Home" Jonathan
Frakes does a
good job directing; there is hardly a place where I would have done
differently. All of the cast
delivers no worse than decent performances; Patrick Stewart, Brent Spiner
and
James Cromwell shining particularly. While the film does have a few of the
time-travel jokes
that were decidedly overused in The Voyage Home, they don't feel forced, and
are actually
worth a chuckle or two. The effects are stunningly created by Industrial
Light and magic, who
are without any doubt the leading in their field - and they prove it here.
Worth of mention is also the performance of Alice Krige (Barfly) who plays
the evil leader of
the Borg; the Borg Queen.  While this concept falls flat in theory, it works
beautifully in function.
The Queen captures Data somewhat half-way through the film and then proceeds
to try to
bribe him into revealing the code that unlocks the main computer, offering
him humanity. Spiner
and Krige play well off each other and the scenes are all a joy to see
[except for one, very brief
scene, where there's thankfully only one line - "We've had a change of
plans, Data"]. For some
reason I detest that scene.
The question is, then, how well does this flick carry on the TNG feeling?
Very well I think. While the
story quite clearly focuses on Picard and Data, it seems like all the
characters are pretty much
having as much screen time as they had in a typical episode of TNG. (With
the possible exception of
Dr. Crusher, who seems to be there only to have all of the cast in there)
The characters are captured
well, as they should be considering the source (Both Braga and Moore were
staff writers at TNG), and
the actors seem to have fun doing the film, and that reflects on the
performance quite more than one
should think. No-one gives a bad performance in this film (I would say that
Robert Picardo, who has a
cameo as a hologram, does, but that's just me hating his character [the
hologram, that is :-)]).
The music was composed chiefly by one of my most favorite film composers,
namely Jerry Goldsmith.
"Chiefly" means that Joel Goldsmith, Jerry's son, composed three of the
tracks. The music lives up to
my expectations, underlining all the scenes that need underlining, and
actually quite good on its own too.
I particularly enjoyed the piece "Red Alert" which plays during the first
battle against the Borg. Also present,
besides the orchestral soundtrack, is two songs included to provide
atmosphere. One is the classic
"Magic Carpet Ride" performed by Steppenwolf (Born To Be Wild), the other an
early rock n' roll tune
by Roy Orbinson (Pretty Woman), namely "Ooby Dooby". Both of these play at
the discretion of Cochrane,
and "Ooby Dooby" could be considered his theme. Overall, a solid soundtrack
well worth a purchase.
This movie, while being a must for Trekkies and ordinary fans of Star Trek,
is also quite a ride for the
odd Sci-fi fan who isn't all too much in on the Trek franchise (though who
that would be, is a question
worthy of a much longer essay). I'm in doubt where to rate this, so I'll
provide two different ratings:
